Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2667 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/27/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P103343 
Project Name: National Emergency Rural Access Project 
Task Team Leader: Susanne Holste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 30, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of this project is to enable the rural population to benefit from year-round access to 
basic services and facilities in the rural areas of Afghanistan covered by the project. This will be 
achieved through contracting with the private sector and, to a lesser extent, with communities for 
the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural access infrastructure.  The achievement of PDO will 
contribute to enhance well being and promote equitable economic growth in the country.  The 
PDO is derived from the overarching program objective of NRAP.  
 
The proposed key performance indicators are:  
 
?
Beneficiaries will be within a 2 km or 30 minutes of walking distance to an all-weather 
road.  This indicator is closely aligned with the IDA-14 indicator for rural accessibility (20 
minutes walking to an all-season road) and Afghanistan's National Development Strategy of 
providing access to 40% of all villages by 2009.  
 
?
After completion of a sub-project, travel time of beneficiaries living along the improved 
road to district centers would be reduced by 30%.  
 
?
After completion of a sub-project, the number of trips taken by beneficiaries living along 
the improved road to district centers would increase by 50%.  
Page  2
?
Price of key consumption and production commodities at beneficiary villages would be 
within 15% of the price in the nearest town.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The IDA grant allocation of the proposed project is US$100 million. The proposed project builds 
on the successful design and implementation of the ongoing IDA project, NEEPRA, which has 
been particularly strong on infrastructure delivery.Project implementation is being carried out 
with the assistance of a project implementation partner (IP).  At this point there is no feasible 
alternative to this approach but the proposed project will aim to decrease the dependence on the 
IP in line with permanent institutional arrangements for rural roads management, such as a rural 
roads department or agency.  These arrangements will be clearly defined during project 
preparation and the terms of reference of the IP will include specific capacity building targets for 
the unit in charge of the management of the rural road network.  Additionally the project will aim 
to involve local communities and social inclusion officers in the different stages of sub-project 
design and implementation in order to leverage from their local knowledge, improve delivery, 
and prevent adverse effects.  The lending instrument proposed is the Emergency Recovery Loan 
(OP 8.50) which currently applies to all World Bank initiatives in Afghanistan.  
 
The preliminary project components are:  
 
(a) Rural Road Improvements ($64 million), including rehabilitation and reconstruction of some 
2,500 kilometers of secondary and tertiary rural roads.  The delivery mechanism will be tailored 
to the security situation of the area, i.e., in the less secure areas community-based contracting 
will be promoted while in the more secure areas, works will be carried out by contractors.  The 
project will aim to promote the development of a professional labor-based contracting industry;  
 
(b) Rural Road Maintenance ($17 million), including setting up of a maintenance system, 
maintenance programming, and routine and periodic maintenance of already rehabilitated rural 
roads; and  
 
(c) Institutional strengthening, capacity building and project implementation assistance ($19 
million), including services of an implementation partner, technical assistance for clarification of 
roles and responsibilities of the management of the rural road network for MPW and MRRD, 
capacity building of staff and contractors, improvement of technical specifications, quality 
control, technical audits, M&E, and incremental operating expenses.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in rural areas throughout Afghanistan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
So far very little capacity has been developed in country regarding safeguards policies.  
Mitigation measures will include to task the implementation partner to provide expertise in 
safeguards compliance and to transfer knowledge to the project implementation unit and selected 
staff in the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) and Ministry of Public 
Works (MPW).   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASES) 
Ms Palwasha Lena Kakar (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
..   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
..   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
..   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
..   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
..   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
..   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
..   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
..   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
..   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
..   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/08/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/08/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
..   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susanne Holste 
12/21/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/21/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
12/21/2006 
Comments:   
