Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2673 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P104301 
Project Name: Expanding Microfinance Outreach and Improving Sustainability 
Task Team Leader: Stephen F. Rasmussen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.45
0.45 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of this project is to address the need and demand of Afghanistan's poor for access 
to finance and build a strong and sustainable microfinance sector that can continue to expand 
outreach and develop new services for the people of Afghanistan in the future. The specific short 
term goals of the project are (i) increase outreach (double the outreach of microfinance services); 
(ii) foster sustainable MFIs (have at least five leading MFIs with operationally fully sustainable 
operations); (iii) move the sector along so that it begins to access commercial funding and 
mobilize savings; (iv) to create Afghan companies (MFIs) that are largely managed by Afghans 
and have local governance structures; and (v) instill credit repayment discipline at the MFI as 
well as apex levels. The IFC has also invested in the microfinance and SME sectors in 
Afghanistan and this project would complement those investments. The Bank's funding will also 
encourage 'crowding in' of other capital into the microfinance sector, thereby having a leverage 
effect.  
 
Global experience demonstrates that a strong, growing microfinance sector is a prerequisite to 
achieving the desired impact. The creation of strong growing microfinance sector will contribute 
Page  2
to poverty alleviation and increases in the incomes of poor people, create economic opportunities 
for poor people in rural and urban areas, contribute to gender equity by increasing the economic 
involvement of women and enhancing their role in society, facilitate improved access to financial 
services to poor people throughout the country, create employment opportunities, and contribute 
to the Government's counter narcotics strategy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project proposes that IDA grant funds (US$ 30 million) be passed on to MISFA through a 
subsidiary agreement between Government and MISFA. The funds would be in the form of a 
long term loan to MISFA that MISFA would in turn loan to microfinance institutions under 
already established criteria and based on business plans that have been negotiated with and 
approved by MISFA. Differently structured loans from MISFA to MFIs can be financed, 
including debt products such as subordinate debt and quasi equity where needed.  
 
IDA funding to Afghanistan is entirely grant funding and is passed on to projects as grant 
funding. In this case, though, the Ministry of Finance has proposed that the funds be provided as 
a
loan to MISFA. The terms and conditions of this loan will be negotiated with the Government 
and MISFA, but a low interest rate, along the lines of what is provided to Bank funded 
microfinance apex institutions in Bangladesh and Pakistan, is a justified subsidy that would in 
turn allow MISFA to loan funds to MFIs on terms that can support their capital formation and 
contribute to their long term sustainability and growth.  At this early stage of development of the 
sector and in the absence of a more mature financial sector, this is akin to providing risk capital 
through well targeted interventions with an exit strategy.  
 
MFI performance to date and business plans that have already been provided to MISFA show 
that $30 million in loan funds can be easily absorbed over the two year period that is proposed 
for this project. The main funding considerations are (i) that the loan from Government to 
MISFA should be in Afs (not US$) so that MISFA is able to pass on Af denominated loans to 
MFIs; (ii) that there be a reasonable grace period before principle has to be repaid to Government 
since it will still be necessary to provide a grace period to the MFIs at this early stage of their 
development when they are growing and do not have other sources for replacement funds; and 
(iii) that the interest rate applied to the loans allow MISFA to apply a reasonable intermediation 
cost while still being able to pass on funds to MFIs at 'market'rates.  
 
The success of this project is dependent on the microfinance sector and MISFA continuing to 
receive funding from other donors, as it has in the past. The IDA loan will supplement those 
other funds, not replace them. While there is so far only one commitment for funding in 2007 ($9 
million from DFID), this is not unusual and it is expected that other funds will also be made 
available, something that was discussed with MISFA's donors at a recent meeting. It is expected 
that other donor funds will continue to contribute to capacity building needs that the IDA loan 
funds will not cover. The overall funding for the sector is expected to address capacity building 
as well as loan funding needs.  
 
MISFA has also signed an agreement for a $30 million project funded by USAID. This project 
will only provide $9 million for MISFA's existing microfinance program, all of which is 
expected to be disbursed before the end of 1385 (March 2007). Another $15 million is for a new 
Page  3
SME financing window for which MISFA is establishing an SME department. This window will 
largely work with banks to develop and scale up their small business lending portfolios. The 
remaining $6 million will go as grants to apex institutions set up to oversee the credit unions and 
financial cooperatives that USAID intends to establish under the part of its $80 million rural 
finance project that is not managed by MISFA. These grants will be conditional on these apexes 
achieving certain established performance targets over the next two years.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As a result of more than two decades of conflict, exodus of trained personnel, low salaries, and 
the lack of exposure to new approaches, the Borrower?s institutional capacity is generally weak, 
especially in such specialized areas as safeguard policies   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
It is not expected that any of the WB Safeguards Policies will be triggered as the IDA grant 
funds will be channelled by the government to MISFA which in turn will loan to MFIs to i.a. 
increase outreach .   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
It is not expected that any of the WB Safeguards Policies will be triggered as the IDA grant 
funds will be channelled by the government to MISFA which in turn will loan to MFIs to i.a. 
increase outreach .   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
It is not expected that any of the WB Safeguards Policies will be triggered as the IDA grant 
funds will be channelled by the government to MISFA which in turn will loan to MFIs to i.a. 
increase outreach .   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
It is not expected that any of the WB Safeguards Policies will be triggered as the IDA grant 
funds will be channelled by the government to MISFA which in turn will loan to MFIs to i.a. 
increase outreach .   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
It is not expected that any of the WB Safeguards Policies will be triggered as the IDA grant 
funds will be channelled by the government to MISFA which in turn will loan to MFIs to i.a. 
increase outreach .   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
It is not expected that any of the WB Safeguards Policies will be triggered as the IDA grant 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
funds will be channelled by the government to MISFA which in turn will loan to MFIs to i.a. 
increase outreach .   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
It is not expected that any of the WB Safeguards Policies will be triggered as the IDA grant 
funds will be channelled by the government to MISFA which in turn will loan to MFIs to i.a. 
increase outreach .   
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/01/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Technical Annex completed during pre-appraisal mission February 18th - March 1st, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen F. Rasmussen 
12/22/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/09/2007 
Comments:  Decision to transfer safeguards oversight to SASSD will be made upon confirmation of 
policies triggered which are now show as TBD. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
12/22/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
