Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2173 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P087860 
Project Name: Afghanistan Urban Water Sector Project 
Task Team Leader: Christophe E. Bosch 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S);Pollution management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
As a result of lack of investment, conflict and drought during the last decades, and the very rapid 
urban growth in recent years, the Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) service in Afghan cities is 
of very poor quality. Only Kabul (more than 3 million people) and 13 towns with populations 
ranging from 1,000,000 to 50,000 have piped water supply systems serving a total of about 
60,000 connections, of which 35,000 in Kabul.  The concerted efforts of the Government, and 
the support of many donors have resulted in significant improvements since 2002. However, the 
task ahead is daunting: current access to piped water infrastructure is the lowest in the world at 
around 15%, and  because of poor operation and maintenance (O&M) the water service reaches 
an even lower share of the population.  
 
The Central Authority for Water Supply and Sewerage (CAWSS) under the Ministry of Urban 
Development and Housing (MUDH) is responsible for piped WSS systems. CAWSS is a 
centralized authority, but due to communication difficulties with provincial towns during the 
period of conflict, its regional operations have acquired a certain degree of autonomy.  There is 
no clear jurisdiction over point water supplies and on-site sanitation and several functional 
Page  2
overlaps exist between CAWSS, and municipalities; the latter usually handle solid waste 
collection and on-site sanitation through local Department of Sanitation (DoS).  Current 
institutional arrangements do not allow for a clear separation of policy, supervisory and 
operational roles.  
 
The objectives of the project would be to support the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation 
Medium-Term Program of the Government and help achieve the Millenium Development Goals 
(MDGs):  
 
•
Objective 1: Establishing technically sustainable operations: improving the Central 
Authority for Water Supply and Sewerage (CAWSS) operational performance in Kabul and 
provincial towns where it currently operates a piped system, and developing an appropriate 
institutional structure for effective delivery of services;  
 
•
Objective 2:  Establishing financially sustainable operations by moving towards cost 
recovery, gradually increasing CAWSS revenue to cover 100% of O&M costs by the end of the 
project, and implement tariff structures that meet simplicity and social equity criteria in addition 
to financial and economic objectives;  
 
•
Objective 3: Extending urban WSS coverage:  increasing access to safe and affordable  
water supply and sewerage services and on-site sanitation in Kabul and provincial towns.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve these objectives, the project would include four main components:  
 
•
Component 1: Management Contract(s).  Management contract(s) with a professional 
operator(s), in Kabul and selected provincial towns: its (their) exact geographical coverage 
would depend upon the outcome of the bidding process.  The IDA Grant/Credit would finance 
the foreign exchange component of the Management fee and contribute, on a declining basis, to 
the local currency portion of O&M costs; disbursement could be linked to the actual performance 
of the operator.  The operator would operate CAWSS piped networks in the geographical area 
covered by the Management contract and provide drinking water through alternative supply 
(such as water tankers or community reservoirs) in areas not covered by distribution networks.  
The operator would also be responsible for: (i) implementing (as a contractor employed by 
CAWSS) an urgent investment program that can be identified before bidding; and (ii) planning, 
designing and implementing part or all of the extension programs described under Component 2 
(as engineer acting on behalf of CAWSS).  
 
•
Component 2: Water Supply and Sewerage.  Extension of piped water supply systems in 
geographical areas covered by the Management contract(s), and limited extension of the 
sewerage system in Kabul.  
 
•
Component 3: On-site Sanitation.  Supply of suction trucks in Kabul and some provincial 
towns; construction of septage disposal facilities; rehabilitation of existing and construction of 
new public toilets.  Support to Solid Waste Management would be provided through a separate 
Page  3
project, potentially ARTF-funded; this project could also include part or all of on-site sanitation 
envisaged under IDA financing.  
 
•
Component 4: Technical Assistance.  Technical assistance to: (i) the Ministryof Urban 
Development and Housing to help set up future institutions; (ii) CAWSS to independently 
monitor the performance of the operator(s) and prepare future projects; and (iii) to the local 
private sector for the construction of safe latrines. Social intermediation, community user group 
participation and management of WSS, health awareness campaigns.  Feasibility study and 
detailed design of the long-term bulk water project for Kabul (if not funded by other donors).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will cover Kabul and selected provincial towns. However the exact geographical 
scope of the project will depend upon the outcome of the bidding process for the international 
operators.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Although efforts have been made to develop the capacity of the implementing agency during 
FY05, notably through a training program on social and environmental management in which 12 
officials from the urban Ministry and the Kabul Municipality participated, there is a need to 
more. This should be achieved through a TA project for institutional development in FY06 and 
beyond, which should establish fully operational social and environmental management capacity 
within central institutions and line Ministries and agencies, including those that would 
implement the proposed Urban Water Supply and Sanitation project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental and social screening and assessment framework has been developed for 
Bank-financed operations in Afghanistan. The framework will assist the project implementing 
agency in screening all the sub-projects not defined at appraisal for their likely social and 
environmental impacts, identifying documentation and preparation requirements and prioritizing 
the investments. Project design and subproject selection will aim to maintain regional balance 
and equity between genders, and ethnic and religious groups, as far as technically feasible. 
Employment opportunities within the projects will likewise be merit-based and available on 
equal basis to all, In addition Procedures for Mine Risk Management in World Bank-funded 
projects has been designed to respond to the risks caused by the presence of mines in 
Afghanistan.  
 
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment would be triggered. In addition to rehabilitation 
activities, the project includes expansion/construction of new UWSS infrastructure. Associated 
environmental impacts would be identified and addressed in an Environmental Assessment (EA) 
and Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which are expected to bring out the specific site 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and sub-projects specific issues and ways of mitigating them. The EA and EMP will draw upon 
the environmental studies that have been carried out under ongoing WSS projects (funded by 
IDA and other donors, notably KfW), as part of the feasibility studies for WSS system expansion 
in Kabul and about 20 provincial towns.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered. Due to expansion/construction works, 
resettlement issues may arise, but they are expected to be limited. A Social Assessment (SA) will 
be carried out to identify the sites and sub-projects where adverse impacts can be anticipated. 
The SA will include a mitigation plan for the rehabilitation of those affected. The SA will draw 
upon surveys that have been carried out under ongoing WSS projects (funded by IDA and other 
donors, notably KfW), as part of the feasibility studies for WSS system expansion in Kabul and 
about 20 provincial towns.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
•
Environmental and Social Assessment under the ongoing IDA, ARTF and KfW-funded 
projects:  
 
Completed for Kabul water, to be completed by April 05 for Kabul sanitation and 
Provincial Towns WSS  
 
•
Environmental Assessment and 
 
 
 
to be completed by December 
05  
 
Environmental Management Plan  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
•
Social Assessment 
 
 
 
 
to be completed by December 05   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christophe E. Bosch 
03/15/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/30/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
03/30/2005 
Comments:   
