Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/15/2007 
Report No.:  AC2979
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P104301 
Project Name:  Expanding Microfinance Outreach and Improving Sustainability 
Task Team Leader:  Stephen F. Rasmussen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 18, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: August 30, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.45
0.45 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
This project is classified as a financial intermediary project because it provides funds to 
MISFA Ltd, a company established under the 1955 Commercial Code and registered with 
AISA. As such it is a financial company with no Government equity, though the sponsor 
of the Company is the Ministry of Finance. The Articles of Association of the Company 
give all powers for controlling the Company and the use of its assets to the Board, and 
should the company be liquidated at any time, the assets do not revert to the treasury. In 
this case, the assets will belong to the microfinance service providers in the first instance 
with the remainder going into the reserves of Da Afghanistan Bank. The World Bank 
managed Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund that has provided funding to MISFA 
Ltd since it was established in 2006 recognizes MISFA as an autonomous implementing 
organization.  
 
The objective of the project is to achieve the operational sustainability of Afghan 
microfinance service providers that have scaled up the outreach of financial services to 
help meet the needs and demands of many poor Afghans, especially women. This will 
take place through:  
Page  2
•
Increased sustainability of microfinance service providers that have begun the 
process of diversifying their funding sources to include commercial sources in addition to 
funds provided by Government and donors.  
 
•
Microfinance service providers that operate under relevant Afghan laws and 
supervision.  
 
•
Scaled up outreach to many more poor people in most provinces.   
 
3. Project Description 
This project only has one component: all $30 million will be loaned by MISFA to the 
microfinance service provider organizations.  
 
The IDA grant funds (US$ 30 million) provided to Government will be passed on to 
MISFA through a subsidiary agreement between Government and MISFA. The funds 
would be in the form of a long term loan to MISFA that MISFA would in turn loan to 
microfinance service providers under already established criteria and based on business 
plans that have been negotiated with and approved by MISFA. Differently structured 
loans from MISFA to MFPs can be financed including debt products such as subordinate 
debt and quasi equity where needed. MFPs would in turn use the funds for on-lending to 
their microfinance clients, the majority of whom are women.   
 
IDA funding to Afghanistan is entirely grant funding and is passed on to projects as 
grant funding. In this case, though, the Ministry of Finance has proposed that the funds be 
provided as a loan to MISFA. The lending terms that have been agreed between MoF and 
MISFA are a local currency loan with a ten year maturity and five year grace period with 
a
1%
charge per year. MISFA will pass these loan funds on  to MFPs at similar terms 
based on their track record to date and business plans they present for expansion. The 
terms from MoF to MISFA are not as soft as similar on-lending of IDA loans to Bank 
funded microfinance apex institutions in Bangladesh and Pakistan, but are in line with 
repayment terms that have already been agreed between MISFA and the MFPs and are 
affordable to the MFPs. As such, MISFA will be able to structure terms that will allow it 
to service its obligations to the MoF. Subsidized terms from MISFA to the MFPs support 
MFP capital formation and contribute to their long term sustainability and growth. At this 
early stage of development of the sector and in the absence of a more mature financial 
sector, this is akin to providing risk capital through well targeted interventions with an 
exit strategy.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASES) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project is classified as a financial intermediary project because it provides funds to 
MISFA Ltd, a company established under the 1955 Commercial Code and registered with 
AISA. As such it is a financial company with no Government equity, though the sponsor 
of the Company is the Ministry of Finance. The Articles of Association of the Company 
give all powers for controlling the Company and the use of its assets to the Board, and 
should the company be liquidated at any time, the assets do not revert to the treasury. In 
this case, the assets will belong to the microfinance service providers in the first instance 
with the remainder going into the reserves of Da Afghanistan Bank. The World Bank 
managed Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund that has provided funding to MISFA 
Ltd since it was established in 2006 recognizes MISFA as an autonomous implementing 
organization.  
 
Using established selection criteria, the project will provide funds for micro loans that 
include no land related issues and result in minor environmental impacts. There are no 
potentially large scale significant impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This is a category FI project that consists of a large number of micro subprojects. These 
subprojects will be screened by loan officers trained to use an agreed environmental 
framework so that adverse environmental impacts will be avoided or minimized.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
sound environmental framework procedure based on World Bank practice with other 
microfinance apex projects will be developed and implemented as agreed by the task 
team and MISFA. This framework will take account of (i) applicable laws and policies on  
 
environment; (ii) lists and procedures by which to screen / consider subprojects; (iii) 
defined responsibilities of different institutions; (v) training for environment 
management, monitoring and reporting.  
 
Based on assessment of MISFA and MFP capacity, relevant staff will be designated as 
focal points responsible for overseeing the environment requirements. As required, 
external expertise may be engaged to help with any particular task.  
 
MISFA will assume overall responsibility for the environmental soundness of the 
microfinance project and take all necessary measures to ensure that MFPs put in place 
adequate policies, procedures, and staffing to meet the agreed requirements. 
Environmental due diligence requirements will be defined in the contracts that MISFA 
signs with MFPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The stakeholders of the project mainly include the MFPs and the households that will get 
loans. The client households (or ‘subprojects’) cannot be identified at this stage. The 
agreed framework will be distributed among the MFPs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/15/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  5
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen F. Rasmussen 
06/04/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
06/12/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
06/12/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/05/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
06/14/2007 
Comments:   
