Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:40325   
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  May 22, 2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P100133 
Project Name: Kabul Municipal Solid Waste 
Recycling and Composting Project 
Task Team Leader: Karine Fourmond 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASES 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance 
Sector: Solid Waste Management (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Asta Olesen and Arif Rasuli 
Credit/Grant amount ($m.): 1.1-2.5 (Carbon Finance) 
Other financing amounts by source: IDA 
Up to 4.0 ($m) 
B.  Project Objectives 
1.  The objective of the project is to develop treatment facilities for urban waste while taking 
advantage of Carbon Finance opportunities. As of now, municipal solid waste is merely disposed 
and the disposal of residues from on-site sanitation is a real issue. Realistic options for urban 
waste treatment include planted wetlands for septage and sludge from flush toilets connected 
with cesspits and septic tanks covering 27.4 % of urban habitable area in Kabul city. Co-
composting is currently considered as the most promising way of handling nightsoil from dry 
toilets connected to traditional pit and vault latrines covering 71.3 % of urban habitable areas in 
Kabul city. 
 
C.  Project Description 
2.  The Kabul Municipality is currently carrying out a pilot for co-composting of municipal solid 
waste (70 tons 
–
64.5%
organic) and nightsoil from dry latrines (30 tons – 100% organic) at the 
Chamtala dumpsite which is currently being upgraded. As such, the overall biodegradable 
fraction of the mixture should be high enough. Some septage from the septic tanks, which has 
higher moisture content than night soil, will also be used as a source of water to maintain the 
operation at a suitable level of humidity. The co-composting process will be observed over a 60 
day period and the results of the pilot should become available in August 2007. 
Page  2
3.  Depending upon the results of the co-composting pilot, scale up of co-composting activities 
would be envisaged for up to 300 tons per day of municipal solid waste (representing some 22% 
of the estimated 1,362 tons generated per day) and 100 tons per day of nightsoil (representing 
some 50% of the estimated 200 tons generated per day). Compost would be used as cover 
material at the new sanitary landfill site initially. In the future, after the composting is well 
established, the municipality could try screening the compost product for horticultural use in the 
city such as bedding material around parks. 
4. 
Co-composting is primarily seen as a treatment option to stabilize the organic matter in the 
nightsoil. The co-composting facility under consideration would be a simple operation designed 
to operate at a minimal cost (a rough cost estimate for site operation expenditure-opex is 
$200,000 per year). Incoming municipal solid waste and nightsoil would be mixed by a wheel 
loader and placed in windrows. The windrows would be turned every few days to maintain 
aerobic conditions within the windrows. It is assumed that the solid waste would undergo a two 
stage composting process to produce a relatively stable material that would not begin to 
decompose further under anaerobic conditions when placed in the new sanitary landfill. 
5.  By aerobically composting the biodegradable fraction of urban waste, the organic matter is 
converted into CO
2
as opposed to CH
4
as it would occur under the anaerobic conditions 
prevailing in the new sanitary landfill. Therefore, the composting process would translate into a 
reduction of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. Preliminary analysis of scaled up co-composting 
operation indicate that it could translate into Certified/Verified Emission Reductions (C/VER) 
between 0.14 and 0.31 million of tons of CO
2
equivalent by 2014 (7 year crediting period) for 
the dry and wet environment decay constants respectively. 
6.  The construction of the co-composting facility for scaled up operation is proposed to be 
financed under the IDA Kabul Waste Management Project (KWMP) and a provision of up to 
US$3.0 million was tentatively made for the purpose. This co-composting facility would be 
contracted out to the private sector under a competitive design, build and operate (DBO) tender, 
most probably together with the new sanitary landfill, inclusive of its further extension. 
Operating fees for the overall contract would also be financed under IDA KWMP for the initial 3 
to 4 years of operations. 
7.  In addition to curtailing GHG emissions, the proposed project would also result in significant 
local environmental and social benefits. By providing an economic value to the nighsoil from dry 
latrines, the project should contribute to restoring systematic collection and transport 
mechanisms, translating into visible improvement in the neighborhoods environment. The 
project will thus have an overall positive environmental impact, leading to improvements in the 
urban environment with better hygienic conditions in the areas served by this project. This 
project will also pave the way for discussions with communities to cooperate with the 
Department of Sanitation of Kabul Municipality and take responsibilities in environmental 
sanitation and will help improve health status of the served area in particular and of Kabul city in 
general. The community benefit plan could potentially include measures such as additional 
benefits to workers, job training, health education or even small scale social infrastructure to 
communities. 
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
8. 
The project will be located at the site of the new sanitary landfill, in the area called Koh-e-
Badasia situated some 5 kilometers north of Kabul city. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
9.  As a result of more than two decades of conflict, exodus of trained professional, low salary, 
and lack of incentives to new approaches, the Borrower’s institutional capacity is generally 
weak. Therefore, as in the case of other rehabilitation and development projects, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being developed for the IDA 
Kabul Waste Management Project which will finance the construction and the initial years of 
operation of the proposed co-composting facility. A framework approach has been chosen 
because, although project interventions have been well-defined, there are uncertainties given the 
overall post-conflict operational context in Afghanistan, which in turn requires substantial 
flexibility during implementation. The ESMF builds upon the generic safeguard framework 
developed for emergency operations in Afghanistan and used for all emergency operations. The 
ESMF prescribes specific mitigation and enhancement measures to address the social and 
environmental aspects of project interventions. In addition, safeguards screening guidelines have 
been provided for possible subsequent variations in project interventions or possible additional 
investments. 
10. A designated Safeguards Nodal Officer will be identified within the Department of Sanitation 
in the Kabul Municipality with responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The Contractor that implements the 
project investment component will have primary responsibility as per the terms of the design, 
build and operate (DBO) contract to ensure adequate social and environmental mitigation and 
management during design, construction and operation. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Applicable
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
Page  4
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[X] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
11. 
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment 
would be triggered. Environmental impacts have been 
broadly identified and addressed in the Environmental Assessments (EA) and Environmental 
Management Plans (EMP) which were carried out under the IDA-funded Strategic Sanitation 
Plan and Sewerage/Drainage Master Plan for Kabul. Some specific investigations were carried 
out recently to confirm the environmental adequacy of the site for the construction of the new 
sanitary landfill, inclusive of its co-composting facility. The environmental assessment report 
will be further fine-tuned before it is submitted to the National Environment Protection Agency 
(NEPA) for review and clearance, and will notably be complemented with an EMP for 
operations of facilities. Accordingly, the EMPs will be included in the private sector contracts for 
construction and operation of the facilities. 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
12. Overall this project might be classified as category B, given that no significant, irreversible 
or long-term adverse environmental impacts are anticipated and that any identified adverse 
impacts can be effectively addressed through appropriate mitigation measures or preventive 
actions. Following the ESMF approach, considering the project B classification, and also 
availability of an overall Environmental Report clarifying the main issues, a full EIA for the 
project may not be required. As mentioned above, the EA and the EMP should be further verified 
and prepared for disclosure by the project. 
 
13. 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement 
would be triggered. Although no resettlement issues are 
expected, there will be a need for land acquisition for the new sanitary landfill site, where the 
status of landownership is not yet clear. The social assessment of October 2006 indicates limited 
use of the land by pastoral nomads en route. An abbreviated Resettlement Framework has been 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
developed containing policies and procedures for restoring housing and compensating for loss of 
land and livelihood of project affected families in a consultative and mutually agreeable manner, 
compliant with OP 4.12. Private voluntary donations will be documented as required by the 
Framework, as will compensation payments made by the community. For government land, 
documentation will be required that the land is free of encroachments, squatters or other 
encumbrances, and has been transferred for the project by the authorities. A satisfactory and 
policy compliant settlement of the land issues is a precondition for project implementation. 
 
14. 
OP 4.11 Cultural Property
 would be triggered. The proposed project is unlikely to pose a 
risk of damaging physical cultural resources. The Safeguards Framework includes a negative list 
that precludes any activity that would significantly damage nonreplicable cultural properties. The 
framework also includes guidelines for chance-finds of cultural property, so that appropriate 
procedures are followed in compliance with the law on the Preservation 
of
Afghanistan’s 
Historical and Cultural Heritages. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared: N/A 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS: September 2007. 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
·
Environmental and Social Assessment and Mitigation Plan: completed 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Karine Fourmond 
Date: 5-Jul-07 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Brusberg 
Date: 5-Jul-07 
Comments: None 
Sector Manager: 
Karin Kemper 
Date: 6-Jul-07 
Comments: None 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
