Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/10/2006 
Report No.:  AC2174
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P087860 
Project Name:  Afghanistan Urban Water Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christophe E. Bosch 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S);Pollution management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project will support the implementation of the Government's Sector Policy 
and Institutional Development Plan (IDP) and will have three objectives, accordingly: (1) 
develop sector institutions and the needed human resources to transform the Central 
Authority for Water Supply and Sewerage (CAWSS) into a technically viable operation; 
(2) establish the financial sustainability of the sector, and (3) increase access to the water 
service. The project would also prepare a subsequent operation that would be funded 
under a future IDA allocation.   
 
3. Project Description 
To achieve the above objectives, the project would include three components:  
 
•
Investment in Kabul, in coordination with urban water supply projects financed 
by other donors, in particular KfW;  
 
•
Financial support to the future Afghan Urban Water Supply and Sewerage 
Company (AUWSSC -- corporatized CAWSS), including (i) working capital and (ii) 
performance-based operational subsidies, to be phased out by the end of the project; and  
 
•
Technical assistance including (i) institutional and operational support to the 
Company before and after its establishment, (ii) engineering support for the 
Page  2
implementation of investments financed under the project, (iii) preparation of future 
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP), and (iv) technical support for the preparation of future 
investments in the sector, including bulk water supply and sewerage for Kabul.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance investments only in Kabul. However the project will provide 
technical, financial and operational support to the entire CAWSS operation which 
currently covers Kabul and 13 provincial towns.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
An environmental and social screening and assessment framework has been developed 
for Bank-financed operations in Afghanistan. In addition, procedures for Mine Risk 
Management in World Bank-funded projects have been designed to respond to the risks 
caused by the presence of mines in Afghanistan.  
 
Environmental Assessment.  Operational Policy 4.01 is triggered.  Environmental 
impacts have been identified and addressed in the Environmental Assessments (EA) and 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) which were carried out as part of the feasibility 
studies for WSS system expansion in Kabul (funded by KfW) and about 20 provincial 
towns (funded by IDA and ARTF).  Issues of wastewater disposal and treatment have 
been analyzed under the IDA-funded Strategic Sanitation Plan and Sewerage/Drainage 
Master Plan for Kabul and the Sanitation Plan for provincial cities.  They will be 
addressed under the proposed FY07 Urban Waste Management project (for on-site 
sanitation) and a possible future FY08/09 Urban Water Sector project (for sewerage).  
The project will improve existing arrangements for water treatment, water quality 
Page  3
monitoring, and, most importantly the establishment of groundwater protection zones to 
ensure sustainability of the resource, particularly in Kabul. Issues of security of access to 
bulk water, inter-sectoral water allocation, conjunctive use of ground and surface water 
are being addressed through the strategic study on long-term WSS issues for Kabul.  
 
Social assessment.  Social assessment and socio-economic surveys were carried out 
under ongoing WSS projects as part of the feasibility studies for WSS system expansion.  
In addition, a qualitative assessment of past experiences in community involvement in 
WSS in Kabul and other larger cities, e.g. by UN-Habitat, will be carried out, along with 
a
review of the experiences among NGOs/INGOs and UN agencies of WSS-related 
health-
hygiene campaign.  Particular attention will be paid to the potential for women’s 
employment, e.g. as attendants at water kiosks,as well as other jobs related to public 
water supply and sanitation.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement. Operational Policy 4.12 is triggered. Although no 
resettlement issues are expected, there will be a need for limited land acquisition for the 
new pumping station and reservoir envisaged as part of the Logar II sub-project.  
Furthermore, maintenance of the right-of-way for the transmission line to the reservoir 
will also require land acquisition as the alignment will cut across a hill which is rapidly 
turning into a residential area.  A survey is being conducted to document and clarify the 
status of the land involved and to determine the number of people affected. An 
abbreviated  Resettlement Framework has been developed containing policies and 
procedures for restoring housing and compensating for loss of land and livelihood of 
project affected families in a consultative and mutually agreeable manner, compliant with 
OP 4.12.   A satisfactory and policy compliant settlement of the land issues is a 
precondition for project implementation.  
 
Cultural Property. OPN 11.03 is not triggered. The proposed project is unlikely to pose 
a
risk of damaging cultural property. The Safeguards Framework includes a negative list 
that precludes any activity that would significantly damage nonreplicable cultural 
property as guidelines for chance-find procedures according to national law.  
 
Indigenous Peoples. OP 4.10 is not triggered. There are no groups classified as 
Indigenous Peoples in Afghanistan and through the planned follow-on social 
assessments, the project will explore how to ensure greater social equity in outreach 
through community participation and involvement of women in planning and service 
delivery. Effective community consultations will identify any problem areas (potential 
exclusion from project benefits, negative project impacts, and the need for specific 
culturally compatible mechanisms for participation, e.g. for women, permanently 
disabled), and will incorporate adequate measures to address such vulnerability in project 
design. Gender segregated community consultations will be conducted.  
 
Projects on International Waterways. OP 7.50 is not triggered because the project only 
supports investments for abstraction of water from locally confined ground water aquifers 
and hence will not have any measurable impact on international waters.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant long term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alignment of pipelines and location of pumping station have been defined while 
minimizing potential land acquisition and disturbances.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Capacity for the management of social and environmental issues in the WSS sector will 
be built in MUDH and AUWSSC through a proposed project administered by the newly 
created National Environmental Agency (NEPA). This project should establish fully 
operational social and environmental management capacity within NEPA and line 
Ministries and agencies, including MUDH and AUWSSC. The Consultants assisting 
AUWSSC in implementing the project will be responsible for supervising the 
implementation of the safeguards framework, as per provisions of their contracts.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project's Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework was developed on the 
basis of an overall Framework for World Bank-funded emergency operations in 
Afghanistan which was prepared in consultation with the principal NGOs and 
development partners participating in reconstruction activities in Afghanistan.  
Consultation and disclosure requirements have been simplified to meet the special needs 
of these Afghanistan operations prepared under emergency recovery procedures (OP 
8.50).  Prior to approval of the project by the World Bank Board, it will be disclosed by 
the Government in both Dari and Pashto, as well as English, and it will also be made 
available at the World Bank’s Infoshop. Several workshops havealready taken place to 
consult with stakeholders on the objectives and components of the project. Consultations 
at the community level will also take place before and during actual project 
implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/30/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/30/2006 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/30/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Consultation and disclosure requirements have been simplified to meet the special needs 
of Afghanistan operations processed under O.  P. 8.50 (emergency operations).  Prior to 
approval by the World Bank Board, the Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework 
will be disclosed in Afghanistan in Dari and Pashto, and in the World Bank Infoshop.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christophe E. Bosch 
02/17/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
02/17/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
02/17/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/01/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jeffrey S. Racki 
03/01/2006 
Comments:   
