Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1834 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P098118 
Project Name: Sustainable Development of Natural Resources 
Task Team Leader: Craig B. Andrews 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s main objective lies at the core of the natural resources sector strategy – for MMI to 
significantly improve capacity to effectively regulate Afghanistan’s natural resources sector, and 
thereby stimulate private sector development.  
 
Project components to achieve this objective relate to strengthening those units that are deemed 
to be essential to the mission of MMI as a regulatory body   MMI’s efficiency and effectiveness 
in this regard might be measured by the agency’s ability to respond to investor interest.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
number of different development alternatives for the sector have been considered.  Bi-lateral 
donors, such as the US and the UK, are funding some aspects of work required by the sector.  
Likewise, trust funds and/or mining sector components of other Bank projects have been used to 
fund portions of work required by the sector.  Also, significant technical assistance has been 
delivered to the government via internal Bank budgets.  However, the principal drawbacks of 
these alternative approaches are that they: 1) do not lend themselves to a coherent, consistent and 
sustained approach based on the sector strategy; 2) the government, particularly the 
implementation ministry, is not fully involved and has limited ownership of the activities; and 3) 
Page  2
insufficient funds are available to establish a “critical mass” to effectively achieve development 
results.  For these reasons, a sector investment lending operation is the most appropriate vehicle.  
 
The project would provide IDA grant funding for the creation and capacity building of essential 
units: (1)  Policy / Strategy Unit to provide resource policy, support strategic investment 
decisions, provide an interface to investors and ongoing industry, and support improved financial 
planning / administrative oversight of programs,  (2)  Program Management Unit (PMU) to 
attract local and foreign investment through implementation of policy and sector strategies; and 
planning of administrative and financial reforms that support the MMI’s new policy-making and 
regulatory role.  (3)  A Financial Management Unit to improve financial planning / 
administrative oversight of MMI programs (4) Legal and regulatory support for competitive, 
transparent tendering and leasing processes considering safeguards. (5)  Environmental / social 
protection department (6) Public information unit.  Subject to additional program costing, 
additional tasks may be added relating to (i) restructuring the Afghanistan Geological Service 
(AGS) to enable sector promotion through the provision of new geoscience information and an 
integration of solid minerals and hydrocarbons into one agency; and (ii) disposition of select 
state-owned enterprises.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Technical Assistance / Capacity Building with government agencies in Kabul City and possibly 
in regional offices as required.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will support government efforts to develop an institutional structure for 
environmental regulation in the mining/natural resources sector, which is currently very weak.  
The project will build capacity for the development and implementation of environmental 
legislation and standards in this sector.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Christophe E. Bosch (SASES) 
Mr David C. Hanrahan (SASES) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/17/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard-related studies are planned.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Craig B. Andrews 
12/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
01/06/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
