Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3218 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/23/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P106259 
Project Name: Second Education Quality Improvement Program 
Task Team Leader: Scherezad Joya Monami Latif 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (50%);Secondary education (50%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
22.00 
 
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
84.70
156.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The program development objective is to increase equitable access to quality basic education 
especially for girls through school grants, teacher training and strengthened institutional capacity 
with support from communities and private providers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: School Grants  
 
Sub-Component 1.1 School Grants for Quality Enhancement  
 
The objective of the quality enhancement grant is to develop healthy linkages between schools, 
communities and local government while supporting and empowering schools and communities 
as local education managers. The grant would finance activities such as education materials and 
supplies, supplementary readers, toolkits, expenditures for workshops, seminars, meetings and 
transportation for teachers and School Shura/PTA members to participate in appropriate 
Page  2
meetings. Under the program, there would be two types of grants: first and second generation 
grants.  
 
Sub-Component 1.2: Infrastructure Grant  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to rehabilitate and construct schools using community 
participation and community-based decision making. Priority would be given to: (i) girls 
schools; (ii) schools with both boys? and girls? sections/shifts; and (iii) boys schools which plan 
to open up sections/shifts for girls. This component has been tried and tested in the past two 
IDA-funded education programs in Afghanistan and its design is based on the lessons learned.  
 
Sub-Component 1.3 Social Awareness and Mobilization  
 
The main objective of this sub component is to mobilize and strengthen School Shuras to 
manage their schools based on local priorities. It would finance: (i) social mobilization activities 
for communities to implement the program components with NGO support where relevant; (ii) 
the development of training modules for training and support to DEDs, PEDs, Provincial 
Departments of Construction (P-DOCs) and MOE at the center; and, (iii) the organization of 
community and provincial level dissemination of program information.  
 
Component 2: Teacher and Principal Training and Education  
 
Sub-Component 2.1: District Teacher Training Teams (DT3s)  
 
The objective of this sub component is to facilitate the creation of a system for sustainable 
teacher training and professional support in order to increase the knowledge and skills of 
teachers already working in MOE schools.  Three types of training would be delivered to 
teachers: pedagogy and basic knowledge training (INSET-I); content-knowledge training 
(INSET-II); and training to educate under-qualified female teachers (Accelerated Learning-AL). 
This sub component would also support the rehabilitation and construction of District Education 
Offices (DEOs) based on need and in order to provide for appropriate facilities in support of the 
DT3s.  
 
Sub-Component 2.2: Development of School Principals  
 
The two objectives of this sub-component are: a) to equip principals in government registered 
schools (currently 9,500 in number) with the most needed administrative and leadership tools for 
improving schools; and b) to establish a system of professional development networks which 
would support the longer-term MOE reform strategy for better quality teaching and learning. 
Principal training, implemented across Afghanistan and delivered to all principals, would have 
two phases.  
 
Sub-Component 2.3: Support to Increase Female Teachers  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to increase female enrollments in high schools and 
TTCs, through: (i) a program that hires and places qualified individuals to teach in under served 
Page  3
high schools around the country and (ii) a nation wide household scholarship program for girls 
entering TTCs. The sub-component would also partially support MOE?s plans to have fully 
equipped TTCs by providing for the construction of classrooms in provinces where no TTCs 
exist or there are gaps in funding, with a priority on classrooms for females.  
 
Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
3.1 Program Management and Coordination  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to support the structure for the management and 
implementation of the program. The project would continue to be managed under the structure 
which has evolved and has been tried and tested during implementation of EQUIP I.  
 
Sub-component 3.2: Monitoring  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to measure if and to what extent monitoring KPIs have 
been achieved (See Annex 2). This information will be used in the third party evaluation and will 
also be utilized for ongoing program improvement.  
 
Sub-Component 3.3: Evaluation  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to verify monitoring information and to measure if KPIs 
have been achieved. Independent third party evaluators will be used to assess all components as 
well as the program as a whole.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will have activities all over Afghanistan. After the long conflict, droughts, and 
excessive use of natural resources, negligence of proper resource and environmental 
management and the consequent environmental degradation as well as fragile ecosystems 
prevalence is a common problem in the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Currently social and environmental management in Afghanistan is suffering from critical 
capacity constraints. Since there is potential for adverse environmental impacts, albeit limited, 
from the proposed activities under the EQUIP II, their mitigation and management is key to the 
wholesome rehabilitation and development within the educational sector. Hence, keeping in view 
the existing management capacity, as well as the flexibility required with investments still to be 
finalized, a framework approach is adopted for EQUIP II.  It allows for early identification of 
potential adverse impacts, without the requirement of rigorous analysis through quantification, 
and also provides general policies and broad guidance for their effective mitigation, along with 
codes of practice and procedures to be integrated into project implementation. Consistent with 
existing national legislation, the objective of the Framework is to help ensure that activities 
under the proposed reconstruction operations will:  
 
(i)Protect human health;  
 
(ii) Prevent or compensate any loss of livelihood;  
Page  4
(iii) 
Prevent environmental degradation as a result of either individual subprojects or their 
cumulative effects;  
 
(iv) 
Enhance positive environmental and social outcomes; and,  
 
(v) 
Ensure compliance with World Bank safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDN) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Since the project will consist of rehabilitation and construction of schools buildings, 
provision of water and sanitation facilities and in some cases donation/transfer of land in some 
cases would be needed either for the whole school or for the latrines or other purposes such as 
road and etc and therefore the WB (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Only minor land acquisition is expected as the rehabilitation or construction of schools 
buildings primarily will take place on community or government land based on community 
decision. An Abbreviated  Resettlement Framework has been developed containing procedures 
for restoring of housing,  compensation for loss of land and livelihood of project affected 
families in a consultative and mutually agreeable manner, compliant with OP 4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/15/2007 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF for the project will be ready by appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Scherezad Joya Monami Latif 
10/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/23/2007 
Comments:  SAR Safeguards will review ESMF before appraisal. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
