Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC3126
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P103343 
Project Name:  National Emergency Rural Access Project 
Task Team Leader:  Susanne Holste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 4, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 6, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
112.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of this project is to enable the rural population to benefit from year-round 
access to basic services and facilities in the rural areas of Afghanistan covered by the 
project. This will be achieved through contracting with the private sector and, to a lesser 
extent, with communities for the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural access 
infrastructure.  The achievement of PDO will contribute to enhance well being and 
promote equitable economic growth in the country.  The PDO is derived from the 
overarching program objective of NRAP.  
 
The proposed key performance indicators are:  
 
-
Beneficiaries will be within a 2 km or 30 minutes of walking distance to an all-
weather road.  This indicator is closely aligned with the IDA-14 indicator for rural 
accessibility (20 minutes walking to an all-season road) and Afghanistan's National 
Development Strategy of providing access to 40% of all villages by 2009.  
 
-
After completion of a sub-project, travel time of beneficiaries living along the 
improved road to district centers would be reduced by 30%.  
 
-
After completion of a sub-project, the number of trips taken by beneficiaries living 
along the improved road to district centers would increase by 50%.  
Page  2
-
Price of key consumption and production commodities at beneficiary villages would 
be within 15% of the price in the nearest town.   
 
3. Project Description 
At this stage of project preparation, the proposed project includes three components: (i) 
improvement of secondary roads by the Ministry of Public Works (MPW); (ii) 
improvement of tertiary roads by the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development 
(MRRD); and (iii) institutional strengthening, project management and program 
development. The detailed project components and activities included in each component 
are presented in Appendix 2.  
 
Component A. Improvement of secondary roads (US$53.9 million equivalent including 
contingencies and taxes). This component implemented by MPW includes four sub-
components: (i) rehabilitation and reconstruction of about 650 kilometers of secondary 
rural roads.  The project will aim at promoting the development of a professional labor-
based contracting industry.  MPW has presented the preliminary investment programs 
summarized below, which are 70% confirmed a part of which will be financed under 
retroactive financing.  Final list of sub-projects will be agreed upon during appraisal.  The 
proposed detailed sub-projects are presented in Appendix 2.  The road selection was 
based on discussed and agreed criteria. IDA funding complements the ongoing programs 
financed under ARTF and takes into account as much as possible global equity 
parameters to ensure balanced investment proposals between the secondary and tertiary 
roads and equity amongst regions, provinces and districts. This component includes also 
(ii) financing a provisional amount of US$2.5 million equivalent (base cost) to address 
emergency repair works to roads and bridges following natural disasters such as heavy 
snow, rocks falls, landslide and rocks blockage, heavy rains and flooding.  Specific 
eligibility criteria that are simple and realistic, still to be defined by appraisal (covering 
e.g. proven exceptional event, re-opening of roads to link isolated areas, blockage of 
heavy traffic road without possibility of road deviations and to some extent proven 
imminent risks), will be used and precisely define in the legal agreement to trigger this 
type of investment; (iii) environmental and social sector management, monitoring and 
evaluation, this includes provisions for monitoring the updated Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and activities that involve community participation; 
and (iv) project implementation assistance: services of an implementation consultant and 
financial contribution to incremental operating expenses required to run the project 
implementation unit of MPW.  
 
Component B. Improvement of tertiary roads (US$51.9 million equivalent including 
contingencies and taxes). This component implemented by MRRD includes five sub-
components: (i) rehabilitation and reconstruction of about 850 kilometers of tertiary rural 
roads.  The delivery mechanism will be tailored to the security situation of the area, i.e., 
in the less secure areas community-based contracting will be promoted while in the more 
secure areas, works will be carried out by contractors.  The project will aim at promoting 
the development of a professional labor-based contracting industry.  MRRD has 
presented the preliminary investment programs summarized below, which are 70% 
confirmed a part of which will be financed under retroactive financing.  Final list of sub-
Page  3
projects will be agreed upon during appraisal.  The proposed detailed sub-projects are 
presented in Annex xx.  The road selection was based on discussed and agreed criteria. 
IDA funding complements the ongoing programs financed under ARTF and takes into 
account as much as possible global equity parameters to ensure balanced investment 
proposals between the secondary and tertiary roads and equity amongst regions, 
provinces and districts; (ii) financing a provisional amount of US$2.5 million equivalent 
(base cost) to address emergency repair works to roads and bridges following natural 
disasters such as heavy snow, rocks falls, landslide and rocks blockage, heavy rains and 
flooding.  Specific eligibility criteria that are simple and realistic, still to be defined by 
appraisal (covering e.g. proven exceptional event, re-opening of roads to link isolated 
areas, blockage of heavy traffic road without possibility of road deviations and to some 
extent proven imminent risks), will be used and precisely define in the legal agreement to 
trigger this type of investment; (iii) carrying out a maintenance program mainly on the 
already rehabilitated road under the NEEP/NRAP financed by IDA and will cover the 
initial estimated financing need for a period of twelve to eighteen months (some US$8 
million equivalent base costs). MRRD is currently carrying out a maintenance pilot 
operation consisting of eight roads covering 53 km.  This includes routine, periodic and 
emergency maintenance and the results obtained so far appear to be promising.  
Communities were contracted to carry out routine and periodic maintenance works and 
contractors were hired for the emergency works. At this stage of project preparation, 
MRRD approached the National Solidarity Program (NSP) and is exploring the option of 
using the NSP mechanism using the Facilitating Partners (FP) to provide technical advice 
to the communities and using the Community Development Councils (CDC) as the entry 
point for community contracting for routine maintenance works and participatory 
monitoring of this sub-component;. (iv) environmental and social sector management, 
monitoring and evaluation, this includes provisions for monitoring the updated 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and activities that involve 
community participation; and (v) project implementation assistance: services of an 
implementation consultant and financial contribution to incremental operating expenses 
required to run the project implementation unit of MRRD.  
 
Component C. Institutional strengthening, project management and program 
development (US$6.2 million equivalent including contingencies and taxes).  Three sub-
components are envisaged at this stage: (i) Rural roads management system including 
support for: (a) the formulation of a rural access strategy and its implementation through 
a
national prioritized investment program for the next 5 years to be presented to the 
donors by project Mid Term Review; and (b) the setting up of maintenance mechanism, 
maintenance programming for the short and medium term and support for its first year of 
implementation, and routine and emergency maintenance works. In addition and in 
conformity with the road management strategy, this sub-component will also finance (ii) 
capacity building activities for staff who will be tasked to manage the rural road sector, it 
will also include rural road management, e.g. road network management (identification of 
a
core rural road network, definition of appropriate service levels, data collection and 
analysis, and RED), public procurement, financial management, upgrading of 
engineering skills, reporting, and geographic information systems. The project will 
continue to finance internships for at least 100 engineering students with NRAP and 10 
Page  4
community development/social inclusion students.  It is also planned to develop a 
program for managerial level staff who would receive on-the-job training in roads 
agencies in other countries.  This sub-component will also include capacity building for 
contractors (national works contractors and engineering firms) which would target on-
the-job training and business skills (bidding, contract management and community 
contract management, works organization, and technical aspects); and (iii) Project 
management, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in rural areas throughout Afghanistan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDN) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Roads, whether primary or village access, have a wide range of potentially positive and 
negative impacts, depending on their location within the country. Roads located in the 
area having steep slope (mainly village access roads) are characterized by hairpin or 
sharp bends, whereas in flat areas they follow rather straight alignments. These geometric 
features affect the volumes of earthworks to be carried out and consequent impacts on the 
environment. Disruption of drainage is a major consideration in road design as it may 
hamper free drainage, cause stagnant pools of water, lead to increased sediments into 
ponds, streams and rivers due to erosion from road tops and sides, as well as increased 
run-off and flooding. In the case of mountain roads, borrow excavation into the 
mountainside to achieve the planned design width of the roadbed may lead to the erosion 
of exposed slope surfaces and possibly to slides of slopes onto the road. Slope 
stabilization is therefore a key design issue in mountainous areas. Loss of natural 
Page  5
vegetation may also occur during construction, especially when widening works are 
planned. In that case, revegetation and replanting should be envisioned to protect 
susceptible soil surfaces. Loss of access is possible in case roadbeds are raised or villages 
bisected by road widening. During construction, inadequate disposal of oil and bitumen, 
as well as the introduction of work camp or hazardous wastes, may lead to soil and 
groundwater contamination. Environmental impacts resulting from road works are 
expected to be localized and it is therefore reasonable to assume a negligible risk of 
cumulative negative impacts.  
 
Natural habitats: Experience from ongoing projects has shown that occasionally the 
implementing Agencies in rural areas would, despite the strict criteria of selection, extend 
or expand the rural road. This extension or expansion may cause tree/shrub cutting and 
causing other damages to the local ecosystem in a fragile/sensitive/forestry area. 
Triggering this policy will help to be prepared for such a situation.  
 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement The activities to be undertaken under the proposed 
project involve rehabilitation of existing secondary and tertiary roads and other related 
rural access infrastructure which may involve minor land acquisition and will not have 
any significant adverse social or economic impacts; on the contrary the project is 
expected to bring positive social and economic benefits because of increased access to 
markets and services.  No activities which require involuntary land acquisition will be 
supported. In instances where limited amounts of land is needed to facilitate the works, 
voluntary donations will be sought or compensation issued according to the, "Guidelines 
for Land and Asset Acquisition, Entitlements and Compensation" included in the 
Framework.  
 
Local Minorities. There are no groups classified as Indigenous Peoples in Afghanistan. 
The proposed project is of national scope and aims at ensuring regional balance in terms 
of coverage of ethnic and religious groups The sub-project screening will ensure 
inclusion of local minorities and that no groups are excluded from project benefits due to 
ethnic and religious affiliation. Employment opportunities within the projects will be 
available on an equal basis to all, on the basis of professional competence, irrespective 
ethnic or religious group affiliation.  In all sub-projects which require consultations with 
local communities or beneficiaries, gender-separated consultations will be conducted to 
elicit the views of the female population, along with that of the male population.  
 
Cultural Property. Chance archeological finds will be recorded in project monitoring 
formats, the implementing agency will secure the artifact, and the Archeological 
Committee will be informed of the find.  Should the continuation of work endanger an 
archeological site, project activities will be suspended until a solution is found. Further 
information is given in the Attachment 3 of Appendix 11: Environmental and Social 
Management Framework.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect impacts include induced commercial and business developments along the 
rehabilitated road sections and village access roads. An increased risk of road accidents 
due to higher speeds and heavier traffic could also occur.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives, relevant to this project and considered will include design, technology, 
construction techniques and phasing, as well as operation and maintenance procedures.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In preparation of the proposed project, the Government commissioned an assessment of 
the implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework under 
NEEPRA, including audit of a representative sample of 8 sub-projects to assess how 
much the previous ESMF was integrated in the projects cycle, existing gaps, capacity 
constraints, institutional arrangements, potential Environmental and Social impacts, and 
possibilities of improvements to be introduced under the prevailing circumstances. Based 
on this assessment the government prepared an update to the previous ESMF which 
should enhance the quality of the road subprojects, comply with the World Bank 
Environmental and Social Policies and the National Environmental Laws and 
Regulations, prepared by NEPA. The ESMF prepared contains, a check-list of likely 
environment and social impacts will be filled out by the Project Management Teams 
(PMTs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) prepared for each subproject 
before construction begins. The EMPs include mitigation plans, and monitoring plans and 
documentation formats.  
 
Capacity for the management of social and environmental issues in the rural roads 
sector will be built in MRRD through a proposed project administered by the newly 
created National Environmental Agency (NEPA). This project should establish fully 
operational social and environmental management capacity within NEPA and line 
Ministries and agencies, including MRRD. The Consultants assisting NERAP in 
implementing the project will be responsible for supervising the implementation of the 
safeguards framework, as per provisions of their contracts.  Overall responsibility for the 
implementation of the above process will be with the Project Management Teams 
(PMTs). PMT staff will include Environmental and Social Focal Officers/Specialists 
throughout the project?s duration. The Focal Officers should be trained in the 
implementation of EMPs of all project components. After that period of training, the 
PMT?s ESMF Focal Officers/ pecialists should be qualified enough to adequately 
manage and monitor EMPs.  
 
Considering that this project is an emergency recovery project, measures taken by the 
borrower to address safeguard policy issues are those defined in the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) designed for NERAP. Under this framework 
(and following Bank guidelines for emergency projects), a check-list of likely 
Page  7
environment and social impacts will be filled out by the Project Management Teams 
(PMTs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) prepared for each subproject 
before construction begins. The EMPs include mitigation plans (control measures to 
reduce or eliminate to the extent possible the expected adverse impacts), monitoring 
plans (consisting primarily of field visual inspections. Photographic documentation 
would be implemented at the construction phase and maintained at least one year after 
completion of construction activities), and institutional strengthening-capacity building 
activities as the client agency capacity in management and implementation of the ESMF 
is currently weak.  
 
The main mitigation measures that will be implemented include:  
 
?
Improved and environmentally-sound road standards, especially: (i) adequate 
drainage with minimum changes in flows; (ii) provision of a sufficient number of cross 
drains, energy dissipaters, cascades, steps, and check dams; (iii) balancing of cut and fill; 
and (iv) slope stabilization through suitable means, planting of a wide range of 
vegetation, and the creation of slope breaks.  
 
?
Adequate measures during construction, such as: (i) removal of work camp waste, 
proper disposal of oil, bitumen and other hazardous wastes; (ii) provision of fuel at work 
camps to prevent cutting of firewood, and sanitation; (iii) management of construction 
period worker health and safety; (iv) use of archeological chance find procedures and 
coordination with appropriate agencies; and (v) comprehensive community participation 
in planning and setting-up of a local conflict resolution system in case of migration 
issues.  
 
Systematic public consultations with people affected by subprojects due to land 
acquisition. Discussions with each of these people will be held to confirm their requests 
and preferences for compensation, agreements reached, and any eventual complaint they 
may have.  Depending on the location of the road projects, overall responsibility for the 
implementation of the above process will be with the Project Management Teams 
(PMTs). PMT staff will include Environmental and Social Focal Officers/Specialists 
throughout the project?s duration. The Focal Officers should be trained in the 
implementation of EMPs of all project components. After that period of training, the 
PMT?s ESMF Focal Officers/Specialists should be qualified enough to adequately 
manage and monitor EMPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include all population living along or nearby rehabilitated roads, 
especially rural people who will significantly benefit from reconstructed village access 
roads; local governments; the relevant departments in the Ministries of MRRD and MPW 
as well as their partners.  
 
As per the ESMF, both implementing agencies (MRRD and MPW) and their partners 
will systematically consult local institutions and groups that may be affected by road sub-
projects to gather their views on the sub-projects? environmental and social aspects. 
Page  8
MRRD and MPW will ensure that all occupants of land and owners of assets located in 
the subproject area are consulted. These consultations will be initiated as early as possible 
to make sure recommendations and opinions can be incorporated in the sub-projects at an 
early stage. Relevant material describing the sub-projects and their potential impacts will 
be distributed prior to consultation, in a form and language(s) that are understandable and 
accessible to the groups being consulted. The minutes of the consultations will be widely 
disseminated by MRRD and MPW directly or through their partners, and especially to all 
affected people.  
 
Public consultations will more likely be held in those areas where significant impacts 
(positive or negative) are expected. For each meeting, a formal record will be made 
including the agenda, a list of participants, and a summary of all issues discussed.  
 
The project's Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework was developed on the 
basis of an overall Framework for World Bank-funded emergency operations in 
Afghanistan which was prepared in consultation with the principal NGOs and 
development partners participating in reconstruction activities in Afghanistan.  
 
Consultation and disclosure requirements have been simplified to meet the special needs 
of these Afghanistan operations prepared under emergency recovery procedures (OP 
8.50).  Consultations at the community level (with gender segregated consultations in 
order to reach women) will also take place before and during actual project 
implementation. Prior to approval of the project by the World Bank Board, it will be 
disclosed by the Government in both Dari and Pashto, as well as English, and it will also 
be made available at the World Bank?s InfoShop.  
 
The project?s Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA), and all supporting studies, 
will be disclosed at the World Bank, Washington, DC, and with involved governmental 
authorities within Afghanistan (MPW and MRRD in Kabul and in the provinces).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/14/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/26/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/23/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/14/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/26/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/23/2007 
 
Page  9
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susanne Holste 
08/21/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
08/21/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
08/21/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
08/22/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
08/21/2007 
Comments:  This is approved by me, subject to some modifications: total IDA is $112 m, the project 
is processed under OP 8.5,there should be no reference to appendix/annex, disclosure info needs 
updated. 
