Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/10/2006 
Report No.:  AC2278
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P098118 
Project Name:  Sustainable Development of Natural Resources 
Task Team Leader:  Craig B. Andrews 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of this project is to assist the Ministry of Mines and Industries (MMI) in 
improving its capaci
ty to effectively regulate Afghanistan’s minerals and hydrocarbon 
resources sector in a transparent manner and foster private sector development. Among 
the benefits to Afghanistan of development of its mineral resources will be tax revenues, 
employment, rural development, and economic spin-offs.   
 
3. Project Description 
This project will assist MMI to make the transition from being a producer of minerals and 
other commodities to a policy-making institution and regulator for the sector through 
capacity building and institutional strengthening across four components:  
 
•
Improve internal efficiencies of ministry departments  
 
•
Develop regulatory capacity  
 
•
Develop mineral resources  
 
•
Enhancing sector governance and transparency  
 
The components are summarized in Table 1.  
 
Table 1   Project Components  
 
Component $US 
 
 
Program Management Unit  $3,400,000  
 
Component 1:Improving Internal Efficiencies  
Page  2
Administration Department  $1,300,000  
 
Component 2: Developing Regulatory Capacity  
 
Department of Environmental and Social Protection  
 
Department of Cadastre  
 
Department of Inspectorate  $9,000,000  
 
Component 3: Developing Mineral Resources  
 
Sector Policy Unit and Private Sector Promotion & Development  
 
Senior Industry Advisors  
 
Afghanistan Geological Survey Mapping Supervision & Information Support  
 
Afghanistan Geological Survey - Geoscience Program  
 
Extractive industry SOE analysis and strategy formulation $10,000,000  
 
Component 4: Strengthening Sector Governance  
 
International Advisory Body  
 
Extract. Industries Transparency Initiative  $1,350,000  
 
Training, Workshops, Conferences & professional development  
 
hardware, software, communications, equipment, works, vehicles, other  $4,500,000  
 
Incremental Operating Costs - Vehicles & Other 
$450,000  
 
$30,000,000  
 
Capacity building and institutional strengthening will rely upon a progressive transition 
from international experts to MoM counterparts with capacity being built using a “train 
the trainer” approach. Central to this approach will be the need for promising staff 
individuals within MoM to be offered, and assume, leadership roles.  
 
Component 1: Improving Internal Efficiencies  
 
Activities in this component will strengthen capacity and streamline processes within 
the Administration Department of MMI covering: budget and planning, financial 
management, human resources, information technology, and asset management. The 
project will assist MMI in having an operating information technology and financial 
management system.  
 
Financial management, including budgeting, is a weakness of MMI at present, which is 
true for most of the other ministries. This project will define a strategy for development 
of a Finance and Accounts Unit including staffing, budget, and skills requirements; 
define administrative systems for performing internal audit functions and improving 
MMI financial efficiencies on the basis of market-based budget and accounting practices; 
and provide technical support to the budgetary process.  
 
Component 2: Developing Regulatory Capacity  
 
This component will develop MMI’s regulatory capacity and put into operation three 
new essential departments: (1) Mining and Hydrocarbons Inspectorate, which will house 
a
Small-Scale Mining and Extension Services Unit, (2) Mining and Hydrocarbons Title 
Registry and Cadastre, and (3) Environmental and Social Protection, under which falls a 
Liaison Unit, linking MMI to the National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA).  
Page  3
A
Mining Licensing Board, consisting of both MMI staff and external advisors, will be 
established to review the activities of the three departments with respect to the rights of 
investors to operate in the sector. The Board will check conformity of award, renewal, 
cancellation or termination, and surrender of licenses, titles, and contracts with applicable 
procedures and make recommendations to the Minister accordingly.  
 
The Mining and Hydrocarbons Inspectorate will begin the process of formalizing the 
many operating mines currently not licensed and not paying royalties; inspect extractive 
industry operations to monitor compliance with occupational health, safety, and work-
procedural regulations as well as terms of contracts where applicable; and enforce other 
sector-specific laws and regulations. The Inspectorate will also supervise compilation and 
publication of statistics and information about the production and sale of minerals and 
hydrocarbons. The Small-Scale Mining and Extension Services Unit under the 
Inspectorate will provide technical support and guidance to small-scale miners and assist 
in the formalization of the many operations currently not paying royalties.  
 
Mining and Hydrocarbons Title Registry and Cadastre will house a Licensing Unit and a 
Production and Royalty Audit Unit. The Licensing Unit will process and register various 
applications from investors and license holders; issue mineral rights in the form of 
licenses, authorizations, and contracts; ensure compliance therewith; and maintain a 
register of industry activity. The Production and Royalty Audit Unit will verify annual 
mineral and hydrocarbon production; assess royalties based on the quantities and 
qualities of the minerals and hydrocarbons produced in accordance with the minerals and 
hydrocarbons legislation; and ensure payment thereof to the central treasury.  
 
One of the principal aims of the project is to create appropriate environmental and social 
management units within MMI, as required by the Minerals and Hydrocarbons Laws, and 
to train ministry staff to monitor and supervise the environmental performance of the 
sector. The Environmental and Social Protection Department will develop an 
environmental/social policy framework for future sector development; establish and 
assist NEPA in enforcing sector-specific environmental guidelines and procedures; 
monitor compliance therewith by private companies; and evaluate, jointly with NEPA, 
environmental impact assessments, environmental management plans, and abandonment 
plans as may be required under the legislation. A key function of this department is 
liaison with NEPA on broader oversight of environmental issues across sectors. 
Throughout the technical assistance process particular emphasis will be given to training 
and the development of internal capacity within MMI to carry out these tasks 
independently.  
 
Component 3: Developing Mineral Resources  
 
Promoting the development of mineral resources is the largest component in the project. 
This component will support activities in the Sector Policy Unit and the Afghanistan 
Geological Survey, and conduct assessment of SOEs with a view to developing sub-
sector strategies.  
 
Page  4
The Sector Policy Unit will formulate extractive industries policy and undertake market 
analysis by way of analyzing supply and demand. It will also prepare sector laws, 
regulations, and guidelines with input from other departments and units.  
 
The Afghan Geological Survey will receive technical support for mapping of 
prospective mineral regions and mineral resource assessments to encourage new private 
sector exploration investment. The project will also support the development of a 
geographic information system for internet-based distribution of information and a public 
information center. This builds upon the work carried out by the British Geological 
Survey (BGS) and U.S. Geological Survey in building capacity within the department. 
The Afghanistan Geological Survey will house a Business Development Unit to design 
short-term resource development strategies and serve as the interface to the private sector 
on basic information, MMI activities as defined by sector laws and regulations, and 
tender of resource properties. The Business Development Unit will promote investment 
by participating in industry trade shows and conferences and preparing promotional 
materials.  
 
Component 4: Enhancing Sector Governance  
 
The government, through the project, will devise and implement a number of measures 
to ensure competition, transparency, and adherence to international best practices in 
respect of authorizing new investments in the sector. To this end, this project will help 
establish and support an International Advisory Council and the implementation of the 
principles of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).  
 
The International Advisory Council will consist of a number of experts widely 
recognized in their respective fields for their knowledge of the sector and emerging 
trends in governance and transparency. They will review procedures for awarding 
licenses and contracts for all major transactions as well as the negotiated licenses and 
contracts themselves, and provide a second opinion on the conformity of each transaction 
with international best practice and the fairness of the deal. The Council will also conduct 
an annual audit of cadastre functions. The Council will report to the Inter-Ministerial 
Committee established by the Mining and Hydrocarbons Laws and the management 
committee of the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. The experts on the Council 
will be retained by the government to review each contract in accordance with applicable 
World Bank procurement procedures.  
 
During negotiations the government has agreed to endorse and implement the principles 
of the EITI. The EITI supports improved governance in extractive industries through the 
full publication and verification of company payments and government revenues from 
oil, gas, and mining. This project will help establish a multi-stakeholder EITI committee, 
which will agree upon basic EITI procedures and develop a work plan. The committee 
will members draw from the government, extractive industries, and civil society. The 
committee will design a reporting template and engage the public in dissemination and 
discussion of the audit findings.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will take place mostly in Kabul at the Ministry of Mines and Industries in the 
form of technical assistance.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Christophe E. Bosch (SASES) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large scale impacts of this capacity building project are envisaged.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As the ministry’s institutional capacity is strengthened, Afghanistan will be able to attract 
private investment to develop the minerals and hydrocarbons sector. Environmental and 
social protection regulations and guidelines are needed to ensure sustainable sector 
development.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will develop a framework for environmental and social protection policy, 
establish an Environmental and Social Protection Department within the Ministry.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Craig B. Andrews 
05/03/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Christophe E. Bosch 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
05/09/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
05/05/2006 
Comments:  Approved, subject to completing the Compliance Monitoring Indicators section 
