Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC2625
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P079736 
Project Name:  CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Francois Marteau 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (40%);General transportation sector (30%);Railways 
(20%);Ports, waterways and shipping (10%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
166.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objectives are to enhance regional trade and integration and 
sub-regional cooperation between CEMAC and ECCAS member states, and specifically 
provide the landlocked countries Central African Republic (CAR) and Chad with a better 
access to the Port of Douala through: (i) assistance to the strengthening of the CEMAC 
Customs Union; and (ii) improvement of the logistics chain, including road and rail 
infrastructure to the Port of Douala's hinterland.  
 
At a higher level, the project will contribute to the shared growth objectives of the 
CEMAC countries' PRSPs, by ensuring that the Customs Union is effectively 
implemented and by improving trade facilitation in the region.  It will also support the 
broader goal of increasing the regional integration of CEMAC member states by 
improving its core rail and road infrastructure.  Furthermore, NEPAD has selected 
CEMAC as one of the target institutions for Central Africa, and these corridors as the 
main transport infrastructure to be supported in this sub region.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
This project is a piece of the priority actions of a general program that should, in the end, 
cover the whole CEMAC region, with a common objective to secure access to the 
landlocked countries and increase trade in the CEMAC countries.  
 
The program is currently limited to include the Douala-N'Djamena and Douala-Bangui 
corridor and expected to include the following major components to be co-funded with 
AfDB, EU, France and Japan:  
 
a) 
Roads and Railway Infrastructure Improvement: This will include: (i) Periodic 
maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading works on selected sections of the corridors; (ii) 
Paving of gravel road sections ; (iii) Axle load Control policies harmonization and 
enforcement; (iv) Improvement of rest areas; (v) Rehabilitation of critical rail 
infrastructure; and (vi) measures to mitigate environmental and social risks, including 
HIV-AIDS.  
 
b)
Transport Facilitation Investments: This will include: (i) communication between 
stakeholders, especially within the Port Community (IT interfacing); (ii) Border Crossing 
Improvements (Joint Interconnections and Cargo Tracking, Border Posts); (iii) Port 
Safety and Security; (iv) Improvement of intermodal interfaces.  
 
c) 
Customs and Transport Sector Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building: 
This will include: (i) CEMAC Customs Union and National Customs Strengthening; (ii) 
Institutional support for transport facilitation institutions; and (iii) Management of the 
program components.  
 
The total expected project cost financed by IDA is about US$ 165 million equivalent. 
The detailed distribution among the respective beneficiary countries, donor commitments 
and the details of the IDA funding are specified in the project appraisal document.  
 
The IDA project includes mainly :  
 
-
In Cameroon, contribution to the paving of the Ngaoundere-Garoua-Boulai section, 
rehabilitation of rail track, Customs reform, intermodal interfaces in Douala, facilitation 
of the port community in Douala and institutional support to the ministries of transport 
and infrastructure;  
 
-
In Chad, a long term performance based maintenance contract on the N'Djamena 
Moundou road and institutional support to the ministries of infrastructure and Customs;  
 
-
In CAR, a contribution to the paving of the Garoua-Boulai Bouar section, the 
Bangui dry port improvement and support to Customs reform.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and Chad, 
including (a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui to 
Douala that need upgrading or long term maintenance (b) rail sections in Cameroon 
between Yaounde and Belabo that need to be rehabilitated (c) a number of trade-related 
investment and technical assistance in the three countries.  
 
Page  3
Because the works carried out under (c) are of limited scope at existing sites they are not 
being treated as safeguards issues. Safeguards treatment will thus primarily concern 
environmental conditions and social impact resulting from the road and rail investment 
components of the project in Cameroon and CAR (the road component in Chad is only a 
maintenance contract on an existing road, with no significant impacts). Key social issues 
relevant to the project objectives are mostly in relation to social impacts of the road 
improvements in Cameroon and CAR (Rail investment will take place within an existing 
functioning framework put in place under the current IDA project). Environmental 
impacts were assessed for the road links and the EMP designed for the Cameroon 
Railways project has been improved and updated to cater for permanent actions and 
additional issues not identified during the first phase.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTSD) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFMCM) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment : OP/BP 4.01 was triggered and two main Environment and 
Social Impact Assessment studies were carried out both in Cameroon and Central Africa 
Republic.  The Environmental Assessment of the road sections has not revealed any 
significant direct environmental impacts.  The most important negative environmental 
impacts associated with the road rehabilitation in CAR and Cameroon concern a small 
encroachment (4ha in Cameroon) of a national park, air quality degradation, disruption of 
drainage, and the potential indirect stimulus to illegal logging and the bushmeat trade,  
 
The government of Cameroon will compensate the 4 ha area encroached in the Benou? 
National Park according to national legislation by allocating a similar additional surface 
to the same park or a park located in the same ecological zone. It will be secured during 
Page  4
implementation that this land is not being used by people or are not part of the traditional 
territory of a given community(ies).  
 
During the works, air quality in the local area will be somewhat degraded by intensive 
use of gas-powered machines and repetitive truck movements, but this air pollution will 
be limited in time and importance. A major environmental benefit of the pavement of 
roads in this region lies in reduction of dust generation, particularly important on dirt 
roads during the dry season. Works can also affect rainwater streaming and the soil?s 
physical properties. As the area is highly populated in the stretch close to Ngaound?r? in 
Cameroon, strict water sanitation and drainage precautions have to be taken to avoid 
important rainfall streaming changes. After pavement, the road will become a waterproof 
strip that can considerably modify water streaming.  
 
Proper environmental measures can avoid most of negative environmental impacts 
resulting from the physical works and these measures will be included in all the 
procurement documents. A specific budget has been allotted for the environmental 
mitigation measures to be undertaken both in Cameroon and CAR. As for the road 
maintenance contract in Chad, the contractor will be held responsible through the 
procurement arrangements for the adverse environmental effects resulting from the 
project, that have been assessed to be very limited.  
 
No major social impact has been identified during the preparation phase. Impacts during 
construction phase relates to the destruction of physical habitat and the logging of fruit-
trees within the road reserve. However, no new road section will be constructed and the 
widening of some sections will only affect very partially the local agricultural activity 
and housing. As a side-effect of the physical works, agricultural work force will be 
reduced in the region. Impacts during the operational phase of these facilities include 
increased noise and accident risks due to the increased traffic and HIV/AIDS 
propagation. High attention will be paid to road safety improvement. A dedicated part of 
the investments has been allotted to sensitize the local population to fight against HIV, 
road safety and environmental conservation.  
 
The rail sections in Cameroon have been concessioned in 1999. The investments to 
rehabilitate rail track for part of the Section Yaound?-Belabo will be executed by the 
concessionaire. An Environmental and Safety Management Plan (ESMP) has been 
produced to detail mitigation measures, which cover both the works to be carried out and 
the company?s overall environmental liabilities. Major potential impacts relate to the 
environmental impacts of rail rehabilitation works.  Environmental and social impacts of 
rail accidents were taken into consideration in this reviewed ESMP.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Except for the small encroachment (4ha) in Benue 
National Park in Cameroon previously mentioned, the operation will not have any 
important direct impact on natural habitats, as it will support road rehabilitation rather 
than construction..  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12):  The operation will cause involuntary 
resettlements. 126 families in CAR and160 families in Cameroon will be concerned.For 
Page  5
each country a specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was issued. It is important to 
note that families will not be displaced more than 50 to 200 meters away from their 
original sites. In each country a financial provision has been done to ensure the 
implementation of the RAP and compensate the other impacts assessed by the EIA.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): No archeological site has been identified 
during the EIA. Specific attention has been paid in CAR. Some graveyards have been 
located in Cameroon and CAR. Compensation will be provided with respect to national 
legislations.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): Along the road sections considered no impact on 
indigenous people was identified.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main long term adverse impacts identified by the EIA in Cameroon and CAR are the 
increased road accident risks due to traffic growth, HIV/AIDS propagation and potential 
increase in pressure on natural resources, particularly through illegal logging and the 
bushmeat trade.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative has been considered to minimize adverse impacts. As for the road 
investments, the operation is mainly a rehabilitation of existing roads no alternative 
plotting is therefore conceivable. The most sustainable technical option has then been 
chosen with respect to the project resources.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
For Each country the Ministry in charge of Environment was responsible for the approval 
of the EIA and the EMP. A special unit was also created in each country to ensure the 
implementation of the EMP in close collaboration with the Ministry in charge of 
Environment.  
 
CAR, :  The legal frame work regarding environment matters remains weak in CAR. 
The Government started in 2006 the process of drafting the Environment Law. No 
regulation in terms of EIA exists.  
 
The EMP will be followed and monitored by the Environment Protection Unit hosted in 
the Ministry in Charge of Public works and by the Environment General Directorate 
hosted at the Ministry of Water, Forests, Hunting and Fisheries. The coordination 
structure will be able to hire other external expertise when needed. The government 
capacity to monitor and implement the EMP is also weak, so project resources will be 
used to help strengthen the capacity of those ministries to ensure the implementation of 
the EMP and the RAP.  
 
Page  6
CAMEROON:   Since the beginning of the 90s, the government of Cameroon has 
significantly improved the legal framework for environmental management. Law n 96/12 
of August 5, 1996 sets the framework for environmental matters. The decree n?  
2005/0577/PM of February 23, 2005 provides guidance for the EIA. The creation of the 
Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection in 2004 has reinforced the institutional 
capacity of the government to monitor environmental matters. An Inter-ministerial 
commission exists through the 96 Environment Law and plays its role in term of 
approving EIA and EMP. The Ministry of Public Works has a special unit for 
environmental issues. This Unit presents all competencies able to ensure the 
implementation of the process with the monitoring of the Ministry of Environment and 
Nature Protection and its creation was set up through IDA funding under the Transport 
Sector Project. The members of this Unit will be provided with training in the area of 
Bank social safeguards to allow them to properly monitor the implementation of the RAP 
Although there are still significant shortcomings in the national environmental 
management and regulatory framework, adequate implementation of the EMP and RAP 
will be supported by capacity-building initiatives targetting the Ministries of Public 
Works, Environment, and Forests, to be financed by the Project.  Furthermore, the 
implementation of the Forest and Environment Program supported by the Bank will 
contribute to the improvement of the legal and implementing frame work. In the rail 
sector, a Memorandum of Understanding between Camrail and the Ministry in charge of 
Environment and Nature Protection governs relationships and monitoring of the main 
impacts associated to the rail.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The keys stakeholders identified are as follows:  
 
?
Local populations  
 
?
NGOs,  
 
?
Donors,  
 
?
Regional and local leadership and  
 
CAR:  
 
?
Ministry of Water, Forest, Hunting and Fisheries, in charge of the Environment,  
 
?
Ministry of Public Works,  
 
?
Ministry of Interior and Public Security,  
 
?
Ministry in charge of rebuilding public infrastructures,  
 
?
Ministry of Urban Affairs and Housing  
 
?
CEMAC (Community of Central African States)  
 
Cameroon  
 
?
Ministry of Environment and Protection of Nature  
 
?
Ministry of Forests and Wildlife  
 
?
Ministry of Publics Works  
 
?
Ministry of Transports  
 
?
Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization  
 
?
Ministry of Energy and Water  
 
?
Ministry of Justice  
Page  7
Mechanisms for consultation  
 
The EIA was carried out on the basis of a participative methodological approach. 
Individual interviews, group discussions and several meetings were organized during the 
execution of the study and during the approval process. The project contents, in terms of 
economic, social, cultural, environmental stakes, as well as mitigation impacts and 
compensations measures were developed and discussed with diverse consulted 
stakeholders. The team will ensure that this participatory consultation process continues 
on a regular basis during the project implementation. Supervision missions will be the 
opportunity to assess the whole process.  
 
Disclosures measures:  
 
The EIA and the RAP reports were disclosed and the Executive Summary (ES) for the 
EIA will be published in local newspapers with indication of where the full document can 
be consulted.  This ES have been published in the local PIC and the Infoshop at 
Headquarters.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/14/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/20/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
these sections will need to be revised once disclosure has taken place.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  8
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Francois Marteau 
02/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
02/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
02/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
02/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/20/2007 
Comments:   
