Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2288 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/24/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Eastern Africa 
Project ID: P100406 
Project Name: Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II 
Task Team Leader: Ladisy Komba Chengula 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (70%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (30%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Biodiversity (P);Other rural development 
(P);Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  30.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
15.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The second phase of the program will continue the three main areas of emphasis of the first; i.e.,  
generation of knowledge and information about the lake, governance of the resources, and 
environmentally responsible growth.  Although each element remains important, the relative 
weight in the second phase will shift to governance and growth.  
 
Project objectives: The LVEMP 2 will contribute towards the achievement of the regional 
(EAC) Lake Victoria Development Vision of having: ???a prosperous population living in a 
healthy and sustainably managed environment providing equitable opportunities and benefits to 
the riparian communities.???  The development objectives of the proposed LVEMP 2 are to: (i) 
Strengthen regional and national institutions for coordination of sustainable management of the 
transboundary Lake Victoria basin resources; (ii) Facilitate environmentally friendly investments 
Page  2
in the Lake Victoria Basin; and (iii) Enhance conservation of biodivesity and genetic resources 
of targeted fish species.  The proposed project will be a  second phase with duration of 6 years 
implemented through an Investment Lending (IL) instrument.  The total project costs for the 
second phase (2007 ??? 2013) are estimatedat US$165 million.  The LVEMP 2 is expected to be 
financed with US$90 million IDA credits, US$30 million from bilateral donors, US$15 million 
in counterpart funds, and the residual US$30 million from other sources, including GEF.  The 
latter is dependent on availability of funding under GEF4 and on completion of the ongoing 
Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis (TDA) and the Strategic Action Plan (SAP). The TDA/SAP 
processes will be completed by November 2006 and will help clarify the policy, legal and 
institutional reforms and investments required to address key transboundary concerns.  Since 
progress on completion of the TDA/SAP has been delayed relative to the original timetable, GEF 
support for the program will be associated with the IDA credits, rather than fully blended into the 
operation.  
 
Expected Outcomes: The expected outcomes of the project are: (i) continued monitoring of 
natural resources and environmental characteristics of the Lake Basin ecosystem using process, 
stress reduction, and impact indicators; (ii) increased use of Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) for public and private investments in the Lake Basin; (iii) harmonized policies and 
regulations for environmental management of the Lake Victoria basin are enforced by the 
regional, national, and local institutions; (iv) increased adoption of sustainable land management 
practices by the Lake Victoria basin communities; (v)  increased adoption of improved fishing 
practices, and measures to restore biodiversity and protect genetic resources by fishing 
communities; (vi) reduced quantity of untreated industrial and municipal effluents flowing into 
Lake Victoria; and (vii) increased public awareness of the environmental concerns of the Lake 
Victoria basin ecosystem.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
LVEMP 2 will have four main components: (i) Building the information base for governance and 
growth; (ii) Strengthening governance of transboundary natural resources; (iii) Enhancing 
sustainable economic growth; and (iv) Raising public awareness through education and 
communication.  Indicative costs of each component will be determined after completion of the 
TDA and SAP processes.  
 
Component 1:  Building the information base for governance and growth.  This component will 
build on the results of LVEMP I and will support ongoing and targeted new: (i) applied and 
adaptive research programs that explore the ecosystem health, and develop management and 
technological responses; (ii) monitoring, control, and surveillance systems; (iii) and sharing of 
information using the established protocols.  It will have two sub-components:  
 
(a)  Applied research.  The project will finance continuation of research to generate relevant 
environmental, social, and economic related findings and outcomes to guide Lake Basin 
management decisions.  Scientific research areas will include: (i) fisheries resources - taxonomy, 
genetic diversity (species conservation in satellite lakes), fisheries stocks, and fish biology; (ii) 
water resources - quality, quantity or balance, hydrology, eutrophication, pollution loading, 
nutrients balance, communicable water-borne diseases, and sedimentation; (iii) land resources 
??? erosion rates, nutrient losses, and integrated soil and water management practices; and (iv) 
aquatic weeds - water hyacinth and other invasive species.  
Page  3
(b)  Monitoring and evaluation system.  The project will finance the development of the 
scientific and socio-economic data gathering protocols, monitoring and evaluation framework, 
and data sharing mechanisms.  It will also support the monitoring of key environmental and 
socio-economic parameters, using process, stress reduction, and impact indicators.  The Lake 
Basin management indicators, such as the performance of policies, institutions, stakeholder 
participation, technologies, information systems, and financing arrangements will also be 
monitored.  Results from research and monitoring will guide management decisions on selection 
of investments required under components 2 and 3.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening governance of transboundary resources.  This component will 
focus on building institutions to improve governance.  Its objective is to foster transparency, 
accountability, and voice, as well as improve performance of key regional and national 
institutions.  The component will establish and/or strengthen regional and national institutions 
that regulate, monitor and enforce sustainable utilization of natural resources and environmental 
standards.  Mechanisms for resolving disputes over natural resources management and 
environmental impacts will also be developed.  This component will have three sub-components:  
 
(a) Policy, legal, and regulatory framework for natural resources and environmental 
management.  The project will finance efforts to harmonize national policies, laws, and 
regulations governing the sustainable utilization of land, fisheries, and water resources.  In 
particular, efforts will focus on establishment of regional and harmonized national environmental 
regulatory standards and mechanisms for enforcement.  
 
(b) Institutional development and strengthening.  The project will finance the establishment of 
the Lake Victoria Water Resources Organization (LVWRO). In addition, it will strengthen the 
capacity of the Lake Victoria Basin Commission (LVBC), and the Lake Victoria Fisheries 
Organization (LVFO); the national water, fisheries, and environmental management institutions; 
and local government authorities, in order to improve and sustain the management and utilization 
of the shared Lake Victoria Basin resources.   
 
(c) Capacity building.  The project will finance the capacity building programs of the regional, 
national, and local institutions responsible for undertaking applied research, management of the 
Lake Basin resources, and enforcement of environmental standards. Capacity will be enhanced 
through long and short term training, technical assistance, provision of office and laboratory 
equipment, and research/monitoring marine vessels.  
 
Component 3: Enhancing sustainable economic growth.   This component will help to reduce 
the costs of doing business in the basin in environmentally benign ways, through defraying 
expenses for competent assessment of environmental impacts of proposed investments and 
sharing the costs of ecologically benign choices of technology.  Efforts supported under this 
component will also help identify investment opportunities that could be pursued in 
environmentally acceptable ways and yield benefits to the local populations.  Interventions will 
be implemented at the community, district, national, and regional levels.  There will be three 
sub-components:  
 
(a) Public investments in environmental management. The objective of this sub-component is to 
accelerate growth by improving sanitary services.  The project will identify high priority areas 
and hotspots for direct intervention while catalyzing resources to control point-source pollution.  
Areas for support include feasibility studies and addressing of hotspots and leveraging resources 
for wastewater treatment, rehabilitation of selected sewerage treatment and solid waste 
Page  4
management systems of the major urban centers around the Lake Victoria - Kisumu, Homa Bay, 
Mwanza, Musoma, Bukoba, Entebbe, Jinja, and Kampala.  The project will complement 
investments by the jurisdictions with the intent to ensure consistent application of effluent 
standards across boundaries.  
 
(b) Community-driven investments in management of natural resources.  This sub-component 
will seek to reduce non-point source pollution (sediment loads, nutrients, and agro-chemicals) by 
rehabilitating critical catchments in the watershed.  The project will provide matching grants to 
riparian communities, with particular emphasis on the poor, marginalized groups, women, and 
young people, to promote local partnerships in addressing degradation of the watershed.  
Community-driven approaches will be used to scale up watershed rehabilitation interventions, 
such as integrated management of soil and water, reforestation and afforestation, catchment 
protection, and rehabilitation of degraded wetlands.  In keeping with the principle of subsidiarity, 
where existing instruments can be used to address the problems, LVEMP2 will seek to catalyze 
and top-up those instruments.  The project will not create additional and/or parallel systems 
where programs of local government or ongoing community-driven instruments, such as 
TASAF, can be adapted to meet environmental management objectives.  
 
(c) Private sector development initiatives.  This sub-component will promote economic growth 
by supporting actions that reduce cost of doing business.  The objective is to improve the 
investment climate, enhance incentives for attracting Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs), and attract private capital to environmentally benign activities.  Through an 
environmental fund, the project will establish a facility to undertake environmental assessments 
for potential private investors.  Those who evidence intent to implement ???green 
development??? i.e., measures included in project designs to mitigate environmental risks, may 
be eligible for additional payments from the fund.  The project will support the establishment of 
payments for environmental services (in some cases implemented through public works under 
component 3b above) to address environmental externalities with downstream impacts, and 
benefit sharing.  Programs of environmental certification will be explored.  
 
Component 4: Raising public awareness through education and communication.  This 
component will support public education programs and communication.  The results of research 
and monitoring will be made available in languages that decision makers, stakeholders, and 
resource users can understand.  The sharing of information will be done through establishment of 
information centers, training of journalists and interaction with the media, and involvement of 
local organizations and communities.  The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) indicators will be 
used to communicate easy-to-understand summaries of scientific research and monitoring 
programs.  This information will be stored in a GIS-based regional Management Information 
System (MIS).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Those parts of Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, and Burundi that are part of the Lake Victoria 
watershed.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined.  Likely weak, especially at local levels.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  5
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Investments in Component 3 may need EAs/EMPs before approval.  If such investments are 
defined during project preparation, EAs/EMPs will be prepared before project appraisal.   For 
other investments, an ESMF will be prepared by appraisal that defines process, roles and 
responsibilities for EA/EMP work when identifying, preparing and approving investments.  
Transboundary Diagnostic Assessments (TDAs) are being carried out nationally and regionally 
that will lead to a Strategic Action Plan (SAP) for the Basin to address key environmental and 
poverty alleviation issues for environmentally sustainable development. The TDA/SAP is 
expected to serve as a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) in clarifying key issues at the 
basin level, and appropriate LVEMP2 responses. The need for additional SEA work will be 
determined once the TAD/SAP process is complete.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Lake Victoria is a threatened, globally important ecosystem and habitat for endemic aquatic 
species, and will be considered as such in the TDA/SAP and EAs/EMPs.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Pesticide use and IPM may be an issue in regulatory development and with some 
investments.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
There is a need to be sensitive about cultural properties that might potentially be impacted by 
project-related activities or investments   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Since this is a multi-country project with a wide range of interventions, many of which are 
not yet known, resettlement process frameworks or resettlement policy frameworks will be 
prepared during implementation if investments necessitate involuntary resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Some investments may involve construction of dams/weirs, or may depend on water supplied 
from, or regulated by, existing dams/weirs.    
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
In a shared water basin, notification of riparians is needed for anticipated project-induced 
changes in water withdrawls or quality.    
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/22/2006 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The TDAs/SAP are expected to be completed by November 2006 as one input into LVEMP2 
design. The scope of EA/EMP and RPFs/RAPs needs will be determined by the TDA/SAP 
process and consequent project design. The safeguard reporting instruments will be consulted 
and disclosed prior to Appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ladisy Komba Chengula 
04/21/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/24/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/21/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
