                                                                                                                                                                                                         43716


Authorized
                                                                                                                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 02/21/2007                                      Report No.: AC2712
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Africa                                  Project ID: P094084
                                                                                                            Project Name: West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP)
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Ismael S. Ouedraogo
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12,           Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007
                                                                                                            2007
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: AFTS4                             Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                                                                                                                                             Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Agricultural extension and research (60%);General agriculture, fishing and
                                    Disclosure                                                              forestry sector (40%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Technology diffusion (P);Trade

                                              Public                                                        facilitation and market access (P);Land administration and management (S);Biodiversity
                                                                                                            (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):               45.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
                                                    Authorized                                              Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                   4.50
                                                                                                                    Local Communities                                                    1.50
                                                                                                                                                                                         6.00
                                                              Disclosure                                    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                            Simple []           Repeater []
                                                                        Public                              Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)           Yes [ ]       No [X]

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The proposed regional project is the first phase of a 10-year Adaptive Program Lending
                                                                                                            (APL) concerning three, prime-mover countries: Ghana, Mali and Senegal. This APL will
                                                                                                            be the first of a series of overlapping, similar APLs, each involving different groupings of
                                                                                                            countries. Taken together, this series of APLs is expected to span 12 to 15 years, at the
                                                                              Authorized                    end of which period it will have covered all ECOWAS countries eligible for regional
                                                                                                            support. The overlapping APL design addresses four key considerations: incite countries
                                                                                                            to collaborate in a regional setting; allow countries to leverage regional funds to boost
                                                                                                            their IDA allocation; provide long-term support (10 years) in agricultural R&D to each
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            participating country; and give flexibility to groups of countries to participate in the
                                                                                                            WAAPP as they become eligible, rather than wait at the gates for the end of the first
                                                                                                  Public    phase of the initial APL.

                                                                                                               The development objective of the 10-year APL is to contribute to agricultural
                                                                                                            productivity increase in the participating countries? top priority commodity sub-sectors

that are aligned with regional priorities. Aligning national and regional priorities ensures
the program?s regional spillover. The development objective of the series of overlapping
APLs, taken together, is to contribute to sustained productivity increase in the ECOWAS
region?s top priority commodity sub-sectors. The region?s first top priority sub-sectors,
as identified in the 2006 IFPRI/CORAF quantitative study, are as follows: roots and
tubers, livestock, rice, cereals, fruits and vegetables, oil seeds and bulk export crops
(cotton, coffee/cocoa). The study indicates that these commodity sub-sectors make the
greatest contribution to the region?s agricultural growth and to producers? benefits in
R&D. The study also indicates that sustained productivity increase in these commodity
sub-sectors will be needed for the region to substantially increase agricultural growth in
order to reduce extreme poverty by 2015.

   The outcome at the end of the 10-year program will be 25 percent productivity (yield)
achieved in the participating countries top priority commodity sub-sectors that are
aligned with the region?s top priorities.

   Phase 1 (the proposed project) is an initiation phase that sets up the program?s
framework in terms of the mechanisms for sharing technology, establishing national
centers of specialization, and funding of TGD. Phase 2 is a deepening and expansion
phase that will see further strengthening of the centers of specialization, consolidation of
the technology dissemination system and generation of an increased number of
technologies.

   The development objective of the project (first phase of the support program to the
WAAPP) is to generate and disseminate improved technologies in the participating
countries? top priority areas, as identified by CORAF. These include roots and tubers in
Ghana; rice in Mali; and cereals in Senegal. The region?s consumers, particularly those
affected by extreme poverty, are the ultimate beneficiaries of the WAAPP. Agricultural
producers and agribusinesses, as users of the improved technology, are the primary
beneficiaries of the program. These are also the key participants, along with researchers,
extension agencies and universities (in adhering to the agricultural knowledge
information system (AKIS) conceptual framework), in the generation and dissemination
of technology that is directly supported by the program.

   The key project outcome indicators are as follows: (i) at least three improved
technologies in the participating countries? top priority areas have been released by these
countries at the end of the phase; (ii) productivity gain (crop yield) with at least one of
the released improved technologies is 15 percent or more over the control technology.
Key intermediate indicators include the following: (i) a web-based information system on
agricultural technologies and research skills is developed and maintained by CORAF; (ii)
three national Centers of Specialization (NCOS) in areas of both national and regional
priorities have been developed by participating countries within their NARS; (iii) at least
85 percent of completed competitive grant sub-project have been implemented
successfully, as assessed by independent review panels of experts; and (iv) a system for
data collection, analysis and reporting on regional agricultural productivity is established
and working satisfactorily. Annex 3 (Results Framework and arrangements for results

monitoring) identifies the other intermediate outcomes per component and summarizes
the tools and techniques for data collection, analysis, and reporting.

   The project implementation manual will provide detailed information for measuring all
key indicators of project supported activities.

3. Project Description
The proposed project would support the following components:

   Component 1: Enabling Conditions for Regional Cooperation in TGD (US$5.5
million, IDA: US$5.4 million). This aims at strengthening the mechanisms and
procedures for the dissemination of technology, so to allow countries to benefit fully
from the regional cooperation in technology generation that is being promoted. These
conditions need to be worked out at both national and regional levels, for before
technology products can be available at the regional level, they must be available at the
national level. Often, unfortunately, the regulations and standards at the national level
are either not adequate or not operational, so that improved technologies may have been
developed but not officially released. At the regional level, also, ECOWAS has thus far
lagged behind its timetable.

   This component targets the following key areas: (i) Common regulations for the
registration of genetic materials and pesticides at the ECOWAS level; (ii) National
registration committees for genetic materials and pesticides in the participating countries;
(iii) Information system on agricultural technologies and research skills at the regional
level.

   Component 2: National Centers of Specialization (US$19.6 million, IDA: US$17.8
million). This aims at strengthening the alignment of national priorities with regional
priorities within participant countries? national agricultural research systems (NARS).
Countries need to focus on their top R&D priorities, rather than attempt to tackle all
possible issues with little prospects of success, in order to make the best use of scarce
resources and achieve meaningful results toward increasing growth and reducing extreme
poverty. A country can more readily rationalize this decision if it is ensured to benefit
from research efforts in these other areas where it does no have comparative advantage
but in which other countries do-- just as its own efforts in its areas of comparative
advantage will benefit other countries.

   The project will support national centers of specialization that (i) focus on areas of
national priority aligned with a regional priority; (ii) demonstrate sustained public
support for core programs and staff; (iii) commit to collaboration with regional and
international institutions; and (iv) commit to share results with other countries. In a
recent study and validation workshop, CORAF has identified the region?s top priority
areas, i.e., those that contribute the most to the region?s agricultural growth (roots and
tubers, livestock, rice, oil seeds, fruits and vegetables, cereals and cotton contribute from
17% to about 3% to the region?s agricultural GDP). The selected NCOS are in a national
priority directly aligned with one of the regions top priority areas, and included: Ghana?s

research program on roots and tubers; Mali?s research program on irrigated rice; and
Senegal?s research center on drought-resistant cereals (CERAAS).

  The project will focus on the following key areas: (i) Upgrading core facilities and
equipment of the selected NCOS to help establish/strengthen the viability of the center--
making it more operational and attractive to other researchers in the region; (ii) Building
the capacity of researchers, particularly through visiting researcher programs for periods
of 12 months to other centers; and (iii) Supporting R&D programs of NCOS, concerning
commissioned as well as adaptive research with effective participation from stakeholders,
particularly producers and agribusinesses.

  Component 3: Funding of Demand-Driven Technology Generation and Adoption
(US$18.4 million; IDA: US$17.1 million). This aims at strengthening priority-focused,
transparent funding mechanisms for demand-driven agricultural R&D within
participating countries and at regional level. The component focuses on areas that have
been identified as high priority at both the national and regional levels. The project will
thus ensure that work carried out in the participating countries will have great relevance
to the region. Eligible activities will cover all key constraints along the supply chain of
these commodity sub-sectors. Activities may concern new, as well as on-the-shelf
agricultural technologies with potential for quick impact.

  This component will support a competitive agricultural grant system (CARGS) and a
limited (non-competitive) core funding with strong buy-in from major stakeholders. It
includes a regional and national windows.

  Funding of the CARGS will follow clear and transparent guidelines adapted from
existing procedures, best practices and lessons learned, as described in the manual of
procedures. The manual will reflect, among others, the following guidelines (i)
administration by a competent governance body; (ii) openness to producer groups and
agribusinesses to lead the implementation of R&D activities; (iii) openness to R&D
activities to promote technology on-the-shelf for effective adoption; (iv) two-step
selection process, with the first step as a concept note to be reviewed for its relevance to
the issue on hand; (v) overhead of the R&D's implementing unit capped at 20% of the
operating cost; and (iii) score-card evaluation of the program?s performance by a panel of
competent and independent experts.

  Component 4: Project Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
(US$4.9 million; IDA: US$4.7 million). This aims at establishing an effective
coordination, management and M&E system at the national and regional levels. The
IDA-supported WAAPP will be implemented at the regional level by CORAF
(ECOWAS? mandated implementing agency) and at the national levels by the national
coordination units of the AgSSIP in Ghana, the PSAOP 1 in Mali and the PSAOP 2 in
Senegal. The financial management arrangements of the project meets IDA's
requirements and are thus adequate to provide, with reasonable assurance, accurate and
timely information on the status of the project required by IDA.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The APL starts with IDA credit to three countries in phase I (Ghana, Mali, Senegal) and
expanding its geographic focus in each consecutive phases to cover all of the fifteen
member states of the Economic Community of West Africa States (ECOWAS) at
program's end.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The net social and environmental impact of the proposed project is expected to be
positive since it will generate environmentally and socially sound agricultural
technologies. These technologies are not yet known; nonetheless, the use of some of
these technologies may trigger some safeguards policies. The competitive grant process,
used to fund the development of such technologies, will include environmental and social
screening, and should guard against the potential negative impact of these technologies.
To prepare the ground for these screenings and other mitigating measures, the project
prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF
examined the existing and potential environmental and social risks associated with the
generation of agricultural technology generation and dissemination (TGD), and related
increases in agricultural production in the region. The ESMF is built on the existing
ESMF and related EA documents developed for the WAAPP-related operations
(agricultural services and producer organization projects) in the three participating
countries (Ghana, Mali and Senegal). The project disclosed the ESMF, together with the
other related safeguard document (Pest Management Plan) at Infoshop and in the
participating countries before appraisal. The project will not generate any severe
environmental impacts.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The draft safeguard documents are available. Several Bank-funded projects in each of
the participating countries already support the countries'capacity to implement safety
measures in agricultural research and development activities.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The stakeholders that were consulted in the preparation of the safeguard documents were
CORAF and the various agricultural, environmental, social and health agencies in the
three participating countries. The following direct beneficiaries and potentially affected
people were also consulted: producer organizations and agribusiness associations, both at
the regional and national level. The workshops planned at the launching of the project
will include specific sessions about safeguard policies addressed to these key
stakeholders.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01/18/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  02/06/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02/06/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Pest Management Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01/18/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  02/06/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02/06/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                   N/A
Is a separate PMP required?                                                  Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                           Name          Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr Ismael S. Ouedraogo       02/20/2007
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Amadou Konare             02/20/2007
Social Development Specialist     Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi    02/09/2007
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Warren Waters             02/21/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock       02/21/2007
 Comments:

