Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2697 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P096407 
Project Name: Abidjan-Lagos Transport and Transit Facilitation Project (ALTTFP) 
Task Team Leader: Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (50%);Other domestic and international trade (50%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
136.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching development objective of the proposed ALTTFP is to enhance economic growth 
in Western Africa by facilitating movement of goods and people along the Coastal Corridor and 
increasing regional integration among the countries crossed by the Corridor.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The regional project will cover five countries: Ivory Coast, Ghana, Togo, Benin, and Nigeria. At 
the same time, the project team proposes a tailored approach to countries' conditions. Due to the 
current civil unrest in Ivory Coast, as well as to the temporary suspension of Bank lending to 
Togo, only institutional and regulatory issues would be addressed, as a first step, in these two 
countries, on a grant basis; adequate arrangements should be made so that as soon as suspension 
is lifted, a supplemental regional grant or credit(s) can be prepared on a pre-assessment basis.  
 
The project will be a Sectoral Investment Lending (SIL) for a preliminary estimated cost of 
about US$136 million, of which Nigeria US$63 million; Benin US$22 million; Togo US$2 
million (grant); Ghana US$46million ; and Ivory Coast US$3 million (grant). In each country, 
Page  2
the project will finance well defined components and sub-components to reduce the identified 
infrastructure and institutional bottlenecks.  
 
More specifically, the PDO is expected to be achieved through the following major 
components:  
 
(A) Trade Facilitation Component (about US$19 million broken down as follows: Nigeria about 
US$5 million; Benin about US$6 million; Togo about US$2 million; Ghana about US$3 million; 
and Ivory Coast about US$3 million) will include the sub-components listed below:  
 
(i) 
Support to the customs modernisation for trade facilitation;  
 
(ii) 
Support to interconnectivity between customs administrations along the corridor;  
 
(iii) 
Improve the legal awareness and free access to legislation information on TTF along the 
corridor for the road users;  
 
(iv) 
Support to decrease the number of road blocks by increasing awareness of TF to 
enforcement bodies;  
 
(v) 
Support to harmonisation of legislation for truck operating rules and travel 
documentation of passengers and users;  
 
(vi) 
Improvement of access, TF procedures, and security at the ports of Lagos (Nigeria), 
Cotonou (Benin), and Takoradi (Ghana).  
 
(B) Road Corridor Component (US$ 117 million broken down as follows: Nigeria US$58 
million; Benin about US$16 million; and Ghana about US$43 million) will include the sub-
components listed below:  
 
(i) 
Technical and design studies;  
 
(ii) 
Execution and supervision of civil works for road rehabilitation (possibly based on 
performance based rehabilitation and maintenance) of various road segments in Nigeria (the 
federal highway between Krake and Lagos, 90 km), Benin (the national road between Cotonou 
and Hilla Condji, 70 km), and Ghana (Agona - Junction to Elubo border post, 120 km);  
 
(iii) 
Improvement of the access roads between the port of Lagos and the federal highway 
(Nigeria);  
 
(iv) 
Provision of technical assistance, material and equipment for road safety.  
 
The overall regional project coordination will be ensured by ECOWAS in line with its 
designated role over the regional and corridor projects in West Africa.  The Bank team 
recommends that the existing structure of Abidjan-Lagos Corridor Organization (ALCO) created 
under the ongoing IDA funded HIV/AIDS regional project operate as a Regional Coordination 
Unit (RCU) under ECOWAS. The RCU would therefore provide for a regional "umbrella" 
ensuring: (i) the interface and coordination between the national PCUs, the national transit 
facilitation committees, and the regional transit facilitation committee within ECOWAS; (ii) the 
data collection and monitoring of local, national and regional project performance indicators, as 
well as reporting to the national transit facilitation committee, ECOWAS, and the World Bank; 
and (iii) provision of expertise and capacity building to the national Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU), as needed. At national levels, the project will be prepared and executed by PIUs. That 
Page  3
may be a lead agency involved in the project, or an existing unit implementing another transport 
project.  
 
Eventually, the project will help implementing an efficient transit regime and enforcing 
regional harmonized regulations in the sub-region.  To that end, a comprehensive set of transit 
and transport procedural reforms would be applied and tested along the coastal corridor.  The 
results of such actions will be measured and monitored through a system of local, national and 
regional performance indicators to be shared and made public in the member countries.  If 
successful, the results can be scaled-up at national and regional levels by the ECOWAS member 
states.  This "corridor approach" is proposed in recognition of the fact that national and regional-
wide enforcement of ECOWAS rules and regulations has been so far disappointing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located along the West Africa road Coastal Corridor between the cities of 
Abidjan and Lagos. About 70% of the IDA credit proceeds will finance civil works for the 
rehabilitation and periodic maintenance of the Corridor roads included in the national road 
network. The roads to be covered under the project have already been pre-identified; they are 
located throughout the national road network. The final selection of roads will be done early 
during project preparation, and an environmental and social impact assessment will be carried 
out and disclosed before appraisal, including an Impact Mitigation Plan acceptable to the Bank. 
The rest of about 30% of credit and grant proceeds will finance a trade facilitation components 
including mainly technical assistance and training for border agencies, in particular Customs.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined during project preparation. This will be the second operation along the 
Abidjan-Lagos road corridor, after the HIV/AIDS project. The existing capacities - e.g. within 
the Abidjan-Lagos Corridor Organization (ALCO) and within the on-going Bank-financed road 
programs - will be used to the extent possible. The Bank will further support the Borrowers' 
capacities in dealing with Safeguard related issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental category: B - Partial Assessment  
 
It is expected that the periodic maintenance and rehabilitation of the corridor roads as well 
as the assistance to border agencies would result in positive environmental and social impacts. A 
successful implementation of the proposed periodic maintenance and rehabilitation is likely to 
improve the quality of passenger and cargo transport, create employment opportunities (mostly 
in the road construction industry), and indirectly contribute to the countries' economic 
development and to improvement in the quality of life of the affected population. However, some 
potential environmental and social impacts may occur in the physical works component of 
Component B.  An environmental and so
cial assessment of each road sub
-
project will be carried
-
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
out by the Borrowers during project preparation, under TOR acceptable to the Bank. The 
objective of the assessment will be to identify, qualify and quantify any negative and positive 
environmental and social impacts pertaining to each road, and to propose the required mitigation 
measures to be implemented to avoid potential negative impacts.  Specific ESIAs will be 
conducted for each individual road covered under the project and will make the object of 
consultation with the affected population as the case may be. The ESMF will be disclosed prior 
to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Site impact assessments will determine whether any natural habitats will be affected. The 
results will be captured in the ESIAs, and if impact determined the technical studies will be 
revised.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The proposed civil works for road improvements will be executed on existing roads and 
normally within the right of way. Some rest stops and parking areas are, however, foreseen in the 
project design. The technical studies for roads works will determine whether any involuntary 
resettlement will be triggered and the project team will verify the technical studies findings by 
field inspection.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/20/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF will be issued, approved and disclosed prior to Appraisal (planned for April, 
2008).  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
02/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/15/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/15/2007 
Comments:   
