                                                                                                                                                                                                     43677


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 02/15/2007                                    Report No.: AC2619
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Africa                                 Project ID: P094103
                                                                                                            Project Name: Regional Communications Infrastructure Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Laurent Besancon
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13,          Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007
                                                                                                            2007
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: CITPO                            Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                                                                                                                                            Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector
                                    Disclosure                                                              (20%);General industry and trade sector (20%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Infrastructure

                                              Public                                                        services for private sector development (P)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):            424.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                    Authorized                                                      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               37.40
                                                                                                                                                                                     37.40
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: U - Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA)
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                           Simple []           Repeater []
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)         Yes [ ]      No [X]

                                                                        Public                              2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The RCIP Program, the CIP 1,2,3 Projects and following CIP Projects have two
                                                                                                            overarching development objectives (i) to contribute to lower prices for international
                                                                                                            capacity and extend the geographic reach of broadband networks (the ?connectivity
                                                                                                            development objective?) and (ii) contribute to improved Government efficiency and
                                                                                                            transparency through e-government applications (the ?transparency development
                                                                                                            objective?).
                                                                              Authorized
                                                                                                            3. Project Description
                                                                                                            Overall Program: Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP)

                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                             The first Phase of the proposed RCIP 10 year horizontal APL includes Communications
                                                                                                            Infrastructure Projects 1, 2 and 3 (CIP 1, 2, 3) in the range of US$166m IDA volume,
                                                                                                  Public    which is expected to reach the Board in the 1st quarter of 2007 and to include Kenya
                                                                                                            (CIP 1 or the Transparency & Communications Infrastructure Project, TCIP), Burundi
                                                                                                            (CIP 2) and Madagascar (CIP 3). Subsequent phases will reach the Board based on
                                                                                                            readiness of countries applying for support under the Program as well as availability of

IDA/IBRD financing. Interested candidates include Malawi, Rwanda, Mozambique,
Tanzania, Zambia, Lesotho, Uganda, DRC and Mauritius (IBRD). In the particular case
of Mauritius, the activities may include submarine cable-related activities and would
likely have to be treated as a related but altogether different project. It is also expected
that other countries will accelerate their dialogue to use IDA funds once the first Phase
moves to effectiveness. It is also expected that some relevant complementary country-
specific components will be added, on an opportunity- and readiness basis. Estimate for
the combined IDA volume for likely the above countries (except Mauritius) in the second
and subsequent phases are in the order of US$258m.

 Overall, the Program is open to Angola, Botswana, Burundi, Comoros, DRC, Djibouti,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Namibia, Rwanda, Seychelles, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, provided these countries are eligible for IDA or IBRD
financing at the time of their application for IDA/IBRD support under the Program. A
public website is being developed to facilitate this process (www.worldbank.org/rcip).



 Project Description

 The proposed World Bank Operation under RCIP aims at assisting E&SA countries to
implement a strategy of effective regional connectivity and increased government
efficiency through the use of this connectivity, by (i) offering technical assistance to
promote further sector liberalization and resolve market efficiency gaps, (ii) leveraging
private investment in the deployment of regional and national backbone infrastructure, as
well as rural networks through public private partnership (PPP) arrangements, and (iii) to
leverage the infrastructure to increase government efficiency and transparency through
the selective deployment of key eGovernment services.

 To maximize flexibility and client-responsiveness in a multi-country environment, RCIP
has been designed as a menu of options which individual Governments choose from in
order to package their RCIP operation. The proposed options include:

 Component 1: Enabling Environment, incl. Monitoring & Evaluation capacity-building

 This component will aim at promoting regional market integration and further sector
liberalization through technical assistance and capacity building in specific
telecommunications sector regulatory matters, as well as the design of the legal and
regulatory framework for the information society. It will also involve support in the
implementation of the program, notably through strengthening the Public Private
Partnership (PPP) framework, building M&E capacity and supporting project
communications. It is expected that common areas of technical assistance and capacity
building initiatives (in particular training courses) can be implemented as multi-country
activities.

 Component 2: Connectivity.

 This component will aim at supporting the deployment of regional connectivity through
the following subcomponents: (a) financing the landing station or virtual landing station
(for landlocked countries) for the submarine cable (dry portion), involving a small
construction with limited infrastructure and telecom equipment; (b) financing the pre-
purchase of capacity on the regional infrastructure (both submarine and terrestrial) for
schools, universities, hospitals, eGovernment and other priority targeted user groups; (c)
leveraging private sector investment on the basis of PPPs, if required, in the deployment
of regional and national terrestrial backbone networks; (d) financing the establishment of
a government virtual private network (GovNet) to cater to all the government
communications needs (both data and voice/video); and (e) leveraging private sector
investment on the basis of PPPs with competitive award of subsidies, if required, to
extend the telecommunications and ICT infrastructure in rural areas and/or community-
driven ICT development.

 Component 3: Transparency ? eGovernment Applications.

 This component will aim at enabling governments to improve their internal systems,
deliver services more efficiently and effectively, and make information more accessible
to the citizenry. It will involve the development of five or six major government services
which would be candidates for transition to eGovernment through the use of technology,
business process re-engineering to streamline processes, and change management to
ensure acceptance of the new methods of working. Selection of target applications will be
prioritized based on potential impact in terms of transparency and accountability,
existence of a change champion, possibility of private sector participation, high potential
for quick success. Examples include public finance, procurement, inland revenue
collection, customs, civil and business registries, property titling and vehicle/driver
registrations, insurance, citizen?s ID cards, utility payments, and so forth.

 Component 4: Project Management.

 This component will support project management related issues, and may include
elements such as support for management, procurement, financial management, M&E,
and communications expertise, as well as support to conduct audits.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Under the new design, financing of submarine cables is not envisaged. A related
submarine cable infrastructure, the East African Submarine Cable System (EASSy), is
being financed by a consortium of private and public operators with the support of private
sector branches of multiple DFIs, including IFC, AfDB, EIB, KfW, AFD and DBSA. As
these activities are associated with this project, World Bank Group standards apply and a
detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been conducted for the
EASSy cable, which also includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP). The ESIA?s preliminary findings indicate that, while the EASSy cable route
passes within close proximity of a number of environmentally sensitive areas, the impacts

likely to be generated in the cable laying are minimal, and are limited to the shallow
water cable laying operation, for which detailed mitigation measures are outlined. With
regards to onshore cable laying, the only potential impact arises from the construction of
the beach manhole and the ducts to carry the cable to the landing (or terminal) station.
However, in most of the countries this onshore infrastructure is already in place and
requires minimal upgrades or extensions. Mitigation measures are outlined in the ESIA
for the construction activities related to this onshore cable infrastructure up to the landing
station.

 The physical components of the proposed World Bank project will mostly be limited to
the building of national terrestrial backbones, rollout of rural networks, and of the landing
stations, in the few cases where the latter might be required. No beach manholes or
onshore cable infrastructure up to the landing station will be financed under the proposed
World Bank project.

 The risks associated with this kind of infrastructure are generally low, and the project is
therefore assigned to environmental category B under OP 4.01. Land acquisition for
terrestrial facilities will likely trigger OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement considerations.

 An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared for the overall program. Specific costed
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be
prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities during project implementation, in line
with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those facilities have been identified.
The ESMF has been submitted for Bank review and publicly disclosed in the affected
countries and InfoShop prior to appraisal. The institutional responsibilities for preparing
the various safeguards instruments would lie with the implementing agency of each
participating country. Any specific required action for some of the Civil Works will be
taken into account during project implementation. Institutional responsibilities for
preparing the safeguard assessment strategy will be defined closely with the Safeguards
Team.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1)
   Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The physical components of this project will mostly be limited to the building of national
backbones, rollout of rural networks, and of the landing stations. The risks associated
with this kind of infrastructure are generally low, and the project is therefore assigned to
environmental category B under OP 4.01. Land acquisition for terrestrial facilities will
likely trigger OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement considerations.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not Applicable.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement
Policy Framework Plan (RPF) have been prepared for the overall program. At the
individual country level, specific costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial
facilities during project implementation, in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact
locations of those facilities have been identified.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The program-level ESMF and RPF have been published in-country as well as at the
Infoshop for each of the countries participating in the program, as and when they join the
program. Once specific EMPs and RAPs have been drafted for each individual project

and sub-project (if applicable), these will be disclosed in-country and discussed with
potential affected parties, in line with the parameters established in the ESMF and RPF.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       02/06/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   02/13/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    02/15/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       02/08/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   02/13/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    02/15/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Not Applicable.



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)            Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the            Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector          Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's         Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a         Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities      Yes

  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                            Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                  Mr Laurent Besancon                         02/15/2007
Environmental Specialist:          Mr Serigne Omar Fye                         02/15/2007
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or    Ms Kristine Schwebach                       02/15/2007
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Warren Waters                            02/15/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Mr Peter L. Smith                           02/15/2007
 Comments:

