                                                                                            39854


                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

 Report No.:
 Date preparedlupdated: 03119107

 I. Basic Information

 1. Basic Project Data
 Country: Africa                                      Project ID: PO99312
                                                      Additional Project ID (ifany):PO94916
 Project Name: OMVS Felou Regional Hydroelectric Project
 Task Team Leader: Amarauave Armar
 Estimated Appraisal Date: NIA                        Estimated Board Date: 06130107 (ERPA)
 Managing Unit: AFTEG                                 Lending Instrument:
I Sector: Ener~v                                                                               I
 Theme: Climate Change
  IBRD Amount (US$m.):
  1DA.Amount (US$m.):
  GEF Amount (US$m.):
 PCF Amount (US$m.): US$3.2 million
I Other financini amounts by source:                                                           I
I Environmental Category: C
  Is this a transferred project                       Yes [ ]                  No [XI
  Simplified Processing                               Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]



  2. Project Objectives:
  The carbon offset operation corresponds to the investments under IDA project P094916.
  Reminder of PO94916 objectives:
  The goal of the West African Power Pool (WAPP) is to establish a well-functioning,
  cooperative, power pooling mechanism for West Africa, as a means to increase access of
  the citizens of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to stable
  and reliable electricity at affordable costs. The developmental objectives of WAPP APL
  2 (Organisation Pour La Mise En Valeur Du Fleuve Senegal (OMVS) Felou
  Hydroelectric Project (HEP)) Project are to: (a) augment the supply of low cost
  hydroelectricity from the OMVS Power System to the national power utilities of Mali
  (EDM), Mauritania (SOMELEC) and Senegal (SENELEC) as a means to alleviate
  widening power supply deficits that have resulted in chronic load shedding in WAPP
  "Zone B" OMVS countries (Mali, Mauritania, Senegal); and (b) further develop the
  OMVS power system into the nucleus of the future hydro-thermal power pooling
  mechanism - the proposed WAPP Cooperation Agreement - for WAPP "Zone B"
  countries.

                                                                                        39854


3. Project Description:
The carbon project is a component of a larger project PO94916.Therewill be no
additional investment for this carbon component.
Reminder of PO94916 description:
The WAPP is a regional initiative, spearheaded by national power utilities of ECOWAS
Member States, which directly contributes to the broader ECOWAS agenda to establish
an open, unified, regional economic space in West Africa. On June 30,2005, the Bank's
Executive Board of Directors endorsed the application of the adjustable program lending
(APL) instrument, within the framework of the World Bank's Regional Integration
Assistance Strategy (HAS) for West Africa, as the vehicle for providing IDA credit
support to the WAPP initiative. By so doing, the Bank has earmarked substantial IDA
resources to put in place a multi-year programmatic framework to help close the
financing gap and thereby ensure timely implementation of priority WAPP investments
and technical assistance activities of the Revised ECOWAS Master Plan. The APL
instrument would enable IDA credit support to be provided in a flexible manner - when
borrowers have satisfied the policy triggers (country commitments under the Ecowas
Energy Protocol (EEP)) and when individual WAPP priority investments are ready to
receive IDA credit support. All ECOWAS Member States might not actually be granted
IDA credits under the WAPP APL program. However, ECOWAS Member States would
know up-front that they can rely on the Bank to support them in achieving the
developmental goals of the WAPP if they meet specific eligibility criteria and if they
need IDA credit support.

 Component 1:DBOT Contract. The Socikte de Gestion de I'Energie de Manantali
(SOGEM) or its successor asset holding entity - the Agence de Gestion du Patrimoine de
1'OMVS (AGP-OMVS), will outsource the entire "design-build-operate-transfer"
implementation cycle for the OMVS Felou HEP, including pilot operation of the Fklou
HEP to demonstrate performance for up to two hydrological seasons, to a private
contractor ("the DBOT Contractor") under a single responsibility, performance-based
contract. The private contractor will be selected through an international competitive
bidding process, consistent with Bank Guidelines.

 Component 2: A Two-Stage "Project Cycle Management" Contract. The OMVS will
retain the services of an experienced engineering consulting firm to provide
comprehensive project cycle management support through a two-stage sequential
contracting arrangement. For the Stage 1 ("Transaction Adviser") Contract, currently
underway with funding from PPF Q475-0-SE, the consulting firm will provide
transaction advice and support to enable the OMVS to: (a) perform detailed planning and
scheduling of project implementation arrangements, including pre-qualification of
prospective bidders, (b) prepare and issue bidding documents for the selection of a DBOT
contractor, and (c) conduct the two-stage bidding process, evaluate bids and make
recommendation for the award of the DBOT contract. The expected duration of the Stage
1 Contract is 9-12 months. After the award of the DBOT contract is made, the Stage 2
("Owners Engineer") Contract would begin. Subject to satisfactory performance during
the Stage I Contract, the same consulting firm will be retained to assist the OMVS and
SOGEMI AGP-OMVS) to oversee the day-to-day performance of the DBOT contractor

                                                                                           39854


over the entire "design-build-operate-transfer"cycle, including the critical hand-over of a
fully operational OMVS Felou HEP to SOGEM/AGP-OMVS.

 Component 3: Capacity Building Support (Permanent Technical Committee - OMVS
Power System). This component will provide technical assistance, equipment and
capacity building support to upgrade the functional capabilities of the Permanent
Technical Committee (PTC) of the OMVS Power System. The Permanent Technical
Committee of the OMVS Power System comprises representatives of SOGEM (the
OMVS asset holder), ESKOM Energie Manantali (EEM) (the private
concessionaire/system operator), and the national power utilities of Mali (EDM),
Mauritania (SOMELEC) and Senegal (SENELEC). Under this component,
SOGEM/AGP-OMVS will acquire and transfer "use and control" through the PTC to the
national transmission system operators in Mali (EDM), Mauritania (SOMELEC) and
Senegal (SENELEC) of (a) SCADAIEMS and associated communication equipment and
(b) software for hydro-thermal optimization. Together with joint training and associated
capacity building activities to be organizedjointly with the WAPP Organization, this
capacity building component is intended to help improve the real-time operational
planning and coordination with the OMVS Power System Operator (presently, ESKOM
Energie Manantali (EEM) is the private concession holder). Overall, this component
would enable the PTC to execute the "WAPP Action Plan" which would lead towards the
establishment of a WAPP Cooperation Agreement among WAPP "Zone B" OMVS
countries.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis:
The investment component of WAPP APL 2 (Phase 2) is located entirely in north-
western Mali and will be implemented by the DBOT Contractor under the supervision of
the OMVS High Commission and the designated OMVS-sponsored power asset holding
entity - the proposed AGP-OMVS. The site of FClou is located about 200 km downstream
of the hydropower dam of Manantali on the river Senegal and about 15 km from the town
of Kayes (population at 86,500 in 2003). No physical displacement will occur. The
impacts are restricted to the acquisition of 0.35 ha of vegetable gardens and of 0.9 ha of
orchards in the context of civil works

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
For parent project P094916:
   Mr. Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1)
   Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3)

                                                                                            39854


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                          Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                                     X
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                             X
Forests (OPJBP 4.36)                                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                 X
                                                                        --
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                     X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                          X
                                                                                          X
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental                             X
and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP
4.00)

11. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The carbon offset operation corresponds to the investments under PO94916 and no
additional investment will be needed. All necessary safeguards have been conducted
under the parent project (PO94916) and disclosed under the same.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:




3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:




4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:




5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

                                                                                         39854


 B. Disclosure Requirements Date

 Equivalence and Acceptability Report:
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
   Date of submission to InfoSho~                                               N/A
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
   Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
 Refer to PO9491 6



 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the CorporateLevel (to befilled in when the
 ISDS isfinalized by theproject decision meeting)

 OP/BP/4.01 Environment Assessment
               -
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including        I  Yes [ 1  No[ 1     N/A [X ]

IIf yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector    I                                I
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
1incorporated in the credidloan?
IOP/BP 4.00 -Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social         I
 Safeguard Issues in Bank-Supported Projects
 Did the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit                  Yes [ 1  No[ 1     N/A [ X ]
 (QACU) and the ESSD and International Law Practice
 Group (LEGEIV) review and approve the Safeguard
 Diagnostic Review report?
 OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats
               -
IWould the project result in any significant conversion or   I  Yes [ ]  No [ ]    N/A [X ]   I
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management          I Yes  [ ]  No[ 1     N/A [X ]
Iissues?                                                       I                              I
 Is a separate PMP required?                                    Yes [ 1  No[ 1     N/A [X ]
 If yes, has the PNIP been reviewed and approved by a
 safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?     re PMP
 requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
 ~roiectteam include a Pest Management S~ecialist?
 OPN 11.03 Cultural Property
              -
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to               Yes [ 1  No[ 1     N/A [X ]
 cultural property?

                                                                                      39854


1  Does the creditlloan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate     I
                                                         -
   the potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   OPIBP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples
                 -
   Has a separate Indigenous Peoples PladPlanning
   Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
   consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
   If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
   safeguards or Sector Manager review the ~ l a n ?
   If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
   design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
   Social Development Unit?
   OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntarv Resettlement
   Has a resettlement planlabbreviated pladpolicy
   framework/process framework (as appropriate) been

   If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
   safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
   planlpolicy framework/process framework?
 1 OPIBP 4.36 - Forests
   Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional    I Yes [ 1  No[ 1  NIA [X ]
                                                                     - -    - -
 1 issues and constraints bekn carried out?                    I                           I
   Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
   overcome these constraints?
   Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
   so, does it include provisions for certification system?
   OPIBP 4.37 Safety of Dams
                 -
   Have dam safety plans been prepared?                        I Yes [ ]  No[ ]  NIA [X ]
   Have the TORSas well as composition for the
   independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and         ,
   approved by the Bank?
   Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
   prepared and arrangements been made for public
   awareness and training?
   OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
   Have the other riparians been notified of the project?        Yes [ ]  No[ 1  NIA [X ]
   If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
   notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
   Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
   and sent?
   What are the reasons for the exception? Please ex~lain:
  1Has the RVP approved such an exception?

   OP 7.60   - Projects  in Disputed Areas

                                                                                  39854


1Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the    IYes [ ]  No[ 1  N/A [X ]
 international aspects of the        including the
 procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
 dealing with the issue, been prepared
 Does the PADMOP include the standard disclaimer
 referred to in the OP?
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to     Yes [ ]  No[ 1  N/A [X ]
 the World Bank's Infosho~?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     I
 public place in a form and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard ~olicies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation systems of the
 project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
 measures related to safeguard ~olicies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
 reflected in the project legal documents?

                                                                              39854


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                           Name             Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr. Amarquaye Armar             03119/07

  - - ? F a

Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental andlor
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr. Warren
                                                                 -           I
                                                                    I ' f :/c
                                                                 ;
                                                                          L/




  Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Mr. Subramaniam V. Iyer
                                                                Cy3119 (07
                                                   $!  ;vL-p/
Comments:                                                  \

