Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/06/2006 
Report No.:  AC2393
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P096058 
Project Name:  West Africa Regional Biosafety 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Christophe Carret 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (50%);Agricultural extension and research (50%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.40 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.10
2.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The global environment objective of the project is to protect regional biodiversity against 
the potential risks associated with the introduction of living modified organisms (LMOs) 
in West Africa. This will be achieved through the development of common science-based 
risk assessment and management methods for the approval process of LMOs, in 
compliance with international standards.  
 
The project's development objective is to accompany the ongoing LMO development 
dynamic in the agriculture sector by preparing and implementing a Regional Biosafety 
Framework (RBF) that will ensure safe confined field trials and commercial release, if 
proven safe, of transgenic crops and crop products, starting with cotton. This objective 
will be achieved through the establishment and implementation of a regional regulation 
on biosafety, capacity building, and public outreach, in line with the requirements of the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB), which has been ratified by the five beneficiary 
countries of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant (Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali, 
Senegal, and Togo), and other international obligations relevant to biosafety. The project 
will also build a regional observatory and Biosafety Clearing House (BCH) on modern 
biotechnologies to monitor the impacts of the introduction of transgenic cotton. If the 
adoption of a regional regulation is successful, the observatory has the potential to 
Page  2
become an operational and decisional body, responsible for LMO approvals that were 
previously handled at the national level. Since the RBF will most likely be operational 
only after the mid-term of the project, the project will support, as an intermediary 
measure, implementation of the existing National Biosafety Frameworks (NBFs) in the 
countries that have already started field trials, or about to do so.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes three components: (a) a technical component, which will adapt and 
disseminate regional common methodologies to assess and manage risks, in compliance 
with international standards; (b) a regulatory and institutional component, which will 
build a regional biosafety framework and implementation structure in the West African 
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) space; and (c) an implementation component, 
which will support the implementation of the regional regulation at the national level, as 
well as any intermediary measures needed until the regional framework comes into 
effect.  
 
Component A: Adapt and disseminate regional methodologies to assess and manage 
risks (Estimated total: US$9.5 million; GEF contribution: US$1.9 million)  
 
Component A will produce operationally and regionally harmonized methodologies, 
consistent with international standards, such as guidelines, technical documents, forms, 
and checklists for risk assessment and management of LMOs and LMO products. At this 
initial stage, the project will focus on transgenic cotton, extending to other crops in the 
future, according to the priorities and outputs of the biotechnology research institutions. 
The existing tools in the countries and in the sub-region will be assessed and 
strengthened, consistent with international standards on risk management developed by 
specialized organizations, such as the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) and United Nations Environment Program (UNEP). The products 
of this component will be disseminated via workshops and specific trainings to the 
regional and national stakeholders.  
 
The four subcomponents related to risk assessment are: (i) inventory and evaluate 
existing tools and guidelines used or in preparation in the WAEMU countries for risk 
assessment and management, and compare them to recognized international 
methodologies; (ii) identify and get accreditation for a regional reference laboratory and 
two secondary laboratories; (iii) consolidate these tools and develop regional common 
approaches that meet recognized international standards in risk assessment and 
management, inspection, and monitoring and evaluation of LMOs. Prepare a regional 
manual of procedures; and (iv) disseminate the manual of procedures in the WAEMU 
region through the regional BCH.  
 
Component B: Elaborate and implement the Regional Biosafety Framework (Estimated 
total: US$6.4 million; GEF contribution: US$1.9 million)  
 
Component B will complement WAEMU's effort to integrate an economic and political 
area through harmonization of sector policies related to biosafety. This regulatory and 
institutional component will consist of producing a functional Regional Biosafety 
Framework for the WAEMU space. The Regional Framework will be based on 
WAEMU's key principles of subsidiarity, where member states subjugate their power to 
WAEMU in order to pursue common objectives.  
Page  3
The four subcomponents are: (i) prepare a regional law on biosafety according to 
WAEMU procedures; (ii) facilitate the political process for adoption of the regional law 
and its decrees; (iii) create an institutional framework  to accompany the dissemination 
and implementation of the regulation in the eight countries of WAEMU; and (iv) project 
coordination and monitoring and evaluation. The institutional framework of sub-
component three will consist of an observatory on modern agricultural biotechnology that 
will monitor the impact of such technology on the environment, food and feed safety, and 
socioeconomic issues, in accordance with a set of key indicators developed by WAEMU 
and its stakeholders. If the adoption of a regional regulation is successful, the observatory 
has the potential to become an operational and decision-making body, responsible for 
LMO approvals that are currently handled at the national level.  
 
Component C: Implement the Regional Biosafety Framework at the national level 
(Estimated total: US$7.4 million; GEF contribution: US$1.6 million)  
 
This component will focus on implementing the RBF at the national level, strengthening 
the capacities of all relevant national institutions involved in RBF implementation, and 
increasing public awareness and the participation of various stakeholders, especially 
producer organizations. Since the RBF will most likely be operational after the mid-term 
of the project, the project will support, as an intermediary measure, implementation of the 
existing National Biosafety Frameworks in the countries that have already started field 
trials, or are about to do so.  
 
The three subcomponents are: (i) strengthen human, institutional and regulatory 
capacities to enable the countries to implement the RBF and intermediary measures up to 
the effectiveness of the RBF; (ii) inform and sensitize the major stakeholders, especially 
producer organizations, about the regional regulation and its implications for the 
environment and socio-economic development; and (iii) strengthen the regulatory and 
policy environment related to intellectual property rights on transgenic plants.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The beneficiaries of the project are the eight WAEMU member States (Benin, Burkina 
Faso, Mali, Senegal, Togo, Cote d'Ivoire, Niger, and Guinea Bissau). Benin, Burkina 
Faso, Mali, Senegal, and Togo are eligible to GEF funds. Senegal, Mali, and Burkina 
Faso already have a relatively advanced program on agricultural biotechnology in place 
and have indicated strong interest in the project, as they feel an appropriate safeguard 
framework is needed. They have also demonstrated a keen interest in moving forward 
with a harmonized biosafety framework at the regional level. All GEF beneficiary 
countries have participated in the National Biosafety Framework projects, which were 
funded by GEF and implemented by the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP).  
 
Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea Bissau have not yet ratified the Cartagena Protocol and are not 
eligible to GEF. Niger is not a part of the cotton belt, and does not have an urgent need to 
implement a biosafety framework. However, these three countries are included in the 
project, primarily to facilitate the establishment of the regional biosafety regulation. Their 
participation will be financed through other contributions (most likely from IDA and 
WAEMU).   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTS1) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not finance infrastructure, field trials, or the introduction of any living 
modified organism. The main objective of the project is to establish and implement a 
regulatory framework on biosafety that will ensure prevention and management of risks  
 
related to the use and handling of LMOs. The regulatory environment established by the 
project will ensure that future field trials are conducted safely as opposed to the 
haphazard situation that would occur without the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential introduction of LMOs in the beneficiary countries may pose an 
environmental threat or create adverse socioeconomic impacts, and the project shall take 
this into account in designing the regulatory framework on biosafety. As a result of the 
potential for risk, the project has been classified category B and OP 4.01 and OP 4.09 are 
triggered to ensure that adequate measures are included in the forthcoming regional 
framework and during its implementation at the regional and national levels.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Most of these countries are Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, and therefore 
have an international legal obligation to comply with the protocol requirements in areas 
such as risk assessment, public participation, socioeconomic consideration, and 
monitoring and evaluation. The forthcoming regional framework will include the 
requirements of the Cartagena Protocol, and resources will be provided to help the 
countries to comply with these requirements. Other safeguards will be considered during 
Page  5
project implementation and included in the design of the framework as needed. The 
design, scope, and detailed content of the future regulation will be discussed thoroughly 
with the major stakeholders at the national level during the first year of project 
implementation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
WAEMU has prepared, in partnership with major stakeholders in the beneficiary 
countries, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). This 
framework takes into account the minimal requirements of the Cartagena Protocol, as 
well as the local potential risks that were identified during the process of public 
consultation with national stakeholders.  
 
The ESMF includes a description of institutional arrangements for its implementation. 
Capacity in the beneficiary countries is weak and the purpose of the project is to provide 
training and technical assistance to the national competent authorities in each country, as 
well as to the regional institutions in charge of biosafety. Adequate funds for capacity 
building have already been designated in the project design, which will enable the 
beneficiary countries to carry out their responsibilities under the ESMF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As a part of the communication strategy of the project, a team of communications 
specialists were hired with the PDF-B grant. In June 2006, they conducted consultations 
with major stakeholders, including civil society and producer organizations, in the five 
countries eligible to GEF funds, and presented the key project features to them. In 
addition to presenting the project objectives, components, costs, and institutional 
arrangements, they also presented the draft ESMF to the stakeholders. A draft final report 
of the consultations will be submitted by WAEMU to the Bank before July 15rd, 2006, 
and will be disclosed through Infoshop and in the countries, by July 30th, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Christophe Carret 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
 
Comments:   
