Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2179
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P094916 
Project Name:  WAPP APL 2 - OMVS Felou Hydroelectric Project 
Task Team Leader:  Amarquaye Armar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (50%);Renewable energy (50%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
40.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The goal of the West African Power Pool (WAPP) is to establish a well-functioning, 
cooperative, power pooling mechanism for West Africa, as a means to increase access of 
the citizens of the Economic Coummunity of West African States (ECOWAS) to stable 
and reliable electricity at affordable costs. The developmental objectives of WAPP APL 
2
(Organisation Pour La Mise En Valeur Du Fleuve Senegal (OMVS) Felou 
Hydroelectric Project (HEP)) Project are to: (a) augment the supply of low cost 
hydroelectricity from the OMVS Power System to the national power utilities of Mali 
(EDM), Mauritania (SOMELEC) and Senegal (SENELEC) as a means to alleviate 
widening power supply deficits that have resulted in chronic load shedding in WAPP 
"Zone B" OMVS countries (Mali, Mauritania, Senegal); and (b) further develop the 
OMVS power system into the nucleus of the future hydro-thermal power pooling 
mechanism - the proposed WAPP Cooperation Agreement - for WAPP "Zone B" 
countries. This developmental objective is to be achieved, inter alia, by: (a) implementing 
the proposed OMVS Felou HEP through a public-private partnership based on a Design-
Build-Operate-Transfer (DBOT) approach; and (b) upgrading the functional and real-
time operational capabilities of the Permanent Technical Committee that is responsible 
for the safe, reliable and efficient operation of the OMVS Power System.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The WAPP is a regional initiative, spearheaded by national power utilities of ECOWAS 
Member States, which directly contributes to the broader ECOWAS agenda to establish 
an open, unified, regional economic space in West Africa.  On June 30, 2005, the Bank's 
Executive Board of Directors endorsed the application of the adjustable program lending 
(APL) instrument, within the framework of the World Bank's Regional Integration 
Assistance Strategy (RIAS) for West Africa, as the vehicle for providing IDA credit 
support to the WAPP initiative. By so doing, the Bank has earmarked substantial IDA 
resources to put in place a multi-year programmatic framework to help close the 
financing gap and thereby ensure timely implementation of priority WAPP investments 
and technical assistance activities of the Revised ECOWAS Master Plan. The APL 
instrument would enable IDA credit support to be provided in a flexible manner - when 
borrowers have satisfied the policy triggers (country commitments under the Ecowas 
Energy Protocol (EEP)) and when individual WAPP priority investments are ready to 
receive IDA credit support.  All ECOWAS Member States might not actually be granted 
IDA credits under the WAPP APL program.  However, ECOWAS Member States would 
know up-front that they can rely on the Bank to support them in achieving the 
developmental goals of the WAPP if they meet specific eligibility criteria and if they 
need IDA credit support.  
 
Component 1: DBOT Contract. The Societe de Gestion de l'Energie de Manantali 
(SOGEM) or its successor asset holding entity - the Agence de Gestion du Patrimoine de 
l'OMVS (AGP-OMVS), will outsource the entire "design-build-operate-transfer" 
implementation cycle for the OMVS Felou HEP, including pilot operation of the Felou 
HEP to demonstrate performance for up to two hydrological seasons,  to a private 
contractor ("the DBOT Contractor") under a single responsibility, performance-based 
contract. The private contractor will be selected through an international competitive 
bidding process, consistent with Bank Guidelines.  
 
Component 2: A Two-Stage "Project Cycle Management" Contract. The OMVS will 
retain the services of an experienced engineering consulting firm to provide 
comprehensive project cycle management support through a two-stage sequential 
contracting arrangement. For the Stage 1 ("Transaction Adviser") Contract, currently 
underway with funding from PPF Q475-0-SE, the consulting firm will provide 
transaction advice and support to enable the OMVS to: (a) perform detailed planning and 
scheduling of project implementation arrangements, including pre-qualification of 
prospective bidders, (b) prepare and issue bidding documents for the selection of a DBOT 
contractor, and (c) conduct the two-stage bidding process, evaluate bids and make 
recommendation for the award of the DBOT contract. The expected duration of the Stage 
1
Contract is 9-12 months. After the award of the DBOT contract is made, the Stage 2 
("Owners Engineer") Contract would begin. Subject to satisfactory performance during 
the Stage 1 Contract, the same consulting firm will be retained to assist the OMVS and 
SOGEM/ AGP-OMVS) to oversee the day-to-day performance of the DBOT contractor 
over the entire "design-build-operate-transfer" cycle, including the critical hand-over of a 
fully operational OMVS Felou HEP to SOGEM/AGP-OMVS.  
 
Page  3
Component 3:  Capacity Building Support (Permanent Technical Committee - OMVS 
Power System). This component will provide technical assistance, equipment and 
capacity building support to upgrade the functional capabilities of the Permanent 
Technical Committee (PTC) of the OMVS Power System. The Permanent Technical 
Committee of the OMVS Power System comprises representatives of SOGEM (the 
OMVS asset holder), ESKOM Energie Manantali (EEM) (the private 
concessionaire/system operator), and the national power utilities of Mali (EDM), 
Mauritania (SOMELEC) and Senegal (SENELEC). Under this component, 
SOGEM/AGP-OMVS will acquire and transfer "use and control" through the PTC to the 
national transmission system operators in Mali (EDM), Mauritania (SOMELEC) and 
Senegal (SENELEC) of (a) SCADA/EMS and associated communication equipment and 
(b) software for hydro-thermal optimization. Together with joint training and associated 
capacity building activities to be organized jointly with the WAPP Organization, this 
capacity building component is intended to help improve the real-time operational 
planning and coordination with the OMVS Power System Operator (presently, ESKOM 
Energie Manantali (EEM) is the private concession holder). Overall, this component 
would enable the PTC to execute the "WAPP Action Plan" which would lead towards the 
establishment of a WAPP Cooperation Agreement among WAPP "Zone B" OMVS 
countries.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The investment component of WAPP APL 2 (Phase 2) is located entirely in north-
western Mali and will be implemented by the DBOT Contractor under the supervision of 
the OMVS High Commission and the designated OMVS-sponsored power asset holding 
entity - the proposed AGP-OMVS. The site of Felou is located about 200 km downstream 
of the hydropower dam of Manantali on the river Senegal and about 15 km from the town 
of Kayes (population at 86,500 in 2003). No physical displacement will occur. The 
impacts are restricted to the acquisition of 0.35 ha of vegetable gardens and of 0.9 ha of 
orchards in the context of civil works   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts expected from 
the Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no potential adverse indirect and/or long-term impacts anticipated as a result of 
anticipated future activities. The main social development issue in the project area 
(Kayes/ Bafoulabe) pertains to the negative impacts on fishing activities and acquisition 
of 1.25 ha of land planted with orchards and vegetable garden for project facilities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Impact Assessment and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were 
prepared and disclosed prior to project appraisal. The RAP determined the adequate level 
of compensation for the loss of assets resulting from the acquisition of 1.25 ha of land. 
The Project will also implement additional social enhancement measures to benefit 
neighboring villages (Lontou, Bengassi) in the Project zone of influence. Detailed 
information on these measures were included in the Resettlement Action Plan. Activities 
planned under the Senegal River Basin Multipurpose Water Resource Development 
(MWRDP) project, which is being developed in parallel, are directed to improving 
fishing techniques and equipment of fishermen, which in turn will benefit the affected 
fishermen under the WAPP APL 2 Project.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Main stakeholders are the local communities close to the site of Felou, and the fishermen 
and farmers affected by the acquisition of 1.25 ha of land. Affected persons and 
communities were consulted in the process of EIA and RAP preparation. The 
implementation of the RAP will follow the participatory process framework established 
by OMVS for the implementation of the MWRDP. Completed Environmental Impact 
Assessment and RAP, which were the required safeguard reporting instruments for this 
Project, were disclosed to the infoshop as indicated in table B below.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/02/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/17/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Page  6
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amarquaye Armar 
05/18/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
05/18/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
05/18/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/18/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
05/18/2006 
Comments:   
