Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2756
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P104507 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Colombia Social Safety Net Project (Ln. 7337) 
Task Team Leader:  Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Education for all (S);Child health (S);Nutrition and food 
security (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
105.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
40.30
40.30 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Additional Financing would support the scaling-up of the Colombia Social 
Safety Net Project to consolidate and expand the successful Familias en Accion Program.  
Expected outcomes include continued good targeting performance to the poor, 
registration of eligible families and improvements in school attendance and child 
nutrition.  The number of households participating in the Program (selected according to 
the SISBEN targeting instrument) would increase from nearly 600,000 currently to 1 
million.   
 
3. Project Description 
Consolidating and expanding the Familias en Accion program ($105.0 million).  The 
project would disburse cash transfers (grants) to poor families linked to compliance with 
key human development conditions.  Under the current Familias program these include: 
a) assuring that children 0-5 have all vaccinations and growth monitoring controls, 
according to the Ministry of Social Protection's (MSP) protocols; and b) assuring that 
children 6-17 years of age are enrolled in schools and regularly attend classes.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The scaled-up program would cover 1,027 municipalities, of which 167 are ones not 
currently covered in the original loan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda (LCSSO) 
Ms Maria Claudia Vasquez Alvarez (LCSHS-DPT) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional financing would not lead to any new safeguard issues beyond those of the 
ongoing project, but in the areas of expansion (the 167 new municipalities) the new 
Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP 4.10) would apply.  While the majority of the project area 
would remain the same, this project would expand into additional Indigenous and/or 
Afro-Colombian areas.  Among the 167 new municipalities, 45 contain indigenous 
people, in 23 the indigenous population exceeds 10 percent and 7 have a majority of 
indigenous population.  There are 28 municipalities which contain indigenous 
communities for which OP 4.10 would apply.  In addition, the scale-up would expand 
Program Coverage in Afro-Colombian populated areas as 53 municipalities have majority 
of Afro-Colombian population.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expansion of the coverage of the Program would not raise the environmental 
category of the Project which was classified as C. There are no unresolved safeguard 
problems.  The October 2006 supervision mission reviewed progress on the action plan.  
The management of the Program has transmitted to the Bank municipal data containing 
information regarding indigenous participants in Familias en Accion.  In addition, the  
planned study to identify the specific needs of ethnic populations, promotion strategy, 
identification of training needs and promotion of more cooperation with health facilities, 
Page  3
has been contracted and results are expected to be available by mid-2007.  The Bank 
team reiterated in the aide-memoire prepared at the end of the October 2006 supervision 
visit, the recommendation of the action plan that the new registration form incorporate a 
question regarding the beneficiary?s ethnicity.  In addition, the above-mentioned study 
would be expanded to address cultural and other relevant aspects of the Indigenous 
populations in the proposed project areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Based upon the findings of the social assessment, the following recommendations were 
made to better adjust the Familias en Accion Program to the needs of ethnic minority 
households and communities.  
 
1. 
It is recommended to expand coverage in Afro-Colombian populated areas, 
particularly in the case of the Department of Choco based on the new SISBEN database 
and to improve the promotion strategy.  The projected expansion of the Program to be 
supported by the Additional Financing would increase coverage among Afro-
Colombians.  Out of the 167 new municipalities, 53 have a high share of Afro-Colombian 
population.  
 
2. 
To ensure higher coverage rates and smoother program operation in areas that 
have significant indigenous and/or Afro-Colombian populations, the Program should 
organize a coordination committee made up of traditional leaders, local health and 
education officials that will meet at least quarterly to discuss strategies for achieving high 
coverage and participation rates and to identify any cultural insensitivities or other 
barriers affecting program success in the municipality. To date, these committees have 
not been formed.  Instead the Program is using the municipal coordinators to carry out 
this task.  
 
3. 
With the purpose of strengthening women's self-esteem, it is recommended that 
the program integrate a new educational component for beneficiary mothers designed to 
build awareness of their rights and responsibilities as individuals, but also explore the 
cultural origins of the ethnic groups present in the area, in an effort to strengthen cultural 
identity while building greater tolerance from members of other ethnic groups.  This 
program component should be delivered to all women living in areas with high numbers 
of indigenous and Afro-Colombian people, regardless of their ethnic origin, based upon 
the assumptions that all women need to be empowered and the behaviors of both majority 
and minority women need to be changed if stigma against ethnic minority is to be 
eliminated.  The outreach strategy being developed by the program for areas with Afro-
Colombian people is incorporating this recommendation.  
 
4. 
The program should incorporate a question on the impact survey regarding the 
beneficiary's ethnicity.  This would enable the program to evaluate the beneficiary 
performance by ethnicity and thus better detect performance problems that may be caused 
by cultural differences and require more culturally sensitive program adaptations to 
correct.  The program budget will include some funding to finance the analysis of this 
Page  4
data through a cultural lens and for follow-up work required to define appropriate 
corrective measures.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
medium term action plan has been developed which is being implemented under the 
project, forming part of the project's overall implementation plan. The borrower is well 
positioned to implement the plan. In fact, the authorities have decided to expand the 
planned additional study, in order to pilot the recommendations of the study in 3 
indigenous communities.  The following actions are included in the plan which has been 
agreed upon with the Colombian authorities:  
 
i. A study aimed at developing a program strategy for ethnic populations with special 
focus on the program's promotion activities, targeting procedures, training needs and 
payment procedures.  The recommendations would be tested in 3 pilot areas in order to 
develop a special annex for the operational manual.  The estimated time for the study and 
the pilots is 6 months.  The selection of the three areas is currently in process (first stage), 
based in principle, on different situations relating to reserves, leadership structure, and 
the municipality, in order that the findings could be applied to other communities.  At 
least one of the pilots would be among the 167 new municipalities covered in the 
additional financing.  The estimated time for the study and the pilots is 6 months.  The 
second stage of the study includes a process of consultations with the indigenous 
authorities and the communities. This stage would take place during February/March.  
The final stage, which is carrying out the pilots is expected to last for 3 months.  The 
study as well as the results of the pilot should be ready in July.  
 
ii. Training for municipal staff (enlaces municipales) to become more aware of the 
ethnic population's specific characteristics and their own behaviors toward this 
population group.  
 
iii. 
Promotion of more cooperation of the program with health facilities, particularly 
in the program's training activities (encuentros de cuidado).  
 
iv.  Further data collection and analysis will be done in order to better understand some 
of the problems identified by the social assessment and an action plan will be formulated 
to address them. It will be ensured also that data is tracked by gender.  
 
v.
Inclusion of information on ethnicity in the impact surveys.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the Familias en Accion program are municipal governments and 
indigenous and Afro-Columbian communities. The program will offer training to 
municipal staff to get a better understanding of ethnic communities and families in order 
to provide better services for them. At the local level, the program will work with 
community leaders to continue to monitor how the program is working for the different 
ethnic groups which will also be captured in the program's management information 
system (MIS).  
 
Page  5
The study described in the paragraph above would incorporate a consultation process 
around the overall approach and framework, to ensure that issues of culturally 
appropriate benefits and broad community support are included in the project activities.  
The Government and the Bank will update the ongoing project?s Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan (IPDP) by disclosing a document containing the following information 
no later than the anticipated date for Board approval of the additional financing, currently 
scheduled for March 15:  
 
-
The contents of the conceptual and technical elements of the terms of reference of the 
study to be undertaken, its principal activities, and the schedule.  
 
-
Criteria for the selection of the indigenous communities in which the pilots will be 
carried out.  This analysis will take into account the municipalities that have indigenous 
population and are included in the 167 new municipalities that are included under the 
additional financing and other municipalities where the program operates, with the 
exception of indigenous communities.  The criteria and selection will take into account 
location as well as leadership structure.The document would include the details of the 
analysis of the population composition of the 167 new municipalities.  
 
In regard to the Afro-Colombian communities, the strategy of promotion will be 
described as well as progress on training which the program is currently carrying out and 
details on the new municipalities which contain a majority of Afro-Colombian population 
will be provided.  
 
In addition, the results of the consultations will be published in April prior to the 
initiation of the pilots.  The Bank will supervise the process of access in the program for 
Afro-Colombian populations and will monitor the progress on the study and the 
application of the pilots in order to ensure the application of OP 4.10.  Once the findings 
of the pilots are available, the IPDP will be updated and issued as an Indigenous Peoples 
Plan (IPP) as per OP 4.10.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/05/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/09/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
02/01/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda 
02/01/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Maria Claudia Vasquez Alvarez 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
02/08/2007 
Comments:   
