Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1771 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/04/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P096058 
Project Name: West Africa Regional Biosafety 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Christophe Carret 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 21, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (50%);Agro-industry (50%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.40 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.00
9.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s development objective is to implement biosafety regulatory systems for safe field 
trial and commercial release of transgenic cotton and other crops in the five beneficiary countries 
(Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali, Senegal and Togo). The project will enable National Competent 
Authorities (NCAs) in each country to carry out efficient review of applications, including risk 
assessment for field trial, and commercial release of transgenic cotton and other crops, and to 
decide whether they will authorize field trials or the commercial release of transgenic crops.  
 
This will be achieved through the implementation of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 
(CPB) in the five beneficiary countries at the national level, and at the regional under the 
umbrella of WAEMU (West African Economic and Monetary Union). The approach will focus 
on strengthening the NCAs in charge of biosafety, training various stakeholders, and promoting 
public awareness. This process, which aims at identifying, evaluating, and selecting actions to 
prevent and reduce risks, will be undertaken in a scientific manner, taking into account 
guidelines developed by relevant international organizations. The project will also build a 
regional legal framework on biosafety and intellectual properties rights (IPRs) on modern 
biotechnologies, and monitor the impact of their introduction. Ultimately, the project would 
Page  2
benefit the West African sub-region in particular, and serve as a possible model for other African 
sub-regions.  
 
While transgenic cotton is a strong driver for developing the present project, and for choosing 
the targeted countries, the project’s goal is to strengthen andbuild the capacity of various 
stakeholders, and improve intersectoral and interagency cooperation, and coordination at the 
national and regional levels.  
 
The team was advised during the QER meeting on February 28, 2006 to upgrade the project's 
environmental category from "C" to "B" due to the dual focus of the project. The first aspect 
emphasizes on strengthening the capacity of various pertinent stakeholders in the process of 
implementing the National Biosafety  Frameworks (NBFs). The second aspect pertains to the 
establishment of the NBFs that will lead to the diffusion of biotechnology in the five beneficiary 
countries. This diffusion warrants for the establishment of an instrument to safeguard the 
environment, human health, and socio-economic considerations that have been the cornerstone 
of the CPB.  
 
The team was further advised to prepare an environment and social impact framework that 
would enable the five beneficiary countries to implement their NBFs. The proposed environment 
and social impact framework is attached as annex 12A to the GEF  Project Brief/PAD.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The establishment of biosafety capacity in the West African sub-region is a challenging task due 
to the complexity of the subject matter that demands for an inter disciplinary approach on cross-
cutting issues ranging from science, economics, law, social studies, institutional governance, and  
politics. A traditional way of building capacity is to empower one country to build and 
strengthen its technical and scientific capacities with the hope that other countries will pursue a 
similar strategy. In the case of biosafety, it is submitted that this approach is time consuming and 
costly to attain a desirable International Standards and uniformity.  Furthermore, such investment 
demands for a long-term commitment from governments who are facing much more challenging 
issues relating to  poverty alleviation, rural development and equity.  
 
Hence, a  regional approach is proposed. This is a process that builds upon the existing 
collaboration at the sub-regional level utilizing the existing capacity, and enhance it by 
facilitating its access to international experts from US, Canada, and Europe. In addition, this 
strategy would seek to collaborate, but not duplicate other ongoing donor-supported biosafety 
investments, notably those of UNEP at the national level, the French Development Agency 
(AFD), and USAID at the regional level.  Such an approach would be faster, cost effective, and 
potentially sustainable. Most of the proposed capacity building activities will be implemented at 
the regional level with the full participation of the identified national institutions responsible for 
implementing the provisions of the CPB.  
 
Taking the above concerns into consideration, and their needs for prompt intervention, this 
project will address key aspects for the establishment of functional biosafety capacity through a 
strategic collaboration among the beneficiary countries, and WAEMU. The strategic 
implementation of the project acknowledges the different levels of institutional capacities of the 
five countries in the safe handling, transfer, and use of LMOs. Burkina Faso has been a clear 
leader in this area by undertaking field trials on Bt cotton, followed by Mali taking similar path, 
Page  3
while Senegal is most advanced in biotechnology research. Benin and Togo have confirmed their 
strong interest to participate in the sub-regional biosafety network as they are concerned about 
losing their comparative advantages if their neighbors move towards the commercialization of Bt 
cotton. Given these differences, the project expects to adopt a two-tiered approach to its 
implementation where the details of such approaches will be defined during project preparation.  
 
The following project design is being considered:  
 
Component 1: Regional  Design and Dissemination of Technical Tools to Assess and Manage 
Risks.  
 
This component will primarily facilitate the sharing of information among partners and 
stakeholders, and also contribute to the long-term sustainability of the project beyond its lifetime. 
This component will specifically (i) establish a web-based regional biosafety clearing house 
mechanism; (ii) design environmental risk assessment tools; (iii) design food and feed safety 
assessment tools; and (iv)  disseminate tools for biosafety clearing house at the national and 
regional levels.  
 
Component 2: Implementation and Management of Biosafety Regulatory Framework at the 
National Level  
 
This component will focus on strengthening the existing national biosafety regulatory 
frameworks in the five countries. It will specifically (i) review the existing national biosafety 
legislations; (ii) stimulate and build public awareness on biosafety issues; (iii) enhance the 
capacities of the National Biosafety Agencies in coordinating biosafety activities; and (iv) 
provide support, and build the capacities of the National Project Co-ordinators.  
 
Component 3: Harmonization of Biosafety and Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) policies 
within the WAEMU space.  
 
This component aims to facilitate the interaction, building of consensus, and formulation of 
regional biosafety and IPRs policies, from all national stakeholders. The component will 
specifically (i) establish a forum for stakeholders to negotiate and deliberate on biosafety and 
IPRs issues; (ii) undertake socio economic impact assessment, and set up a biosafety observatory 
at the regional level; (iii) build the capacity of selected officials to negotiate IPRs issues for cash 
and staple crops; (iv) facilitate a regional dialogue for policy makers; and (v) strengthen the 
capacity on project management, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali, Senegal and Togo   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
WAEMU, in partnership with other regional institutions such as INSAH (Institute of Sahel) and 
WECARD (West and Central African Council for Agricultural Research and Development) have 
the experience and institutional capacity to prepare, and implement the project. At the national 
level, ministries, laboratories, and research institutions will be evaluated during the preparation 
phase to determine their appropriate roles and responsibilities. In addition, regional and national 
institutions should be engaged with the developed world to tap their scientific and technological 
expertise as and when needed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTEG) 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy is triggered because of the dual focus of the project 1)The first aspect emphasizes 
on strengthening the capacity of various pertinent stakeholders in the process of establishing the 
National Biosafety Frameworks (NBFs). 2)The second aspect is pertaining to the establishment 
of the NBFs that may lead to the diffusion of biotechnology in the five beneficiary countries.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/28/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework will be prepared, approved, and 
disclosed prior to appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Christophe Carret 
05/03/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/03/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
05/03/2006 
Comments:   
