Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1974 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P094916 
Project Name: WAPP APL 2 - OMVS Felou Hydroelectric Project 
Task Team Leader: Amarquaye Armar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (50%);Renewable energy (50%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
40.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
WAPP APL: The goal of West Africa Power Pool (WAPP) is to establish a well-functioning, 
cooperative, power pooling mechanism for West Africa, as a means to increase access of the 
citizens of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to stable and reliable 
electricity at affordable costs.  
 
The developmental objectives of OMVS Second Generation Hydropower Projects of the WAPP 
APL (WAPP APL 2) are to: (a) augment the supply of low cost electricity to the national power 
utilities of Mali (EDM), Mauritania (SOMELEC) and Senegal (SENELEC) as a means to 
alleviate widening power supply deficits that have resulted in chronic load shedding in the 
Senegal River Basin countries (Mali, Mauritania, Senegal); and (b) develop the OMVS power 
system into a nucleus power pooling mechanism that can be replicated for other sub-regions of 
WAPP Zone B. This developmental objective is to be achieved, inter alia, by: (a) implementing 
the proposed OMVS Second Generation Hydropower Projects at the Felou (refurbishment of 
existing facility) and Gouina sites using a Design-Build-Operate-Transfer (DBOT) approach that 
involves deployment of date-certain, fixed price, performance-based contracts for each plant; and 
Page  2
(b) providing institutional restructuring and capacity building support to improve the efficiency 
and performance of the public-private partnership involving an OMVS-sponsored power asset 
holding entity (currently the Societe de Gestion de l'Energie de Manantali - SOGEM) and a 
private operation and maintenance concessionaire (currently ESKOM Energie Mali (EEM)).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This FY06 project (WAPP APL 2 Felou Hydro-Electric Plant (HEP)) will provide IDA credits 
through the Governments of Mali, Mauritania and Senegal to the OMVS High Commission and 
the designated OMVS-sponsored power asset holding entity  - the  proposed L'Agence de 
Gestion du Patrimoine de l'OMVS (AGP-OMVS)- to finance the implementation of the proposed 
60 MW Felou Hydro-Electric Plant (Felou HEP). The components of the WAPP APL 2 - Felou 
HEP are:  
 
Component 1: Design-Build-Operate-Transfer (D-B-O-T) Contract for the Felou HEP. The site 
of the proposed 60 MW run-of-the-river Felou HEP is located on the river Senegal about 200 km 
downstream of the Manantali Hydroelectric plant and 15 km from the Kayes sub-station of the 
OMVS power system.  
 
Component 2: Consulting Services 
–
Project Cycle Management and Supervision. 
Comprehensive project cycle development and supervision assistance, covering consultant 
services required by the OMVS High Commission and the designated OMVS-sponsored power 
asset holding entity to: (a) plan and schedule the project, prepare bidding documents, conduct the 
bidding process up until bid evaluation and contract award (Phase 1); and subsequently (b) 
oversee all aspects of the design, construction, commissioning and operational stages (Phase 2) 
of the implementation of the proposed Felou HEP.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Restructuring and Capacity Building TA. This component will 
provide comprehensive technical assistance and capacity building support to restructure/re-
configure the existing public-private partnership between SOGEM and EEM to accommodate 
the OMVS second generation hydropower projects.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The investment component of WAPP APL 2 (Phase 2) is located entirely within Mali and will be 
implemented by the DBOT Contractor under the supervision of the OMVS High Commission 
and the designated OMVS-sponsored power asset holding entity - the proposed L'Agence de 
Gestion du Patrimoine de l'OMVS (AGP-OMVS).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Both the OMVS High Commission and SOGEM (to be restructured into the proposed AGP-
OMVS) have had experience in implementing the Manantali Regional Hydropower Project, in 
accordance with the World Bank's Safeguard Policies. The main social development issue in the 
project area (Kayes/ Bafoulabe) pertains to the negative impacts on fishing activities and 
acquisition of about 2 ha of land planted with orchards and vegetable garden for project facilities. 
Activities planned under the Senegal River Basin Multipurpose Water Resource Development 
(MWRDP) project, which is being developed in parallel, are directed to improving fishing 
techniques and equipment of fishermen.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment (EA) has been prepared and will be disclosed prior to 
appraisal. There are potential impacts on fisheries resources, public health, especially bilharzia, 
and HIV/Aids, potential impacts on food security of the local villagers near the project site, 
security issues with regard to the new channel and access to bathing and washing facilities. 
These issues will need to be adequately addressed in the final EA report.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
About 2 ha of land planted with orchards and vegetable gardens need to be acquired for 
project facilities: a new channel and a new road. A Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared 
and disclosed in country and in the Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The Felou Hydropower Project will rehabilitate an existing two meter high sill. An analysis 
has indicated that there are no dam safety issues. The Dam Safety Report for the upstream 
Manantali Dam is being reviewed (Felou will use water from the Manantali Dam).    
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project is part of the overall OMVS program. In the OMVS all OMVS country members 
are represented. The notification process has gone through the OMVS to notify the member 
countries, as has been standard for other projects in the Senegal River.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/10/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Assessment has been prepared and a Draft Final report is available. A 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared. Both documents will be disclosed in 
country, including the project site and in the Infoshop, prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amarquaye Armar 
02/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
