                                                                                                                                                                                                         43698


Authorized
                                                                                                                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                                APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 05/17/2007                                       Report No.: AC2625
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Africa                                   Project ID: P079736
                                                                                                            Project Name: CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Jean-Francois Marteau
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2,             Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007
                                                                                                            2007
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: AFTTR                              Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                              Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Roads and highways (40%);General transportation sector (30%);Railways
                                    Disclosure                                                              (20%);Ports, waterways and shipping (10%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regional integration (S)

                                              Public                                                        IBRD Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):             201.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                  10.00
                                                    Authorized                                                                                                                          10.00
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                             Simple []           Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                              Disclosure                                                                                                            Yes [ ]      No [X]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

                                                                        Public                              2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The project will contribute to the shared growth objectives of the CEMAC countries'
                                                                                                            PRSPs, by ensuring that the CU is effectively implemented and by improving trade
                                                                                                            facilitation in the region. It will also support the broader goal of increasing the regional
                                                                                                            integration of CEMAC member states by improving the core rail and road infrastructure.
                                                                                                            It will also contribute to trade increase within the region and between the region and the
                                                                                                            rest of the world. Furthermore, the development of the two corridors (Cameroon ­ Chad
                                                                              Authorized                    and Cameroon ­ CAR) to be supported by the project are part of the priority New
                                                                                                            Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) Infrastructure Short Term Action Plan
                                                                                                            for Central Africa.
                                                                                                             The overarching objective of the program is to contribute to facilitate regional trade
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            within the CEMAC and improve Cameroon's, CAR's, and Chad's access to world
                                                                                                            markets. This overall objective is achieved through two PDOs which are: (i) improving
                                                                                                  Public    the implementation of the CEMAC CU; and (ii) reducing physical and non-physical
                                                                                                            barriers along the Douala-N'Djaména and Douala-Bangui corridors.

3. Project Description
This project is a piece of the priority actions of a general program that should, in the end,
cover the whole CEMAC region, with a common objective to secure access to the
landlocked countries and increase trade in the CEMAC countries.

 The Project is expected to include the following major components to be funded with
support from IDA, African Development Fund (ADF), EC, France and Japan through
parallel funding arrangements:

 (I) Roads and Railway Infrastructure Improvement: This will include: (i) periodic
maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading works on selected road sections along the
corridors; (ii) paving of existing gravel road sections; (iii) harmonization and
enforcement of axle load control policies; (iv) improvement of rest areas; (v)
rehabilitation of critical rail infrastructure; and (vi) implementation of HIV-AIDS
awareness and mitigation measures.

 (II) Transit and Transport Facilitation Investments: This will include: (i) ICT
communication between stakeholders, especially within the port community; (ii) transit
regime and border crossing improvements through cargo tracking, border posts); (iii) port
safety and security strengthening; and (iv) improvement in intermodal interfaces.

 (III) Customs and Transport Sector Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building:
This will include: (i) CEMAC CU and national customs strengthening; (ii) institutional
support for transport facilitation institutions; and (iii) management of the project's
components.

 The total expected project cost is about US$680 million equivalent, of which IDA
would fund US$ 201 million equivalent. Table 1 and Table 2 sum up the proposed
Project costs, with a breakdown by components and by countries, also indicating each
development partner's expected commitment. These data are further detailed in Annexes
4 and 5.
 IDA- funded components

 1.     IDA funding primarily covers:

 &#61607;       In Cameroon, contribution to the paving of the Ngaoundéré-Garoua-
Boulaï section, rehabilitation of rail track between Yaoundé and Belabo (component 1 (ii)
and (v)), facilitation of the port IT interfaces and Security improvement in Douala,
intermodal interfaces in Douala and Ngaoundéré (component 2 (i), (iii) and (iv)), and
customs reform and institutional support to the ministries of transport and public works
(component 3);

 &#61607;       In Chad, the co-funding with Republic of Chad of a long-term
performance based maintenance contract and critical road rehabilitation works on the
N'Djaména - Moundou ­ Touboro (Cameroonian border) road section (component 1 (i)

and (iii)) and institutional support to customs and the ministry of infrastructure
(component 3 (i) (ii) and (iii));

 &#61607;       In CAR, a contribution to the paving of the Garoua-Boulaï-Bouar section
and emergency maintenance on the international network (component 1 (i) and (ii)),
improvement of intermodal interfaces (component 2 (iv)) and support to customs reform
and to ministries of transport and public works (component 3 (i) (ii) and (iii)).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will finance activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and Chad,
including (a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui to
Douala that need upgrading or long term maintenance (b) rail sections in Cameroon
between Yaounde and Belabo that need to be rehabilitated (c) a number of trade-related
investment and technical assistance in the three countries.

  Because the works carried out under (c) are of limited scope at existing sites they are
not being treated as safeguards issues. Safeguards treatment will thus primarily concern
environmental conditions and social impact resulting from the road and rail investment
components of the project in Cameroon, CAR and Chad. Key social issues relevant to the
project objectives are mostly in relation to social impacts of the road improvements in
Cameroon and CAR (no resettlement is expected in Chad, and rail investment will take
place within an existing functioning framework put in place under the current IDA
project). Environmental impacts were assessed for the road links and the EMP designed
for the Cameroon Railways project has been improved and updated to cater for
permanent actions and additional issues not identified during the first phase.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTSD)
   Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1)
   Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2)
   Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFMCM)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                             X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment : OP/BP 4.01 was triggered and three main Environment and
Social Impact Assessment studies were carried out both in Cameroon, Central Africa
Republic and Chad. The Environmental Assessment of the road sections has not revealed
any significant direct environmental impacts. The most important negative
environmental impacts associated with the road rehabilitation in CAR and Cameroon
concern a small encroachment (4ha in Cameroon) of a national park, air quality
degradation, disruption of drainage, and the potential indirect stimulus to illegal logging
and the bushmeat trade,

   The government of Cameroon will compensate the 4 ha area encroached in the Benoue
National Park according to national legislation by allocating a similar additional surface
to the same park or a park located in the same ecological zone. It will be secured during
implementation that this land is not being used by people or are not part of the traditional
territory of a given community(ies).

   During the works, air quality in the local area will be somewhat degraded by intensive
use of gas-powered machines and repetitive truck movements, but this air pollution will
be limited in time and importance. A major environmental benefit of the pavement of
roads in this region lies in reduction of dust generation, particularly important on dirt
roads during the dry season. Works can also affect rainwater streaming and the soil?s
physical properties. As the area is highly populated in the stretch close to Ngaoundére in
Cameroon, strict water sanitation and drainage precautions have to be taken to avoid
important rainfall streaming changes. After pavement, the road will become a waterproof
strip that can considerably modify water streaming.

   Proper environmental measures can avoid most of negative environmental impacts
resulting from the physical works and these measures will be included in all the
procurement documents. A specific budget has been allotted for the environmental
mitigation measures to be undertaken in Cameroon, CAR and Chad. As for the road
maintenance contract in Chad, the contractor will be held responsible through the
procurement arrangements for the adverse environmental effects resulting from the
project, that have been assessed to be very limited.

   No major social impact has been identified during the preparation phase. Impacts
during construction phase relates to the destruction of physical habitat and the logging of
fruit-trees within the road reserve. However, no new road section will be constructed and
the widening of some sections will only affect very partially the local agricultural activity
and housing. As a side-effect of the physical works, agricultural work force will be
reduced in the region. Impacts during the operational phase of these facilities include
increased noise and accident risks due to the increased traffic and HIV/AIDS
propagation. High attention will be paid to road safety improvement. A dedicated part of

the investments has been allotted to sensitize the local population to fight against HIV,
road safety and environmental conservation.
   The rail sections in Cameroon have been concessioned in 1999. The investments to
rehabilitate rail track for part of the Section Yaounde-Belabo will be executed by the
concessionaire. An Environmental and Safety Management Plan (ESMP) has been
produced to detail mitigation measures, which cover both the works to be carried out and
the company's overall environmental liabilities. Major potential impacts relate to the
environmental impacts of rail rehabilitation works. Environmental and social impacts of
rail accidents were taken into consideration in this reviewed ESMP.

   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Except for the small encroachment (4ha) in Benoue
National Park in Cameroon previously mentioned, the operation will not have any
important direct impact on natural habitats, as it will support road rehabilitation rather
than construction..

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The operation will cause involuntary
resettlements. 126 families in CAR and160 families in Cameroon will be concerned. For
each country a specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was issued. It is important to
note that families will not be displaced more than 50 to 200 meters away from their
original sites. In each country a financial provision has been done to ensure the
implementation of the RAP and compensate the other impacts assessed by the EIA.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): No archeological site has been identified
during the EIA. Specific attention has been paid in CAR. Some graveyards have been
located in Cameroon and CAR. Compensation will be provided with respect to national
legislations.

 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): Along the road sections considered no impact on
indigenous people was identified.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The main long term adverse impacts identified by the EIA in Cameroon, CAR and Chad
are the increased road accident risks due to traffic growth, HIV/AIDS propagation and
potential increase in pressure on natural resources, particularly through illegal logging
and the bushmeat trade.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No alternative has been considered to minimize adverse impacts. As for the road
investments, the operation is mainly a rehabilitation of existing roads no alternative
plotting is therefore conceivable. The most sustainable technical option has then been
chosen with respect to the project resources.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For Each country the Ministry in charge of Environment was responsible for the approval
of the EIA and the EMP. A special unit was also created or strengthened in each country
to ensure the implementation of the EMP in close collaboration with the Ministry in
charge of Environment.

   CAR: The legal frame work regarding environment matters remains weak in CAR.
The Government started in 2006 the process of drafting the Environment Law. No
regulation in terms of EIA exists.

   The EMP will be followed and monitored by the Environment Protection Unit hosted
in the Ministry in Charge of Public works and by the Environment General Directorate
hosted at the Ministry of Water, Forests, Hunting and Fisheries. The coordination
structure will be able to hire other external expertise when needed. The government
capacity to monitor and implement the EMP is also weak, so project resources will be
used to help strengthen the capacity of those ministries to ensure the implementation of
the EMP and the RAP.

   Cameroon: Since the beginning of the 90s, the government of Cameroon has
significantly improved the legal framework for environmental management. Law no.
96/12 of August 5, 1996 sets the framework for environmental matters. The decree no.
2005/0577/PM of February 23, 2005 provides guidance for the EIA. The creation of the
Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection in 2004 has reinforced the institutional
capacity of the government to monitor environmental matters. An Inter-ministerial
commission exists through the 96 Environment Law and plays its role in term of
approving EIA and EMP. The Ministry of Public Works has a special unit for
environmental issues. This Unit presents all competencies able to ensure the
implementation of the process with the monitoring of the Ministry of Environment and
Nature Protection and its creation was set up through IDA funding under the Transport
Sector Project. The members of this Unit will be provided with training in the area of
Bank social safeguards to allow them to properly monitor the implementation of the RAP
Although there are still significant shortcomings in the national environmental
management and regulatory framework, adequate implementation of the EMP and RAP
will be supported by capacity-building initiatives targeting the Ministries of Public
Works, Environment, and Forests, to be financed by the Project. Furthermore, the
implementation of the Forest and Environment Program supported by the Bank will
contribute to the improvement of the legal and implementing frame work. In the rail
sector, a Memorandum of Understanding between Camrail and the Ministry in charge of
Environment and Nature Protection governs relationships and monitoring of the main
impacts associated to the rail.

 Chad: The principal agencies involved in the environmental management of the
rehabilitation works are the Direction Générale des Routes of MININFRA, and the
Ministry of Environment and Water. The requirement to conduct environmental
assessments of investment projects is established by law No. 14/PR/98, and approval of a

General Guideline for the Preparation of Environmental Impact Assessments is expected
in 2007. The project will provide support to strengthen the environmental management
capacity of both the Direction Générale des Transports de Surface of MININFRA, and
the Ministry of Environment and Water, and will also support a separate analysis of the
social impact of recent road investments in the same region, to help maximize the socio-
economic benefit of future investments.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
?       Local populations
  ?     NGOs,
  ?     Donors,
  ?     Regional and local leadership and
  CAR:
  ?     Ministry of Water, Forest, Hunting and Fisheries, in charge of the Environment,
  ?     Ministry of Public Works,
  ?     Ministry of Interior and Public Security,
  ?     Ministry in charge of rebuilding public infrastructures,
  ?     Ministry of Urban Affairs and Housing
  ?     CEMAC (Community of Central African States)
  Cameroon
  ?     Ministry of Environment and Protection of Nature
  ?     Ministry of Forests and Wildlife
  ?     Ministry of Publics Works
  ?     Ministry of Transports
  ?     Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization
  ?     Ministry of Energy and Water
  ?     Ministry of Justice

  Mechanisms for consultation
  The three EIAs were carried out on the basis of a participative methodological
approach. Individual interviews, group discussions and several meetings were organized
during the execution of the study and during the approval process. The project contents,
in terms of economic, social, cultural, environmental stakes, as well as mitigation impacts
and compensations measures were developed and discussed with diverse consulted
stakeholders. The team will ensure that this participatory consultation process continues
on a regular basis during the project implementation. Supervision missions will be the
opportunity to assess the whole process.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     05/16/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/16/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/16/2007

  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05/16/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   05/16/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    05/16/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of       No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other  No
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes

  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                             Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                  Mr Jean-Francois Marteau                    05/16/2007
Environmental Specialist:          Mr Paul Jonathan Martin                     05/16/2007
Social Development Specialist      Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour                  05/16/2007
Additional Environmental and/or    Mr Robert A. Robelus                        05/16/2007
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Warren Waters                            05/16/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham                   05/16/2007
 Comments:

