Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2241 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/07/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Eastern Africa 
Project ID: P100203 
Project Name: African Rift Geothermal Development Facility 
Task Team Leader: Arun P. Sanghvi 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
35.55 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
100.45
100.45 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s objective is to promote the development of geothermal energy in the selected 
countries. It is expected that this will add low-cost power generation capacity and increase the 
security of power supply. The global objective of the project is to facilitate reduction of green-
house gas emissions in these countries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. 
The creation of a Regional Network managing a geothermal information system and 
capacity building and awareness raising programs.  This will be undertaken by UNEP.  The 
project will support activities related to the development of a geothermal energy information 
database, capacity building activities through training and exchanges and equipment pooling.  
 
2.  
A Risk Mitigation Fund. This will be managed by the Bank. The design of the Fund will 
build on the design of the GeoFund in Europe and Central Asia. The Fund will provide financial 
instruments to assist in mitigating the exploration and appraisal risks. It will thus improve access 
Page  2
to finance for public and private developers and play a catalytic role in establishing geothermal 
energy as a strategic option in power expansion planning of the countries in the region. It will 
provide a guarantee against payment of a “commercial” premium and, to a limited extent, grants 
for exploration and appraisal drilling to both public and private developers at equal conditions. 
As a result, reduced risk and cost regarding early stage geothermal development can be expected 
to encourage the pursuit of projects up to the final stage of an operational power plant.  
 
In order to control the risk to be underwritten by the Fund, guarantees will be awarded on the 
basis of appropriate criteria complying with the state of the art. Project applications shall be 
required to provide sufficient surface-based exploration data to justify investment in exploratory 
drilling in the concerned geothermal field. The eligibility of the drilling site will be judged by an 
independent Geothermal Advisory Panel, (GAP), which will also monitor drilling execution and 
assess possible events of default.  
 
3.  
Technical Assistance, consisting of support for:  
 
(a) Institutional and technical capacity building. This will be managed by UNEP. It includes 
elements such as environmental protection legislation, resource use regulations, social impact 
issues, support for surface exploration activities, and promotion of public-private partnerships.  
 
(b) Risk Management Fund related activities. This will be managed by the Bank. This includes 
(i) operating the GAP, (ii) supporting the private sector in drilling pre-feasibility studies, 
safeguard issues related to environment, social impacts, and preparation of post-drilling bankable 
feasibility studies, and (iii) supporting governments in developing a conducive framework for 
geothermal power, including integration of geothermal energy development in the national 
energy development master plans.  
 
Project Costs by Component:  
 
1. Regional system to manage a geothermal information system and capacity building and 
awareness raising programs (UNEP managed): GEF US$2.5M; Total US$15M  
 
2. Risk Mitigation Fund (Bank managed): GEF US$20.0M, Total US$94.5M  
 
3. Technical Assistance: Total GEF$12.9M; Total US$27.1M  
 
(a) Institutional and technical capacity building (UNEP managed): GEF $6.3M  
 
(b) Risk Management Fund related activities (Bank managed): GEF US$6.6M  
 
Total Project Costs: GEF US$35.5M; Total US$136.6M  
 
(a) UNEP:  GEF US$8.9M  
 
(b) Bank:  GEF US$26.6M  
 
The project would be financed by GEF grants of about $35.5 million, co-financing of about $ 
41.5 million from other donors (KfW, Iceland, Italy, USA) and recipient countries, with the 
remaining funds from predominantly private sources.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
This regional project will cover six countries of Eastern Africa:  Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, 
Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya as they are part of the African Rift Valley system.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The executing agency for the risk mitigation fund will be German KfW that has the capacity to 
implement the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) required by the Bank. As the specific projects are being developed on a 
case by case basis by private developers and sponsors, each project will have to be assessed and 
managed by KfW according to the established ESMF and RPF and applicable local legislation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Exploratory drilling operations will require Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).  
Since drilling locations will only be determined during project implementation, an ESMF is 
required at appraisal to define roles and responsibilities for EMP preparation, approval and 
supervision.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Potential drilling sites may be located in parks or protected areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Potential drilling sites may be located in areas inhabited by indigenous peoples.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Exploratory drilling may require land acquisition or restriction of access for existing users.  
An RPF is required to address compensation issues.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
Potential drilling sites may be located along the Eritrea/Ethiopia border.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/28/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF preparation will be launched in April 2006 for completion by August 
2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Arun P. Sanghvi 
04/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
04/07/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/07/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
