Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2698
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P097201 
Project Name:  3A-Reg&Domestic Pwr Mkt  Dev. (FY07) 
Task Team Leader:  Philippe Charles Benoit 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Export development and competitiveness (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
295.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.00 
 
African Development Bank 
100.00 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
92.00
204.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the Project are (a) to improve operational efficiency and 
expand generation, transmission and distribution capacity, in order to support regional 
power market integration, to better serve domestic power demand and to increase 
revenues from electricity exports, and (b) to improve management standards and 
effectiveness in the power sector, through strengthened financial management and 
enhanced government planning & implementation capacity.  
 
Key indicators for the Project?s intended final outcomes will be: (i) increase in 
generation capacity at the Inga I and 2 plants; (ii) GWh delivered to SAPP countries and 
to industrial customers in Katanga region; (iii) invoiced sales to SAPP customers; (iv) 
GWh delivered to Kinshasa distribution network from Inga site; (v) revenues collected in 
Kinshasa by SNEL (Societe Nationale d?Electricite), the national electricity utility; and 
(vi) number of additional households connected in Kinshasa.  These final outcome 
indicators will be measured directly by SNEL, and will be reviewed as part of the annual 
financial audits of SNEL.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project, APL1-b, is a new phase of an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) that 
will now have four phases.  The first phase of the APL, APL-1, was approved by the WB 
Board on January 24, 2004 and became effective on May 17, 2004.  
 
The APL series consists of a set of interventions that would strengthen the Southern 
African Power Pool (SAPP) as a means of promoting and managing electricity trade in 
the region, removing transmission bottlenecks that inhibit trade, and connect members 
that do not yet have physical connection to the grid.  This subset of interventions was 
adopted by NEPAD and SADC as priority areas in the energy sector.  
 
APL1-b will complement the other phases of the APL series through a set of 
components that will, inter alia: (a)  rehabilitate the hydroelectric power plants at the Inga 
site on the River Congo, providing increased power availability to consumers, both in 
DRC and to external purchasers; (b) through construction of a new transmission line, 
allow for increased volume and higher reliability of power transmission to Kinshasa from 
the Inga site; (c) provide more electricity to more people in DRC, as well as improve the 
quality of service to the more than 1.5 million people in Kinshasa currently with access.  
 
The Association's financing will be on-lent by the Government of DRC to SNEL.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
There are three locations at which physical activities relevant to the safeguard analysis 
will be undertaken as a result of the Project:  
 
The Inga site on the River Congo, situated approximately 125 miles downriver from 
Kinshasa; the works to be undertaken will be at the Inga 1 and Inga 2 hydroelectric 
facilities, as well as in the intake canals for both facilities. The area is sparsely populated 
and consists mostly of savanna with gallery forests in the valleys.  
 
The route of the new transmission line from the Inga site to Kinshasa ending at the 
Kingatoko susbstation. The routing for the line has not yet been finalized and land 
acquisition will be required. The transmission line from Inga to the Kingatoko substation 
in Kinshasa passes mostly through agricultural land. A sensitive forest area near the Inga 
Hydropower station has been avoided.  
 
In Kinshasa, activities to strengthen the power distribution system will include 
rehabilitation activities at three key substations (located at Liminga, Lingwala and 
Utexco), the extension of the grid into currently un-electrified areas of Kinshasa (namely 
30,000 new connections in the Kimbanseke area located to the east of the city, with the 
associated erection of a new substation) and 20,000 new connections in the Kinseso, 
Mpasa 1/2/3 and Malweka areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Page  3
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Social, environmental and resettlement issues relating to the Project are addressed in the 
Project's Environmental, Social and Resettlement Plan, the set of six documents relating 
to environmental, social and resettlements aspects of the project released to the infoshop 
in January 2007.  
 
Inga Site  
 
The environmental impacts of the rehabilitation of the Inga 1 and Inga 2 hydropower 
plants will be moderate and manageable. Environmental and social safeguard issues have 
been identified and addressed as follows:  
 
Only a fraction of the water from the huge Congo River has been diverted into Inga 1 
and Inga 2 intake canal for hydropower production and there will be almost no change in 
the hydrological regime of the Congo River as a result of the Project. The environmental 
impacts of the construction and operation of the Inga 1 and Inga 2 Hydropower Plants 
were and still are moderate and manageable. There are no legacy issues to consider.  
 
Dredging and re-profiling of the 9 km canal will be needed to bring the capacity up to 
the design capacity. The dredging sludge will be tested for chemical pollution. Based on 
the test results a safe disposal place will be identified.  
 
The reservoir of Inga 1 and Inga 2 has a macrophytes problem affecting the operation of 
the turbines. Management of macrophytes will be improved.  
 
The Inga 1 and Inga 2 installations include some Astadi transformers, which could be 
contaminated with PCBs. If PCBs are found they will need safe storage and subsequent 
incineration.  
 
Page  4
The drinking water supply system for the Concession is integrated into the dam 
installations and is completely obsolete and will be renovated.  
 
Water quality monitoring is presently weak and will be strengthened in order to 
optimize reservoir management.  
 
The SNEL concession at the Inga site consists of 21,000 hectares. The area of the 
concession was and still is sparsely populated. It has enough space to house the 
construction camp. The SNEL hospital within the concession area will be used during 
construction. HIV/Aids will be managed during the construction period. SNEL staff live 
inside the SNEL Concession in residential houses and in villages. The social amenities in 
these villages are very good. Presently there are around 6,000 former SNEL workers 
living within the Concession. SNEL is negotiating with the Government of DRC to 
resettle these old workers outside the Concession, but this is not related to the project.  
 
Most villages near the concession area are located on hill tops, as a consequence of the 
presence of riverblindness (onchocerciasis). The incidence of riverblindness in the area is 
presently very low, as a result of past and present riverblindness control programs. The 
project will address the issue of black flies (a vector for onchocerciasis) through the use 
of the pesticide permethrine.  A pest management plan is  being finalized as a part of 
appraisal and will be disclosed shortly.  
 
Dam Safety  
 
Consistent with OP 4.37, and according to ToRs developed in consultation with the 
relevant Bank specialist, a consultant has completed a review of the hydroelectric 
facilities at the Inga site dated February 2007. No significant concerns were identified, 
and a strengthened program of maintenance was recommended. SNEL will, as a result, 
strengthen its capacity to carry out dam safety activities regarding the Inga installations, 
as part of the Project. As the project involves an existing dam, the above study was 
carried out in compliance with OP 4.37. An EPP will be prepared by SNEL, with the 
support of an international consultant, early in project implementation (a covenant to this 
effect will be included in the project legal agreements).  
 
International Waterways  
 
OP7.50 applies to Projects that involve the use of international waterways. The Inga 
rehabilitation component (Component 1) will involve the use of the River Congo, an 
international waterway that DRC shares with 8 countries and, as such, OP7.50 does 
apply. However, the Inga dam is a "run of the river" plant, and the proposed activities 
(rehabilitation of the dam, dredging and reprofiling of the intake canal) will not modify 
the water volume nor its quality. On this basis, and as set out in paragraph 7(a) of 
OP7.50, this Project is exempt from the requirement to notify other riparian states about 
the Project, as the activities will alter neither the quality nor the quantity of the water 
flowing to other riparian states, nor will the Project be adversely affected by the other 
riparians' possible water use.  
 
Page  5
Cultural Property  
 
A
framework for managing cultural property was prepared and released to the infoshop 
in January 2007. Potential sensitive sites include caves in the vicinity of the project area.  
 
Transmission Line  
 
The transmission line from Inga to the Kingatoko substation in Kinshasa passes mostly 
through agricultural land. A sensitive forest area near the Inga hydropower station has 
been avoided. The transmission lines poses manageable environmental impacts which 
will be mitigated by the actions described in the Environmental and Social Management 
Plan (ESMP), part of the Project ESR Plan. The transmission line requires limited land 
acquisition. When the exact routing of the transmission line is known, a Resettlement 
Action Plan will be prepared in accordance with the guidelines of the Resettlement Policy 
Framework which was prepared during project preparation.  
 
Kinshasa Distribution Activities  
 
No negative social, environmental or resettlement issues are anticipated in relation to 
Project activities in Kinshasa to rehabilitate and build substations or to connect customers 
to the distribution grid.  
 
In summary, no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with the 
Project have been identified. The project has been categorized as Category B project, as a 
result of the expected moderate impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only potential relevant alternatives that were considered in Project design relate to 
the routing of the transmission line from Inga to Kinshasa. The line passes mostly 
through agricultural land. A sensitive forest area near the Inga site has been avoided. The 
transmission lines poses manageable environmental impacts which will be mitigated by 
the actions described in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Social, environmental and resettlement issues are addressed in the context of the 
Project?s ESR Plan, the set of six documents relating to environmental, social and 
resettlements aspects of the project, namely: (i) the Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) (ii) Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), (iii) the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), (iv) the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), (v) the Management of Cultural Heritage Framework (MCHF), and 
(vi) the executive summary. These documents set out the measures to be taken by the 
Page  6
borrower to manage relevant safeguard policy issues, at the level of individual Project 
components, including applicable environmental and social regulations.  
 
It is anticipated that an Environmental and Social Management Unit will be established 
within SNEL in order to manage the environmental and social impacts of the present 
project and other SNEL projects. It is assessed that with the establishment of this unit, the 
capacity exists in SNEL to fully implement the various aspects of the Project?s ESR plan.  
 
The contractor will prepare its own Environmental and Social Management Plan, which 
will be based on the Environmental and Social Management Plan prepared for the 
project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders, in addition to staff and management of SNEL and relevant officials in 
the Ministry of Energy and other government departments, include the population to 
benefit from increased access to cheaper and reliable power, including those with access 
to the 50,000 new connection points in Kinshasa, as well as those who may be affected 
by the physical activities undertaken during project. Potentially affected groups are 
limited to those who may live and/or derive livelihoods from land under the routing of 
the new transmission line from Inga to Kinshasa. The routing for the line has not yet been 
finalized and land acquisition will be required once the final route has been determined.  
 
The population who had the land use rights at the time of the construction of Inga 1 and 
Inga 2 has been adequately compensated. Most of these people live outside the 
concession. The rehabilitation of the Inga 1 and Inga 2 hydropower facilities does not 
involve any land acquisition or resettlement.  
 
Disclosure: all the relevant ESR Plan documents were disclosed in-country and in the 
Infoshop in Washington on January 18, 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2007 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/27/2007 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/16/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Final version of the PMP under review and release in-country and at the InfoShop 
expected in next week or so.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
No 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Page  8
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
03/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
03/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
03/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
03/27/2007 
Comments:   
