                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: 36284


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/22/2006

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Africa                                Project ID: P094084
Project Name: West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP)
Task Team Leader: Ismael S. Ouedraogo
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 2, 2006      Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2006
Managing Unit: AFTS4                           Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                               Loan
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (60%);General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (40%)
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Technology diffusion (P);Trade
facilitation and market access (P);Land administration and management (S);Biodiversity
(S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             54.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                1.00
        UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
(DFID)5.00
                                                                          6.00



B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed project will be the first phase of a 12-year Adaptive Program Lending (APL)
consisting of three phases, each lasting four years. The APL follows a dual approach: (i) a
"horizontal" approach, starting with IDA credit to four countries in phase I (Burkina Faso,
Ghana, Mali, Senegal) and expanding its geographic focus in each phase to cover all of
ECOWAS at program's end; and (ii) a "vertical deepening" approach, with progressively more
demanding activities in eachsubsequent phase. The programmatic approach fits the long-term
approach of both the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) and
the African Action Plan in the area of Technology Generation and Dissemination (TGD). Centers
of excellence, for example, will not mature within a single, short-term project.

 The development objective of the long term West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program
(WAAPP) is to increase agricultural productivity in West Africa through the improvement of
agricultural technology generation and dissemination at the national and regional levels.

 The development objectives of the first phase WAAPP (the Project) are to promote the
emergence of West African regional centers of excellence in TGD and strengthen the
coordination mechanisms for TGD at the regional level. The end of project outcomes would be
as follows: (i) at least two centers of excellence in TGD are established; and (ii) formalized
technology dissemination mechanisms are agreed upon by all ECOWAS member states.

 The global environment objective of the project is to contribute to the strategic objectives of
GEF operational programs on biodiversity, climate change and land degradation by contributing
incrementally to the establishment of the regional centers of excellence and regional cooperation
mechanisms for bio-safety and for land and water management, and by strengthening the
capacities of national institutions to join the regional approach.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project would support the following components:

 Component 1: Enabling Conditions for Regional Cooperation in TGD, aims at harmonizing the
policy and regulatory environment, formalizing the public/private partnerships and knowledge
sharing mechanisms, rehabilitating facilities (if necessary), and strengthening the institutional
capacities that are needed to establish sustainable national centers of excellence (COE) and
ensure an effective regional cooperation in TGD. Each COE will focus on a specific area (to be
determined during preparation, with assistance from FARA, the Forum for African Agricultural
Research). Key stakeholders include public policy bodies, the "agriculturalknowledge triangle"
(research, extension, university), producer organizations, private enterprises, and NGOs at the
regional and local levels. This component will fund consultant services (for assessments of
policies and regulations, TGD programs and sharing mechanisms), short-term training (to
improve technical skills in key institutions); workshops (for consensus building); civil works
(rehabilitation of facilities); and operating costs (of COEs). The sources of funds would be
mostly grants (GEF and trust funds) complemented by transfers from IDA credit recipients.

 Component 2: Technology Generation, will finance TGD at the local and regional levels. This
component will support competitive grants to promote agricultural TGD partnership initiatives
through centers of excellence, networks and national institutions. The competitive grants will
have a regional window (managed by a regional implementing agency) and national windows
(managed by national implementing agencies). The program will implement the AKIS paradigm
by encouraging researchers to cooperate with extension services and universities (faculty
members and students) to respond to farmers and agribusinesses'demand. To further add value
to national programs, the WAAPP will encourage partnerships across countries, both on the
supply side (research, extension, universities) and the demand side (farmer organizations, private
sector and civil society) to work on problems of common regional interest. Thus, each IDA
credit recipient will implement activities that will benefit both that country and the region. The
choice of eligible activities (to be determined during preparation) will follow the guiding
principles of the Framework for Africa Agricultural Productivity (FAAP) developed by FARA.

A tentative list could include the following: (i) development and dissemination of new
agricultural technologies or dissemination of quick impact agricultural technologies on-the-shelf,
including food technologies; (ii) TGD-related capacity building investments; (iii) agricultural
market and policy or regulatory analyses and dialogues; and (iv) agricultural education and
information systems improvement.

 Component 3: Project Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. This component
will strengthen the project management and M&E capacities of the implementing agencies at the
regional and national levels. This component will support operating costs, equipments, vehicles,
supplies, and training/workshops. The project will design an M&E system that will establish a
baseline against which to assess increases in agricultural productivity and competitiveness for the
target commodities. The sources of funds will be mostly grants (GEF and trust funds)
complemented by contributions from IDA credit recipients.

D. Project location (if known)
The APL starts with IDA credit to four countries in phase I (Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali,
Senegal) and expanding its geographic focus in each consecutive phases to cover all of the
fifteen member states of the Economic Community of West Africa States (ECOWAS) at
program's end.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The four participating countries (Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali and Senegal) have strengthened
their capacities for safeguard policies through several Bank-funded operations, particularly the
agricultural services and producer organizations projects linked to the WAAPP. The proposed
regional implementing agency, CORAF, has been in operation since 1987 and is likely to have
also developed such a capacity. The extent to which this capacity is adequate for the purpose at
hand will be ascertained during preparation. If required, measures will be taken to ensure that
CORAF develops an institutional capacity for safeguard policies satisfactory to IDA.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1)
    Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    The net social and environmental impact of the proposed project is expected to be positive
since it will generate environmentally and socially sound agricultural technologies. These
technologies are not yet known; nonetheless, the use of some of these technologies may trigger
some safeguards policies. The competitive grant process, used to fund the development of such
technologies, will include environmental and social screening, and should guard against the
potential negative impact of these technologies. To prepare the ground for these screenings and
other mitigating measures, the project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will examine the existing and potential environmental and
social risks associated with the generation of agricultural technology generation and
dissemination (TGD), and related increases in agricultural production in the region. The ESMF

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                            Yes               No              TBD
will build on the existing ESMF and related EA documents developed for the WAAPP-related
operations (agricultural services and producer organization projects) in the four participating
countries (Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali and Senegal). The project will disclose the ESMF,
together with the other related safeguards documents (Pest Management Plan, Policy
Resettlement Framework) at Infoshop and in the participating countries before appraisal and 120
days before Board Date.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                 X
    The adoption of agricultural intensification technologies could lead to increased use of
fertilizer, herbicides and pesticides with potential negative impact on the environment and
human health. Given the demand-driven nature of the project, the extent of such an increased
use cannot be known in advance. The project will prepare a Pest and Pesticide Management
Plan (PMP) to identify the potential risks and ways to mitigate them. As with the ESMF, this
document will build on the existing PMP developed for the WAAPP-related operations
(agricultural services and producer organization projects) in the four participating countries
(Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali and Senegal). The project will disclose the PMP at Infoshop and in
the participating countries before appraisal and 120 days before Board date.
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                                              X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X



Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: 08/15/2006

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: 10/02/2006

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
    Preparation of the Environmental and Social Assessment (ESMF) document and Pest and
    Pesticides Management (PPM).



1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

    TORs approved: July, 2006
    Consultants recruited: July, 2006
    Starting Date: August, 2006
    Completion Date : September, 2006
    Disclosure in Country: October, 2006
    Disclosure at Infoshop: October, 2006

    The Project will disclose these Safeguard Reporting Instruments at Infoshop and in the
   participating countries before appraisal and 120 days before the Board date.

IV. APPROVALS


 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Ismael S. Ouedraogo                       05/22/2006
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Warren Waters                             05/22/2006
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock                       05/22/2006
   Comments:

