Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2619
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P094103 
Project Name:  Regional Communications Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Laurent Besancon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Infrastructure 
services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
416.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: U - Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA) 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The RCIP Program, the CIP 1,2,3 and following CIP Projects have two development 
objectives (i) to support populations and businesses across the Eastern & Southern Africa 
region to have access to quality and affordable telecom services and (ii) making use of 
affordable capacity, contribute to improved efficiency and transparency of selected 
government functions through e-government applications. In addition to efficiency and 
improvements in public sector quality, these objectives will contribute to greater 
fiduciary accountability and improved governance in the public sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
Overall Program: Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP)  
 
The first Phase of the proposed RCIP 10 year horizontal APL includes Communications 
Infrastructure Projects 1, 2 and 3 (CIP 1, 2, 3) in the range of US$139m IDA volume, 
which is expected to reach the Board in the 1st quarter of 2007 and to include Kenya 
(CIP 1 or the Transparency & Communications Infrastructure Project, TCIP), Burundi 
(CIP 2) and Madagascar (CIP 3). Subsequent phases will reach the Board based on 
Page  2
readiness of countries applying for support under the Program as well as availability of 
IDA/IBRD financing.  Interested candidates include Malawi, Rwanda, Mozambique, 
Tanzania, Zambia, Lesotho, Uganda, DRC and Mauritius (IBRD). In the particular case 
of Mauritius, the activities may include submarine cable-related activities and would 
likely have to be treated as a related but altogether different project. It is also expected 
that other countries will accelerate their dialogue to use IDA funds once the first Phase 
moves to effectiveness. It is also expected that some relevant complementary country-
specific components will be added, on an opportunity- and readiness basis.  Estimate for 
the combined IDA volume for likely the above countries (except Mauritius) in the second 
and subsequent phases are in the order of US$277m.  
 
Overall, the Program is open to Angola, Botswana, Burundi, Comoros, DRC, Djibouti, 
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, 
Namibia, Rwanda, Seychelles, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, 
Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, provided these countries are eligible for IDA or IBRD 
financing at the time of their application for IDA/IBRD support under the Program.  A 
public website is being developed to facilitate this process (www.worldbank.org/rcip).  
 
Project Description  
 
The proposed World Bank Operation under RCIP aims at assisting E&SA countries to 
implement a strategy of effective regional connectivity and increased government 
efficiency through the use of this connectivity, by (i) offering technical assistance to 
promote further sector liberalization and resolve market efficiency gaps, (ii) leveraging 
private investment in the deployment of regional and national backbone infrastructure, as 
well as rural networks through public private partnership (PPP) arrangements, and (iii) to 
leverage the infrastructure to increase government efficiency and transparency through 
the selective deployment of key eGovernment services.  
 
To maximize flexibility and client-responsiveness in a multi-country environment, RCIP 
has been designed as a menu of options which individual Governments choose from in 
order to package their RCIP operation.  The proposed options include:  
 
Component 1: Enabling Environment, incl. Monitoring & Evaluation capacity-building  
 
This component will aim at promoting regional market integration and further sector 
liberalization through technical assistance and capacity building in specific 
telecommunications sector regulatory matters, as well as the design of the legal and 
regulatory framework for the information society. It will also involve support in the 
implementation of the program, notably through strengthening the Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) framework, building M&E capacity and supporting project 
communications. It is expected that common areas of technical assistance and capacity 
building initiatives (in particular training courses) can be implemented as multi-country 
activities.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Connectivity.  
 
This component will aim at supporting the deployment of regional connectivity through 
the following subcomponents: (a) financing the landing station or virtual landing station 
(for landlocked countries) for the submarine cable (dry portion), involving a small 
construction with limited infrastructure and telecom equipment; (b) financing the pre-
purchase of capacity on the regional infrastructure (both submarine and terrestrial) for 
schools, universities, hospitals, eGovernment and other priority targeted user groups; (c) 
leveraging private sector investment on the basis of PPPs, if required, in the deployment 
of regional and national terrestrial backbone networks; (d) financing the establishment of 
a
government virtual private network (GovNet) to cater to all the government 
communications needs (both data and voice/video); and (e) leveraging private sector 
investment on the basis of PPPs with competitive award of subsidies, if required, to 
extend the telecommunications and ICT infrastructure in rural areas and/or community-
driven ICT development.  
 
Component 3: Transparency ? eGovernment Applications.  
 
This component will aim at enabling governments to improve their internal systems, 
deliver services more efficiently and effectively, and make information more accessible 
to the citizenry. It will involve the development of five or six major government services 
which would be candidates for transition to eGovernment through the use of technology, 
business process re-engineering to streamline processes, and change management to 
ensure acceptance of the new methods of working. Selection of target applications will be 
prioritized based on potential impact in terms of transparency and accountability, 
existence of a change champion, possibility of private sector participation, high potential 
for quick success. Examples include public finance, procurement, inland revenue 
collection, customs, civil and business registries, property titling and vehicle/driver 
registrations, insurance, citizen?s ID cards, utility payments, and so forth.  
 
Component 4: Project Management.  
 
This component will support project management related issues, and may include 
elements such as support for management, procurement, financial management, M&E, 
and communications expertise, as well as support to conduct audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Under the new design, financing of submarine cables is not envisaged. A related 
submarine cable infrastructure, the East African Submarine Cable System (EASSy), is 
being financed by a consortium of private and public operators with the support of private 
sector branches of multiple DFIs, including IFC, AfDB, EIB, KfW, AFD and DBSA. As 
these activities are associated with this project, World Bank Group standards apply and a 
detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been conducted for the 
EASSy cable, which also includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP). The ESIA?s preliminary findings indicate that, while the EASSy cable route 
Page  4
passes within close proximity of a number of environmentally sensitive areas, the impacts 
likely to be generated in the cable laying are minimal, and are limited to the shallow 
water cable laying operation, for which detailed mitigation measures are outlined. With 
regards to onshore cable laying, the only potential impact arises from the construction of 
the beach manhole and the ducts to carry the cable to the landing (or terminal) station. 
However, in most of the countries this onshore infrastructure is already in place and 
requires minimal upgrades or extensions. Mitigation measures are outlined in the ESIA 
for the construction activities related to this onshore cable infrastructure up to the landing 
station.  
 
The physical components of the proposed World Bank project will mostly be limited to 
the building of national terrestrial backbones, rollout of rural networks, and of the landing 
stations, in the few cases where the latter might be required. No beach manholes or 
onshore cable infrastructure up to the landing station will be financed under the proposed 
World Bank project.  
 
The risks associated with this kind of infrastructure are generally low, and the project is 
therefore assigned to environmental category B under OP 4.01. Land acquisition for 
terrestrial facilities will likely trigger OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement considerations.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared for the overall program. Specific costed 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be 
prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities during project implementation, in line 
with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those facilities have been identified.  
The ESMF has been submitted for Bank review and publicly disclosed in the affected 
countries and InfoShop prior to appraisal.  The institutional responsibilities for preparing 
the various safeguards instruments would lie with the implementing agency of each 
participating country. Any specific required action for some of the Civil Works will be 
taken into account during project implementation.  Institutional responsibilities for 
preparing the safeguard assessment strategy will be defined closely with the Safeguards 
Team.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The physical components of this project will mostly be limited to the building of national 
backbones, rollout of rural networks, and of the landing stations. The risks associated 
with this kind of infrastructure are generally low, and the project is therefore assigned to 
environmental category B under OP 4.01. Land acquisition for terrestrial facilities will 
likely trigger OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement considerations.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework Plan (RPF) have been prepared for the overall program. At the 
individual country level, specific costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial 
facilities during project implementation, in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact 
locations of those facilities have been identified.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The program-level ESMF and RPF will be published in-country for each of the countries 
participating in the program, as and when they join the program. Once specific EMPs and 
RAPs have been drafted for each individual project and sub-project (if applicable), these 
Page  6
will be disclosed in-country and discussed with potential affected parties, in line with the 
parameters established in the ESMF and RPF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/06/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/09/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/09/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  7
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Besancon 
02/13/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
02/13/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
02/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/13/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter L. Smith 
02/13/2007 
Comments:   
