Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3014 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P106063 
Project Name: West Africa Regional Fisheries Project 
Task Team Leader: John Virdin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Environmental 
policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
14.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  25.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to sustainably increase the overall wealth generated by 
the exploitation of the marine fisheries resources of West Africa, and the proportion of that 
wealth captured by West African countries, by: (i) reducing illegal fishing, (ii) strengthening the 
countries’ capacity to sustainably govern and manage their fisheries, and (iii) increasing the 
value and profitability generated by fish resources and the proportion of that value captured by 
the countries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
coordinated approach at the regional level, rather than country by country, was selected in 
order to take into account the shared nature of the resource and the resource users.  Nonetheless, 
the activities would be largely implemented at the national level, in complement to initiatives 
supported by other donors.  
 
The financing for the proposed project would include both regional and national IDA funds, as 
well as GEF grants from the Strategic Partnership for Fisheries in Africa.  
Page  2
The lending instrument for the proposed project would be a horizontal and vertical Adaptable 
Program Loan (APL), implemented in several phases over a period of 15 years, with the 
possibility to expand the number of participating countries during implementation, for example 
to include Liberia or Cote d’Ivoire.  The use of an APL instrument would link the availability of 
financing for subsequent phases of the program to the implementation of specific governance 
and management reforms in fisheries, following similar experiences around the world.  These 
experiences generally have shown that while much can be accomplished in a short period such as 
five years, for example towards reducing illegal fishing, improving the health of the resources 
and strengthening governance and management measures and policies, in order for these gains to 
be truly sustained and the full policy and institutional reforms implemented, a long-term 
commitment on the order of 15 years is required.  As such, a vertical APL would proceed based 
on the realization of key triggers, which would further support the implementation of needed 
reforms.  
 
The objectives of the proposed project would be achieved through: (i) strengthening national 
capacity to manage the marine fish resources in accord with regional policies, (ii) reducing 
illegal fishing activities, and (iii) creating conditions for a greater contribution by the marine fish 
resources to the economic growth of the countries of West Africa.  In terms of the process of 
implementation, reducing illegal fishing activities would be the immediate priority of the 
proposed project, as the success of such efforts will determine the capacity of the countries to 
implement policies and measures aimed at managing the fisheries, and therefore the potential 
returns the resources can generate.  
 
The following components would be envisaged:  
 
Component 1.  Good Governance and Sustainable Management of the Fisheries  
 
This component would support the implementation of the policies described in the CSRP 
Strategic Action Plan for the management of the marine fish resources, in particular through 
reinforcing the capacity of the countries to: (i) develop and enforce national fisheries policies 
that define clear objectives for the use of the resources, (ii) develop and implement 
corresponding resource management plans, (iii) create clear processes for wide stakeholder 
consultation and increased responsibility in sector management. This component would also 
support activities aimed at strengthening the management of fishing effort, and the development 
and implementation of a system of access rights to the resources.  Lastly, as a result of demands 
from the countries of the region, this component would also support continued political dialogue 
on foreign fishing agreements between the countries as well as with third party states.  
 
Component 2.  Reduction of Illegal Fishing  
 
This component would support the means to reduce the illegal fishing activities threatening the 
sustainable management of the marine fish resources.  More specifically, the component would 
strengthen the monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) systems in each country and their 
adaptation to the needs of a regionally-coordinated approach.  The project would also support the 
definition, implementation and regularly upgrading of national MCS plans, as well as the tools 
for their implementation, based on criteria of financial and technical efficiency (for example 
fisheries monitoring centers, satellite-based vessel monitoring system, etc., as described in the 
Page  3
CSRP Strategic Action Plan).  Such investments in MCS would be based on the prerequisite 
creation of mechanisms to ensure sustainable financing of recurrent costs of the system.  
 
Component 3.  Increasing the Contribution of the Marine Fish Resources to the Local 
Economies  
 
This component would support the identification and implementation of measures to increase 
the benefits from fish resources, by increasing the captured share of the value-added and by 
selling fishing rights to foreign fleets at their correct value, in agreement with national sector 
policy objectives.  
 
Component 4.  Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation and Financial Management  
 
The institutional arrangements for coordination of the proposed project, as well as monitoring 
and evaluation and financial management would be determined in the course of preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
West Africa: Mauritania, Senegal, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Cape Verde, Sierra Leone 
and Ghana.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As a regional project, the borrowers' institutional capacity for safeguard policies varies 
tremendously from country to country. Countries such as Senegal and Ghana have much greater 
institutional capacity to ensure adherence to safeguard policies, in comparison to countries such 
as Guinea-Bissau or Sierra Leone. For this reason, the regional structure mandated with 
supporting the management of marine fish resources, the Commission Sous-Regionale des 
Pêches (CSRP), will be used to help coordinate and supervise implementation. While the final 
institutional arrangements for the implementation of the project have still to be determined, a full 
review of the capacity of the CSRP is expected during preparation, as well as of the various 
Borrower agencies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While impacts are not currently known, the project would likely be expected to conduct an 
environmental assessment and an environmental and social management framework.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project would support countries to safeguard and protect key natural habitats critical to 
the health of the marine fish stocks, and such efforts could trigger the safeguard. Any potential 
impacts would be addressed at the country level through existing country systems, with support 
from the regional Commission Sous-Regional des Pêches (CSRP) who would also provide 
notification in disputed zones and international waters.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Based on experiences with management of marine fish resources in the region, for example 
in Senegal with the GIRMaC, the project's support of increased restrictions on the use of the 
resources would be expected to trigger this safeguard. The project would develop a Process 
Framework for ensuring that stakeholders and users are involved in the decision-making process 
over these resources, as well as are compensated for any losses resulting from use restrictions.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project could trigger this safeguard due to the exploitation of marine fish resources in 
shared waters, which would be targeted by the project.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
The same feature of the project as indicated above could apply to this safeguard, in the event 
of disputed waters between countries (e.g. Senegal and Guinea-Bissau), or disputes over shared 
fish resources.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/01/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The studies would hopefully be launched by September 1, 2007, and completed by February 
1, 2008, to be disclosed both in the country and at the Bank infoshop, prior to appraisal.  
Notification to riparian countriees will also be completed before appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Virdin 
06/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/26/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Renato Nardello 
06/26/2007 
Comments:   
