Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC366 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/29/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P074011 
Project Name: Regional Eastern Nile Power Project - Stage 1:  Ethiopia-Sudan 
Interconnector 
Task Team Leader: Philippe Charles Benoit 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 7, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 BORROWING 
AGENCY 
30.00
31.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project's long-term development objective is to promote regional power trade through 
coordinated planning and development of power generation and transmission interconnections in 
the context of multi-purpose water resources development in the Eastern Nile region. The short-
term objective of the project is to take advantage of the hydro-thermal complementarity of the 
two systems to improve the availability and reliability of supply in the two countries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have two components:  
 
A. Construction of transmission interconnection between Ethiopia and Sudan.  This component 
will include the following four sub-components:  
 
-
The construction of a 321km, 230 kV line from Gonder in Ethiopia to Gedaref in Sudan. The 
Bank will only provide financing to the construction of the Ethiopian portion of the line from 
Page  2
Gonder to Metema (approx 171 km). This sub-component will also include supervision during 
construction of the line.  
 
-
Substation expansion and rehabilitation. This subcomponent consists of the extensions of 
Bahir Dar and Gonder substations in Ethiopia and Gedaref substation in Sudan. The Bank will 
only provide financing for the rehabilitation and expansion of substations in Ethiopia.  
 
-
Fiber optics telecommunications system and supervisory control and data acquisition 
(SCADA). This sub-component includes installations at the end stations in both countries and 
one repeater installation in Ethiopia.  
 
-
Implementation of the Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), and Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs)in both Ethiopia and Sudan, to mitigate the risks associated with the construction of 
the transmission line. The EMP will include mitigation, management and monitoring measures to 
be taken during implementation and operation of the transmission interconnection, which are 
aimed at offsetting or reducing adverse environmental and social impacts. The Bank will only 
support the implementation of the EMP and RAP in Ethiopia including payment of 
compensation, but will supervise the implementation of the EMP and RAP in Sudan, to be 
financed under another arrangement.  
 
B. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building: This component will support the 
establishment of operating rules for the interconnected system and the training of personnel in 
power system planning and design, and interconnected system operation and regulation in the 
two countries. A properly functioning protection system in the existing EEPCo and NEC 
networks is a pre-requisite for a reliable operation of the interconnection. A review study of the 
existing protection system and necessary improvements will be undertaken as part of this 
component.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Four routing options for the transmission line between Ethiopia and Sudan where investigated in 
a
Feasibility Study prepared in September 1995 and in a Feasibility Study Update recently 
completed:  
 
.
Option A: Ghedo-Nekemte-Ghimbi-Kurmuk-Roseires (614 km)  
 
.
Option B1: Debre Markos-Injibara-Roseires (428 km)  
 
.
Option B2: Bahar Dar-Injibara-Roseires (405km)  
 
.
Option C: Gonder - Metema - Gedaref (321 km)  
 
Option B1, with the lowest total cost and acceptable technical performance was recommended 
as the least-cost tie solution in a 1995 Feasibility Study.  Option C (a modified version of the 
route recommended by the Update Feasibility Study) was only briefly considered at that time.  
 
The Update Feasibility Study, taking into account operational, social, environmental, and cost 
considerations as well as new developmnents in the two national power systems,  recommended 
Option C from Gonder to Gedaref as the most cost effective route for the interconnection 
between the two national systems.  
 
Option C is the shortest of all the routes considered and it has been under much more human 
development compared with route B. The environmental mitigation measures are more 
manageable in the proposed route . The route is also located in regions of Ethiopia and Sudan 
Page  3
where there is dispersed settlements and where there will be manageable impact to Project 
Affected Peopple (PAP).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
EEPCo in Ethiopia has extensive experience in implementing power sector projects, including 
environmental management plans. ENTRO, the joint project coordinating unit, has employed 
environmental experts to support NEC and EEPCo.  The capacity of NEC and EEPCo in these 
areas will be further evaluated during project preparation. The Bank will supervise 
implementation of the Environmental Management Plans and the Resettlement Action Plans in 
both countries.  
 
In addition, the Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be evaluated during 
project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project's impacts are expected to be minimal and of temporary nature. EMPs are being 
prepared for both Ethiopia and Sudan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The EMPs are looking if natural habitats will be affected but preliminary ESIA reports show 
no impacts on critical natural habitats.    
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project is estimated to affect a total of 256 households in Ethiopia. In Sudan we only 
know so far that approximately 15 households will need to relocate physically while a total of 
607.6 hectares will be affected. A RAP has been prepared for Ethiopia and we are expecting a 
RAP for Sudan.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2006 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EMP and RAP for both Ethiopia and Sudan will be disclosed in the countries and at the 
Infoshop by September 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
06/21/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/26/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
06/23/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
