Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1940 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P084404 
Project Name: Southern African Power Market Program (APL2) 
Task Team Leader: Wendy E. Hughes 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 19, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project are to: (i) strengthen regional power integration by connecting 
Malawi, one of the few remaining unconnected members of SAPP, thus allowing Malawi to 
receive and contribute to benefits of the regional power market; (ii) enable Mozambique to earn 
export revenues from wheeling charges and expand opportunities for power trading.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will comprise the following three components: (A) Interconnection ($60 million); 
(B) Power System Reinforcement and Rehabilitation ($15 million); (C) Institutional 
Development and Capacity Building (5 million).  
 
(A) Interconnection (US$60 million) ,  
 
Based on the feasibility study, the scope will consist of:  
 
-
Construction of a 200 km 220 kV double-circuit line, fitted with a fiber-optic cable, 
between Matambo in Mozambique and Phombeya in Malawi.  
 
-
Extension of Matambo Substation to accommodate two 220 kV feeders.  
 
-
Construction of a new 220/132 kV substation at Phombeya.  
 
-
Landmine clearing  
Page  2
-
Compensation for resettlement.  
 
-
Engineering and supervision of the interconnection component.  
 
(B) Power system reinforcement and rehabilitation ($15 million)  
 
-
Critical rehabilitation or reinforcement of the Malawi network needed to efficiently 
evacuate the additional power supplied through the interconnection.  
 
-
Assessment of further rehabilitation / reinforcement needs to support improved 
performance and access expansion, (to be financed under the Malawi Energy Sector Project).  
 
(C) Institutional development and capacity building ($5 million)  
 
-
Operation and maintenance practices improvement: Update of codes of practice, work 
procedures, and manuals for transmission and distribution, and training of operational staff in 
their use;  
 
-
Studies: e.g., update of the ESCOM generation and transmission master plan; further 
regional inter-connections (this would be coordinated with work being undertaken by the SAPP 
Coordination Center).  
 
-
ESCOM Financial performance improvement:  Consultant services and training for: (i) 
implementation of a financial and operational performance enhancement plan, and (ii) 
implementation of a revenue management strategy.  
 
16.  The preliminary total project costs are estimated at US$ 80 million.  The project would be 
financed by two IDA Credits to the Governments of Malawi and Mozambique, contributions by 
the two utilities, and possibly other development partners that have expressed interest, such as 
AfDB and Norway.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in north-west Mozambique and southern Malawi.  The major proposed 
investments are (i) upgrade of an existing sub-station at Matambo, near Tete in Mozambique, (ii) 
construction of a new approximately 200km transmission line west from Matambo to Phombeya 
in Malawi, 124km in Mozambique, 76km in Malawi (the exact routing of the line is not 
determined.  More detailed information will be obtained at an early stage of project 
implementation); (iii) construction of a new substation at Phombeya in Malawi.  It is also 
proposed to finance some critical rehabilitation / strengthening of the transmission and 
distribution networks, for example rehabilitation of the two 66 kV wood-pole lines from Nkula/ 
Tedzani to Mapanga, and provision of adequate interconnection between main supply points in 
Blantyre and Lilongwe.  The extent of T&D rehabilitation and strengthening to be included in 
this project will de determined during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
EdM has experience in implementing WB and other development partner-funded investment 
projects.  EdM has a small unit dedicated to social and environmental issues, and many EdM 
staff and managers have been exposed to on-the-job training. Typically, however, EdM relies on 
consultants to assess the environmental and social impacts of investments, prepare mitigation 
plans and supervise contractors to ensure compliance.  
 
Page  3
A
similar arrangement is in place at ESCOM, although ESCOM has had less recent experience 
with environmental and resettlement safeguard practices of WB and other development partners.  
 
Under the project, TA for strengthening EdM and ESCOM capacity on environmental and 
social issues would be included as necessary.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTEG) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
see section III, part C for explanation   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
see section III, part C for explanation   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
see section III, part C for explanation   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
see section III, part C for explanation   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EIA and RPF related to the Inter-connector component.  At this stage, in both countries, the 
exact route of the new transmission line is not specified so the extent of land acquisition and / 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
or resettlement is not known.  This information will become available at an early stage of 
detailed project design.  Hence, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is needed for each 
country.  A RPF for Malawi was prepared, cleared and disclosed in 2004. This RPF will be 
updated as needed, reviewed and re-disclosed before appraisal. An RPF for the Mozambique 
part will be prepared and disclosed before the appraisal mission takes place.  Prior to 
commencement of construction of the transmission line and associated sub-stations, RAPs 
will be prepared.  
 
The Environmental Impact Assessment for the Malawi part of the Transmission line and 
associated substations was cleared for disclosure in 2004. It will be updated as needed and re-
disclosed.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report for the Mozambique side is 
currently under review. Environmental Management Plans will be prepared and implemented 
as a component of the contracts for construction of the transmission line and associated sub-
stations.  
 
The site of the new sub-station in Phombeya, Malawi has been identified.  A Land 
Acquisition Assessment for the site will be conducted during the pre-appraisal mission in 
December, 2006.  Based on its results and if needed, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will 
be prepared, cleared and disclosed before the appraisal mission takes place.  
 
Power system reinforcement and rehabilitation component.  Both RPFs above will cover the 
power system reinforcement and rehabilitation component in case, unexpectedly, land 
acquisition is required.  During preparation of the project the requirements for strengthening 
of the internal transmission and distribution networks will be determined.  The project will 
finance the associated Environmental Assessments and preparation of the environmental 
management plans and/or RAPs as required.  These will be completed, reviewed by the Bank 
and disclosed in country and in the Infoshop prior to award the construction contracts.  
 
Implementation experience under APL 1 will be reviewed to ensure that any lessons learned 
will be incorporated when revising and preparing RFP, EMPs and RAPs.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Wendy E. Hughes 
12/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/18/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
12/20/2006 
Comments:   
