Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2973 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/21/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P091099 
Project Name: ENSAP: Water Shed Project 
Task Team Leader: Astrid Hillers 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (40%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
Global Environment Facility - IBRD as Implementing Agency 
6.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
30.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
46.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
As agreed by the Nile Basin institutions, the overall goal of the program is to develop a 
sustainable, transboundary framework for watershed management in the Eastern Nile basins and 
to improve natural-resource based livelihoods and reduce land degradation in selected 
watersheds.  
 
Specific development objectives of the program are to  
 
?
Develop and sustain a mechanism for generation and exchange of information and 
expertise for decision making on the management of the natural resources of the Eastern Nile  
 
?
Implement successful model interventions for livelihoods based catchment management.  
 
Page  2
This program objective directly links to the global objectives of the Strategic Investment 
Program for Sustainable Land Management in Sub-Saharan Africa (SIP) in addressing the 
incremental costs of the Eastern Nile transboundary development plans to improve the integrated 
management of shared land and water resources. In that it advances and enhances the regional 
institution to advance SLM though combined community based measures, policy dialogue, and 
strengthening coalitions on the regional and national level. It also aims at improving natural 
resource based livelihoods in the Eastern Nile Sub-basins by preventing and reversing land 
degradation and preventing climate vulnerability to farmers, e.g. through crop diversification, 
water harvesting, increasing soil moisture retention and improved access to credit.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The overall goal of the proposed program is to assist Egypt, Sudan, and Ethiopia to develop and 
implement coordinated approaches and planning frameworks for integrated land and water 
management in selected watersheds in the Eastern Nile to improve environmental management 
and the living standards of local communities. The program would have two sub-programs ? (a) 
Regional Cooperative Action; and (b) Strategic Watershed Investments ? which represent two of 
the program priorities that have emerged from the on-going Cooperative Regional Assessment 
(CRA) process being undertaken by the Eastern Nile Technical Regional Office (ENTRO). The 
CRA process is a practical tool to: (a) identify, assess, and foster opportunities for cooperative 
actions among the riparian countries of the Eastern Nile; and (b) optimize the benefits of 
cooperation and promote synergistic effects of interventions across sectors. The Cooperative 
Program for Transboundary Watershed Management is, therefore, aimed at supporting system-
wide change at the level of the shared sub-basins in the Eastern Nile to enable integrated 
management of land and water resources.  
 
1. Sub-program 1 ? Regional Cooperative Action (approx. 5 ? 6 million): The Regional 
Cooperative Action sub-program is aimed at enhancing the capacity of relevant institutions in the 
three countries and the existing regional Eastern Nile institution, (ENTRO), to facilitate 
exchange of information and expertise on watershed management and ecosystem health, as well 
as on the mainstreaming sustainable land management into planned large infrastructure 
investments in the Eastern Nile watershed.  It will thus strengthen African owned institutions and 
national coalitions to upscale SLM in the larger regional investment and development plans.  
 
Specific activities to be implemented under this sub-program are outlined below:  
 
?
Regional coordination and cooperation: Development of mechanisms for exchange of 
expertise, such as staff exchange, to facilitate continued networking and technical cooperation on 
watershed management among experts from the riparian countries.  This component will be 
coordinated by ENTRO.  
 
?
Regional information management & expertise to support planning: Establishment of a 
regional function/unit acting as active promoter for exchange of information and as a repository 
of knowledge on the Eastern Nile on SLM and related issues. This function would be anchored 
within the existing Eastern Nile institutional structures; its responsibilities would include 
knowledge management and dissemination as well as providing advice and technical 
backstopping to respective agencies at national level as well as national Nile Basin Initiative 
(NBI) offices. It could also provide small grants to support research on key topics relevant to 
sound environmental management and climate change adaptation in the Eastern Nile. It would 
Page  3
also promote and/or pilot innovative public goods financing mechanisms, such as payment for 
environment services, bio-carbon and other carbon finance, etc.  
 
?
Identify & facilitate priority regional investments and interventions. The ongoing CRA is 
leading to initial recommendations for strategic investments in sustainable land management 
from a regional opportunities & benefits view. The regional program/function would keep the 
CRA alive as an ongoing process leading to advice on investments & adapting to evolving 
regional needs. It may include provision of small, matching funds to provide technical support on 
competitive basis for the development of project concepts by national agencies.  
 
?
Regional sediment monitoring: Establishment of a harmonized regional/networked 
sediment monitoring system in the riparian countries to assess trends in soil erosion and sediment 
load. The system would be established in a phased way to ensure sustainability and be linked 
with other Eastern Nile institutional units monitoring flood/flow.  
 
?
Regional M&E framework: A robust M&E system would be established to monitor 
trends and the impacts of various watershed management interventions on promoting sustainable 
land and water management practices, improving ecosystem health, rural livelihoods and 
incomes, etc. The Eastern Nile M&E system will incorporate key indicators and M&E 
tools/indices of the SIP.  
 
2. Sub-program 2 ? Strategic Watershed Investments (approx. 60 - 80 million): The Strategic 
Watershed Investments sub-program is aimed at addressing bottlenecks to sustainable land and 
water management through targeted interventions to: (a) reverse devegetation and deforestation; 
(b) improve and sustain agriculture productivity; and (c) improve natural resource based 
livelihoods, through increasing rural household incomes and (d) reduce erosion, sedimentation 
and siltation. It therefore directly contributes to the attainment of MDG 1 to eradicate extreme 
poverty and hunger in the project areas and MDG 7 to enhance environmental sustainability.  
 
This sub-program would focus on the following model activities (sub-program components) 
which have already been endorsed by the three riparian countries. Sites were selected through an 
evaluation process based on a set of shared criteria. Lessons from these models would facilitate 
scaling-up of sound watershed management practices across the Eastern Nile watershed. Type of 
interventions may include local institutional strengthening; water harvesting & small scale rain-
fed agricultural production; soil fertility management; improved grazing & range management; 
reforestation/agro-forestry/increased vegetation cover; alternative energy; access to productive 
capacity for women and other vulnerable groups; and mechanisms to decrease vulnerability to 
climate shocks. The interventions will provide an opportunity to develop a sub-basin based 
subset of a future country-wide Country Strategic Investment Framework (CSIF) and will 
strengthen country based coalitions in- and outside governments.  
 
?
Ethiopia: Integrated watershed management. Interventions to be implemented would 
focus on community-based watershed management activities in three sub-watersheds of the 
Eastern Nile, specifically in Lake Tana.. The objective of this component is to maintain eco-
systems functions of the Lake as well as protect large infrastructure development planned around 
the Lake Tana through reducing erosion and sedimentation, as well as assuring that rural 
population benefit form development around a planned ?Tana-Growth-Pole?.The project would 
be part of the larger IDA-financed Tana Beles Integrated Water Resources Development 
Page  4
(TBIWRD) Project. Interventions are part of the EN regional agenda, yet on the other hand will 
maintain close cooperation and represent a sub-set of the Ethiopia Country SLM interventions.  
 
?
Sudan: Sustainable Land Management: Targeted community based watershed activities 
would focus on areas of key needs, build on existing local knowledge and actions, and represent 
a
range of landscapes and issues in Sudan. Pilot sites include the lower Atbara reaches, areas 
surrounding the Dinder National Park, and the Ingessena Mountains (Bau locality; bordering 
Southern Blue Nile State). [a site in Southern Sudan possibly to be added].  
 
?
Egypt: Sedimentation in Lake Nasser. This set of activities would involve further 
enhancement of the existing sediment monitoring network to assess the impact of up-stream 
interventions on the lake and a Lake Nasser/Nubia Management Framework for sustainable 
economic and social development in the lake area without endangering unique ecosystems. It 
would also facilitate the formulation of strategies to prevent additional direct deposit from sand 
encroachment and siltation from upstream sources.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The regional component will be anchored at ENTRO. Physical interventions will be limited to a 
number of key monitoring stations. The country absed activities cover distinct locations: Ribb, 
Gumera, and Jama Watersheds in Ethiopia; Lower Atbara, Dinder area, and Ingessena in Sudan; 
and lake Nasser/Nuba spanning between Egypt and Sudan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrowers institutional capacity for implementation of safeguard policies varies among 
countries. While Ethiopia has implemented a number of similar community based activties 
successfully; Sudan has little track record on successful implementation and weak institutional 
capacity. The experience on resettlement is especially weak; resettlement issues expected in this 
project are limited to possible small scale temporary area closures. Egypt is the most advanced in 
terms of institutional capacity and has solid experience and track record in implementing 
safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
Ms Astrid Hillers (AFTWR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An ESMF will be prepared for the project to cover community based interventions as well as 
outline EA process for possible small scale water storage structures.  Chapters will address 
specific implementation issue for activities on regional and national levels and refer to the 
country specific institutional and legal frameworks. These will be translated in relevant 
languages and the ESMF disclosed in all three countries. Issues that relate to safeguards marked 
as not triggered will be listed on an ?exclusion list? in the ESMF (e.g. acquisition of pesticides 
under the project will not be funded). Chance find procedures and procedures to follow in case of 
unforeseen circumstances will be specified in order for the project to be able to handle such 
issues systematically.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project will support conservation and protection efforts in Dinder national park. I is not 
expected that any conversion of protected areas is involved; yet there are ten villages presently 
within the national park boundaries and handling of this needs tBD with the government   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The social assessment will determine whether the group inhabiting Dinder Park in Sudan is 
deemed Indigenous using the WB policy criteria.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
RPF will be prepared to address situation e.g. in case of temporary local area closures.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project is supporting sustainable land management measures in selcted Eastern Nile 
watersheds. This will likley involve a limited number of water harvesting and small scale 
storages. while these are minor, do not store stream and only cature rainwater, this may be seen 
as a minue implication to the overall water balance. Hence OP 7.50 is triggered. The project was 
adopted in concept at the Nile Council of Ministers meeting in 2001. Notification on deatiled 
project design will be carried through the Nile Basin Initiative secretariat at early stages of 
preparation.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/10/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The national project coordinators within the Ministries of Water Resources in Egypt, 
Ethiopia, and Sudan will be responsible for disclosing safeguard related studies at the project 
sites/in-country (ESMF, Resettlement Policy Framework, and other as needed); these 
documents are expected to be available in final draft in November/December 2007.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Astrid Hillers 
08/21/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
08/21/2007 
Comments:   
