                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                           Report No: AC2410
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/14/2006
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: SOUTH AFRICA                                      Project ID: P080600
Project: Durban Landfill Gas-to-Electricity Project        Task Team Leader: Arun P. Sanghvi
Authorized to Appraise Date: August 16, 2004               IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 11, 2004                               IDA Amount ($m):
                                                           Global Supplemental Amount ($m):
                                                           Prototype Carbon Fund ($m): 2.77
Managing Unit: AFTEG                                       Sector: Renewable energy (85%); Solid waste
Lending Instrument:                                        management (15%)
Status: Lending                                            Theme: Climate change (P); Infrastructure services
                                                           for private sector development (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
    The Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF), administered by the World Bank, supports projects that
    generate greenhouse gas emission reductions while complying with the requirements of the
    Clean Development Mechanism.

    The development objective of the Durban Landfill Gas to Energy Project is to reduce
    greenhouse gas emissions through the use of landfill gas to generate electricity from the La
    Mercy and Mariannhill landfill sites located within the boundaries of the eThekwini
    Municipality (South Africa). The Durban Solid Waste (DSW), the municipality-owned entity
    responsible for management and operation of all landfills in the Durban metropolitan area, is
    the developer of this project. The eThekwini Municipality, formerly known as Durban, is the
    project sponsor.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
    The proposed project consists of an enhanced collection of landfill gas from the La Mercy
    and Mariannhill landfill sites and the use of the recovered gas to generate electricity. The
    produced electricity will be fed into the municipal grid and replace electricity that the
    municipal electric company (Durban Metro Electricity) is currently buying from other
    suppliers. This will include displacing coal-fired energy purchased from the national grid by
    the Durban Metro Electricity. Power purchase discussions have been initiated between DSW
    and Durban Metro Electricity with no technical hurdles identified. The project will result in
    DSW installing 2 MW of combined generating capacity.

    The power generation system for the two sites of the proposed project will include:
    engine-driven generator set; control system; cooling system; fuel supply and gas filtration
    system; generator set accessories; generator set housing; and system control and switch gear.
    All electricity generation facilities will be installed within the boundaries of each of the landfill
    site. The overall voltage supply will be 11kV to connect to the local grid via overhead
    transmission lines or underground cables.

                                                        2
                                                                                                          ISDS




     The Mariannhill landfill is an active landfill site where waste will be deposited until 2024. It
     extends over 49 ha and receives 550 to 700 tonnes of municipal solid waste per day. To date,
     the Mariannhill landfill has received approximately 850,000 tonnes of waste.

     The La Mercy landfill is an old rehabilitated landfill site containing about 1 million tonnes of
     solid waste. It was recently closed and is equipped with passive venting.

     The proposed Durban Landfill Gas to Energy Project will contribute towards the city's
     sustainable waste        management. With the envisaged contribution from the PCF, the project
     will newly implement landfill gas recovery at La Mercy and substantially upgrade the
     collection system at Mariannhill where 6 wells have been installed as a pilot activity. This will
     allow for the maximum collection of generated methane that would not be affordable
     otherwise. Thus the project will help lower greenhouse gas emissions by capturing the
     methane emitted by decaying waste, and by substituting LFG for fossil fuels in generating
     electricity. The generation capacities proposed to be installed at these sites are 1.5 MW and
     0.5 MW at Mariannhill and La Mercy, respectively.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
      Durban is located in the southeast region of South Africa on the coast of the Indian Ocean.

     The landfill sites that constitute the project are both within the municipal boundaries of
     Durban, today known as the eThekwini Municipality (located within the Province of
     KwaZulu-Natal). The Durban metropolitan area is South Africa's second-largest industrial
     hub and one of the country's fastest growing urban centres. It covers 1,366 km2 and has a
     current population of about 2.3 million.

     The La Mercy site is situated 35 km north of Durban. There are no communities living within
     close proximity to the La Mercy landfill. However, there are communities living adjacent to
     the Mariannhill landfill site, which is located about 20 km to the west of Durban Metro area.

     A World Bank safeguards mission looked at the social dynamics surrounding the project in
     detail and identified developing a good relationship between the community and DSW is a
     key social issue that would need to be addressed and maintained. For example, a member of
     the public submitted an appeal against the Records of Decision (RoDs) issued for the sites at
     La Mercy and Mariannhill. One of the issues raised in the appeal relates to the design criteria
     applied to the spark ignition engines to be adopted by the project and the specification of
     actual exhaust emissions. The appeal demands the inclusion of dioxin and furans in analyzing
     the project's atmospheric impacts. Although the appeal was rejected by the Provincial
     Department of Agriculture and Environmental Affairs (DAEA) in early 2005 after a
     five-month review period, existing conditions of project approval were amended on account
     of the issues raised. Consequently, the Mariannhill and La Mercy landfill sites were granted
     authorization to proceed but only as `pilot projects'.

                                                   3
                                                                                                 ISDS


     Based on new information demonstrating that the La Mercy and Mariannhill landfills will not
     result in substandard air quality, the `pilot project' restriction has recently been removed and
     the original RoDs were amended in November 16, 2005. All these decisions were based on
     the findings of the Air Quality Impact Assessment conducted by Enviros Consulting for the
     proposed project, which concludes that "the predicted concentrations of the modeled
     substances (e.g., dioxins and furans) for combustion releases (landfill gas engines and flares)
     are within acceptable limits as defined by air quality standards proposed for use in Germany
     (there is no South African standard) and the impact on ambient concentrations in the vicinity
     is negligible. In the amended RoDs, it was noted that "the content of the new information
     indicates that the air quality impacts associated with the landfill gas project will not only be
     acceptable, but will apparently improve the ambient quality of the air."


     The actual dioxin and furan emissions from flare and engine exhaust emissions will be
     monitored using extractive sampling to sorbent tube separated by high resolution gas
     chromatography (HRGC), and measured by high resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS).

     The WHO and World Bank air quality guidelines, which are slightly more stringent than the
     South African air quality standards and guidelines, were employed in the air quality study,
     following a conservative approach.

     The DAEA submitted the new information to the only appellant to the original RoDs for his
     comment.

The foregoing example illustrates the municipality's efforts to achieve improved relation with the
community. The high-priority being given to public participation in the environmental assessment
process will ensure that similar important concerns are identified clearly and addressed
substantively. Such commitment should eventually lead to further improvement in relations.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: : In general, the potential adverse environmental impacts associated with the two project
sites are minimal and site-specific in nature. None of them are expected to be irreversible and there
are mitigation measures readily known and available to address them. On the basis of this analysis,
the La Mercy and Mariannhill sites are categorized as a B project.


     A World Bank safeguards team (which consisted of a senior environmental specialist, a
     consultant social specialist and an anthropologist) examined documentation relating to the
     management of the landfills and visited the landfill sites during September 2003. Based on the
     information provided to the mission at that stage, and the landfill management practices they
     observed, the mission found no reason to believe that the proposed project at the La Mercy
     and Mariannhill landfill sites would present a significant or unmitigatable risk to the
     environment and human health. The Environmental Scoping Reports undertaken for these
     two sites had not identified any adverse impacts of project activities on landscape and
     biodiversity, and concluded that sufficient information had been made available for the RoDs

                                                        4
                                                                                                       ISDS


     to be rendered by DAEA.

C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     The implementation of the project is expected to lead to a number of positive impacts in the
     locality.

     These include:

·       Improved air quality by displacing grid-supplied electricity and thereby reducing emissions
related to coal-fired power production;
·       Improved protection of the area's groundwater resources as a result of all gas capturing
systems being equipped for leachate removal;
·       Reduced potential for methane migration and its associated impacts from the landfill site
(e.g., through inclusion of a methane monitoring system as required in the RoDs); and,
·       Reduced potential for odor related impacts due to the reduction in volume of landfill gas
being vented passively.

     In terms of negative environmental impacts, it is important to assess them based on the
     construction, operational and decommissioning phases of the project.

     The construction phase at the sites will involve the construction of wells and pipe work to
     extract the gas, general landfill site maintenance, construction of minor new roads and
     construction of the flare and engine compound. All these activities will occur within the
     boundaries of the existing landfill sites. The impacts associated with the construction phase of
     the project will therefore include minor increased traffic, some noise, dust and the increased
     potential for health and safety incidents that may occur on site. All the construction activities

                                               5
                                                                                             ISDS


and their likely environmental impacts will be managed as part of the Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) that have to be produced for each of the sites and through the
implementation of eThekwini Municipality's "Standard Environmental Management Plan for
Civil Engineering Construction Projects".

During the operational phase of the project, potential impacts include increased noise and air
emissions from the generators that will be installed on site. During the operational phase it is
also expected that community concerns around management and closure of the sites are
addressed adequately to avoid any conflict between the community and DSW. The
municipality has given a clear indication that it will be addressing these issues; and also, they
will be part of the Bank's ongoing environmental and social due-diligence process
surrounding the project.

Decommissioning of the plant and infrastructure associated with the landfill gas project will
be part of the landfills' overall closure plan. The development and approval of such a plan is a
South African regulatory requirement and would address issues such as leachate management
and methane migration.

Although the project is a Category B project, it has undertaken proper public consultation
and disclosure. The South African EIA Regulations are recognized as reflecting international
best practice in the area of environmental and social assessments. The regulatory authority for
this project is KwaZulu-Natal Province's Department of Agriculture and Environmental
Affairs (DAEA). DAEA has required the La Mercy and Mariannhill sites to undergo its own
environmental and social assessment process. This involves the scoping of issues to be
addressed in the environmental assessment process and the undertaking of more detailed
specialists' reports for certain issues if required. The alternatives actively considered in the
process include technology options, landfill gas use options and the "no-go" option. Public
consultation is a key element of the environmental and social assessment process within
South Africa and in this project includes informing potential stakeholders through direct
contact and the media, focus group meetings with specific groups of stakeholders, and public
meetings. Disclosure is also a continual part of the process: i.e. an initial background
information document is produced and distributed to all interested and affected parties; the
scoping and environmental assessment documents are also released for comment before being
finalized. This process ensures that issues are comprehensively identified and formally
addressed. The environmental scoping done for the La Mercy and Mariannhill landfill sites
concluded that the proposed project would have an overall positive environmental impact and
that all negative impacts identified could be adequately mitigated. On this basis, no detailed
investigations would be required in a further EIA phase. Nonetheless, the development and
approval of EMPs is a requirement of the DAEA for both sites.

A Monitoring Committee for the Mariannhill landfill site was formed in 1996. The eThekwini
Municipality and national legislation calls for the establishment and regular meeting of a
monitoring committee, made up of interested parties. Law requires that the Monitoring
Committee conducts 6 monthly audits and regular 3-monthly meetings with the community.
Due to La Mercy's isolated location in an uninhabited area, no monitoring committee was

                                                       6
                                                                                                          ISDS


     established for this site.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
     No potential impacts of this nature have been identified or are anticipated as part of this
         project.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
     None

     There are sensitive receptors to noise pollution from the Mariannhill landfill site because of its
     proximity to residential areas. Major contributors to the ambient noise levels are the plant
     used in the transportation and compaction of refuse and the flaring of methane gas. The
     project will be designed to comply with all pertinent regulations and codes of practice,
     namely:
·        South African Bureau of Standards (SABS) 0328-2001: "Methods for environmental
noise impact assessments"
·        SABS 0103-1994: "The measurement and rating of environmental noise with respect to
annoyance and to speech communication"
·        Environment Conservation Act, 1989 ­ Part VI (Section 25), and Noise Control
Regulations


II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
     As detailed in II.D.1a above, alternatives are actively considered in the environmental and
     social assessment process: i.e. technology alternatives, landfill gas use alternatives, and the
     "no-go" option. The main alternative at this stage is to not implement the project due to
     limited quantity of methane and the affordability of odor mitigation measures to be
     implemented at the sites.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
     The La Mercy and Mariannhill sites are each subject to a separate Environmental Assessment
     process as required by the DAEA to meet South Africa's environmental and social impact
     assessment regulations. The Bank has also noted in a number of previous Bank supported
     projects the high compatibility between Bank and South African EIA requirements. For each
     site, an environmental scoping process is followed that identifies, characterizes and analyses
     the impacts associated with the project. This results in a draft scoping report that details the
     results of this process and analyses the potential impacts in terms of their extent, duration,
     probability and significance (with and without mitigation). This report is sent out for
     comment to all the interested and affected parties (I&APs) that have registered with the
     project. Their comments are then used to finalize the report and to identify any further work
     that may be required. The final scoping report is then submitted to the DAEA for their review
     as well as to the public to meet Bank public disclosure requirements. Assessing the adequacy
     of the public participation process is a key element of the review of the environmental and
     social assessment performed by South African regulatory authorities before issuing a Record
     of Decision (RoD).

                                                      7
                                                                                                       ISDS




     As a process, this review may result in the issuing of a RoD for each of the environmental
     assessments that will give DSW authority to implement the project at each of the sites,
     provided that the conditions that it has stipulated in the RoDs are addressed. DAEA may also
     issue a conditional RoD that will stipulate further work to be done for each site or it could
     indicate that the project should proceed into an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
     (EIA) phase. This will require specialists' studies to be commissioned and further public
     participation to be undertaken. In this latter case a draft EIA report would be issued that all
     I&APs would be asked to provide their comments on. Prior to submission of the EIA to the
     authorities, the revised report will be disclosed to the public to meet Bank public disclosure
     requirements.

     The DAEA's final environmental authorization to remove the `pilot project' restriction and
     go ahead with the development of the La Mercy and Mariannhill LFG project rests on the
     amendment of the RoDs, dated November 16, 2005. The condition of authorization in the
     RoDs states that "During the first two years of operation the monitoring of engine emissions
     must be undertaken monthly by an independent test laboratory, the appointment of which
     must be approved by the Department (DAEA). The emission profile to be monitored must be
     as recommended by Enviros Consulting and these reports must be submitted monthly to this
     Department."

     The project proponent and their consultants have been made aware of the World Bank
     safeguards and the need to clearly discuss them in any environmental and social assessment
     documentation produced. The World Bank is formally registered as an Interested and
     Affected Party for the project and will receive all the environmental and social assessment
     documentation produced for comment and input on public disclosure. This will enable
     continual monitoring of the process to ensure safeguard issues are addressed.

     In terms of timing, EMPs are developed only after each site has had a positive RoD given to
     it by the DAEA. This will assist in ensuring that all mitigation measures identified are
     implemented effectively.

     The Mariannhill and La Mercy sites received positive RoDs from the DAEA on July 9, 2004.
     However, as mentioned earlier, an appeal was issued by a member of the public on August 2,
     2004 against the RoDs for the two sites, which had resulted in amending existing conditions
     of approval for these sites. On November 16, 2005, the `pilot period' restriction on
     Mariannhill and La Mercy landfills was removed following new information that
     demonstrates that these sites will result in acceptable air quality. (As required by the South
     African law, the project's EMPs will be completed in the coming months. Completion of the
     EMPs will be a `condition of effectiveness' for the signing of the ERPA.)

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     The public participation process for the project is comprehensive and has the following key
     elements:

                                                  8
                                                                                                ISDS




·       Identification of I&APs ­ this is an ongoing process throughout the environmental and
social assessment process. An initial I&AP list was set up using information from the municipality
and consultations with key stakeholder groups. This was supported by placing advertisements in
national, regional and local newspapers (requesting I&APs to register their interest in
participating in the environmental and social assessment process) and holding a media conference.
An electronic database of all I&APs is maintained and continually updated.

·       Issuing of a Background Information Document (BID) ­ a BID was compiled and
distributed to all I&APs. This document described the key aspects of the proposed project,
provided information on the environmental and social assessment process to be followed, and
provided the contact details of the consultants involved. The BID also contained a registration
sheet to allow for further I&AP registration. The document was also translated into Zulu to assist
residents in the area to access information. The BID was mailed to all registered I&APs and was
also made available at focus group meetings and public meetings. In addition, the BID was
delivered to residents in a zone of 200m from the boundaries of the Mariannhill landfill. This was
not done for La Mercy, as there are no residents within 200m of the site.

·       Focus Group Meetings ­ Formal meetings were conducted with specific groups of key
stakeholders, which were grouped according to formal associations or their specific interests in
the project. These meetings allowed stakeholders to raise specific issues and concerns and to
obtain more information regarding the project and the process. Focus group meetings have been
held with groups representing the communities surrounding the landfill sites.

·       Public Meetings ­ public meetings have also been held to provide feedback to the public
on the results of the scoping study and to present the draft scoping report.


     For all key reports produced during the process (for example, the scoping report) a draft
     report is made available to all I&APs. The reports are finalized showing how comments
     received have been addressed. The issuing of reports is combined with public meetings and
     contact with key I&APs to ensure potential concerns are raised. The public review period for
     such reports is 30 days.

     For any RoDs issued in South Africa a 30-day appeal period is required. The project
     proponent is also required by the regulatory authorities to inform all I&APs of the issuance of
     a RoD.

     Key stakeholders being consulted as part of this project include communities neighboring the
     landfill sites (represented by both individuals and community-based organizations such as
     ratepayers associations), NGOs, business organizations, regulatory authorities and local
     government political representatives for the areas adjacent to the sites (ward councilors).

     The environmental and social assessment process in South Africa is designed to manage
     conflicts through ensuring that I&APs have the opportunity to raise issues, which are

                                                      9
                                                                                                    ISDS


     formally recorded and addressed in a transparent public participation process. In addition, the
     World Bank safeguards team emphasizes the importance of ensuring that environmental and
     social assessment process involves expert personnel to play a strong role in dealing with
     public consultation and conflict case mediation.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              10/18/2004      11/16/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          10/18/2004      11/16/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.




Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Arun P. Sanghvi                                    6/7/2006
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Roxanne Hakim/Person/World Bank                    6/7/2006
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Isabelle Paris/HQ/IFC                              6/7/2006
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Warren Waters                                           6/7/2006
Sector Manager                        Subramaniam V. Iyer                                6/7/2006

