Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2267 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P075941 
Project Name: NELSAP:  Regional Rusumo Falls Hydroelectric and Multipurpose 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Jakob Granit 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (50%);Power (30%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Other rural development (S);Regional integration (S);Conflict 
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
African Development Fund 
40.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
15.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
35.00
90.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The RRFP project development objective is "to enhance economic and social development in the 
region through productive multi-purpose use of water and energy resources along with 
investments in sustainable livelihoods in the project area."  
 
The project, along with other development initiatives, supports the broader Kagera basin 
development goal to improve livelihoods in the region through sustainable development in the 
Basin. To this end, benefit sharing mechanisms will be developed to ensure equitable distribution 
of benefits. Project outcomes at the regional level include an increase in economic activity, 
private sector development, and investments in social infrastructure and services facilitated by 
Page  2
improved access to affordable electricity. Outcomes at the project area level focus on economic 
development in growth centers, improving access to electricity for Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs) and environmental and social services. Targeted micro-grants, financial 
intermediation and capacity building will assist public and private entities in improving the 
productive use of electricity, which translates into improved livelihoods at the household level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The preparation stage is divided into a pre-feasibility phase to explore different generation 
options using the available head and water resource, the full feasibility and basic design study 
phase assessing one preferred option based on a joint decision by the countries, and the 
independent Environmental Impact Social and Environmental Assessment phase.  
 
The specific nature of project components will be reviewed when the pre-feasibility studies are 
available by early 2007. It is expected that technical and other issues referred to in all the 
components would also be reviewed with respect to their appropriateness and project packaging.  
 
The three proposed project components are defined as:  
 
Component 1: Hydroelectric power generation and multi-purpose development  
 
Sub-component 1a: Hydroelectric power generation (est. US$ 110 Million).  
 
This sub-component includes a hydropower facility with envisaged installed capacity of ca. 60 
–
80
MW to be shared between the three countries. The pre-feasibility study will assess three 
alternative options, including at least one run-of-the river option, to optimize the hydropower 
scheme from technical, economic, social and environmental points of view. One of the selected 
options will be studied up to full feasibility including basic design. The power station and 
hydraulic infrastructure would be situated at the Rusumo Falls, where the Kagera River forms 
the boundary between Tanzania and Rwanda, about 2 km downstream of the river’s confluence 
with the Ruvubu River. A linkage program could build capacity of local businesses and the labor 
force, and provide incentives to exploit regionally sourced content in procurement of goods and 
services.  
 
Sub-component 1b:  Multi-purpose/benefit sharing in the project area (est. US$ 15-20 Million).  
 
This sub-component will provide funds for the initial implementation of the social and 
environmental management programs. This will include watershed management, key catchment 
restoration, erosion control, programs for prevention and treatment of waterborne diseases, 
HIV/AIDS prevention in association with dam construction, and stakeholder communication. In 
addition the project will provide support for targeted local communities and business, e.g. 
MSME capacity building, micro-finance schemes and social development funds, creating 
incentives that make the local community shareholders and advocates of the project, fully 
benefiting from economic opportunities. The implementation mechanism for this sub-component 
will be determined during the feasibility phase.  
 
Component 2: Power transmission, regional integration of networks and distribution  
 
Sub-component 2a: Regional transmission interconnection (est. US$ 40 Million).  
 
Three transmission lines –from Rusumo to (i) Gitega, Burundi (200 km); (ii) Kigali/Kabarondo, 
Rwanda (50 km); and (iii) Biharamulo, Tanzania (100 km)– will connect the power station to the 
Page  3
national grids of Rwanda and Burundi, and supply electricity to the western mining provinces of 
Tanzania, which are currently not connected to the country’s national grid. It is expected that in 
the medium-term these transmission lines will form an integral part of a regional “backbone” 
grid for power trade with the EAC, around Lake Victoria, and in the long-term with the South 
African Power Pool. The transmission lines will be designed to support provision of low-cost 
electrification, as well as ITC systems, in targeted rural growth centers in the transmission 
corridor.  
 
Sub-component 2b:  Multipurpose/benefits sharing in growth centers along the transmission 
corridors (est. US$ 15-20 Million).  
 
This sub-component will promote the use of electricity in selected rural growth centers  of the 
transmission corridor. Small-scale investments in both the public and private domains (e.g. 
through capacity building, financial intermediation and micro-grant schemes to support MSMEs) 
are envisaged to promote economic growth and livelihood improvements in selected growth 
centers. Implementation arrangements for this sub-component will be explored during project 
preparation, building on the local knowledge of national utilities and local government 
implementing mechanisms.  
 
Component 3: Project institutional arrangements (est. US$ 10 Million).  
 
At the project level a joint utility/institutional mechanism will be established for management 
of power generation and distribution to national utilities. The joint institution will have a formal 
legal status vested by the three Governments and will maintain effective institutional linkages 
with the overall Kagera basin management framework of the NBI. The joint utility may also 
implement some of the key social and environmental management activities, including urgent 
catchment restoration and protection. The detailed design of the project institution, 
organizational structure, legal charters, and operational responsibilities will be analyzed and 
developed during the project preparation period.  
 
At the sub-regional level the four countries in the Kagera Basin (including Uganda) are working 
towards establishing a Kagera River Basin Management Framework closely linked to the Lake 
Victoria Basin Commission of the East African Community (EAC) and the Nile Basin Initiative 
(NBI). This work is ongoing in a parallel NBI/NELSAP project - the Kagera Transboundary and 
Integrated Water Resources Management Project (Kagera TIWRM). The management 
framework will assess options for basin management and development based on available water 
and natural resources and investment opportunities including water allocation to different Basin 
activities such as the RRFP.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The dam and power station would be situated at the Rusumo Falls where the Kagera River forms 
the boundary between Tanzania and Rwanda, and about 2 km downstream of the river's 
confluence with the Ruvubu River. Depending on the eventual dam height, the reservoir may 
extend some 60km up the Kagera River to Lake Rweru.  
 
Three transmission lines are planned from Rusumo to (i) Gitega, Burundi (200 km); (ii) 
Kigali/Kabarondo, Rwanda (50 km); and (iii) Biharamuro, Tanzania (100 km).   
 
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower capacity varies among the participating countries.  In Burundi it is virtually 
nonexistent, in Rwanda it is weak, and in Tanzania it is stronger but still likely insufficient for a 
project at this scale and complexity.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Dan R. Aronson (AFTQK) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The dam/reservoir (Component 1a) may have potentially significant biophysical and 
socioeconomic impacts both downstream and upstream, while the transmission lines 
(Component 2a) are expected to be less problematic. Project area development activities 
(Components 1b and 2b) may have local, adverse effects that can likely be avoided or minimized 
through well-known design and management measures. Issues of concern will be thoroughly 
analyzed to contribute to project planning and design during feasibility studies, and to provide a 
sound foundation for the subsequent independent EA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project may affect the downstream Akagera National Park in Rwanda by altering the 
flow regime, and will flood an as yet undetermined amount of marsh vegetation upstream.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Agricultural development in the project area consequent upon increased access to electricity 
may increase the use of agricultural chemicals.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
It is possible, though unlikely, that indigenous peoples are in the project area and could be 
affected by the project.  Social analyses during project planning and design will investigate the 
matter.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Flooding the reservoir would affect an as yet undetermined number of people, but perhaps in 
the order of 7,000 according to a preliminary social baseline study. Settlement and land use 
issues along the transmission lines will also need to be addressed. Since the area around the 
proposed reservoir is already intensely settled, involuntary resettlement would need to be 
accomplished within a broadly-defined development plan for the area in order to sustain and 
improve livelihoods.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
During the pre-feasibility phase an options assessment will be undertaken including assessing 
a
12m high dam (considered as a small dam since below 15m) and run-off the river options. The 
reservoir capacity in the case of a dam, however, could exceed 1M m3, in which case the policy 
would be triggered. Also, other factors may justify treating it as a large dam: (i) the possibility of 
uncontrolled release of water from the reservoir; (ii) national/ regional dam engineering capacity 
less than adequate; and (iii) the
usual requirement for the borrower to extend (OP4.37 
--
Art. 5) 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the panel’s composition of technical expertise.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project directly involves three countries, and downstream riparians of Lake Victoria and 
the Nile River. Notification will be through consultative fora of the Nile Basin Initiative.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/25/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As outlined above, safeguards issues will be thoroughly analyzed to contribute to project 
planning and design during feasibility studies, and to provide a sound foundation for the 
subsequent independent EA. Preparation of RAPs is included in the feasibility studies for the 
dam/reservoir and transmission lines. Both the EA and the RAP will be disclosed  in country 
as well as in the Infoshop before appraisal.  An independent expert panel is being convened 
to oversee project preparation; it includes environmental, social and dam engineering 
expertise.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jakob Granit 
07/31/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/31/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
07/31/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
