Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1854 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P093806 
Project Name: Niger Basin Water Resources Development and Ecosystems Management 
Task Team Leader: Ousmane Dione 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%);Central government 
administration (30%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Regional integration (P);Environmental policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to achieve a sustainable increase in the overall productivity 
of existing water resources to foster economic development in selected countries of the Niger 
River Basin. To achieve this objective, the project will focus on: (i) strengthening the 
institutional capacity of the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) and its national cellules; (ii) 
rehabilitating existing water infrastructure; and (iii) restoring severely degraded environments in 
targeted areas that affect the Basin’s natural resources.  
 
The expected outcomes include: (i) improved management capacity of NBA; (ii) efficient 
delivery and management of water infrastructure; and (iii) enhanced restoration and management 
of degraded environments in the Basin for sustainable natural resources. The project is expected 
to directly benefit 5 million people in the Basin and indirectly benefit approximately 10 million 
people.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
Overview of project design. The proposed project's estimated total cost is US$ 46 million 
inclusive of an IDA loan of US$ 40 million. The project consists of a sector investment lending 
(SIL) of 5 year period. The Borrower will comprise five riparian countries, namely Benin, 
Guinea, Mali, Niger and Nigeria with NBA acting as the implementing agency on behalf of the 
five riparian countries. The project is being prepared in consultation and coordination with the 
donor partners. The project design, based on the principles of regional integration, includes three 
inter-
related components namely: (i) strengthening the Basin’s regional and national institutional 
capacities; (ii) rehabilitation and upgrading of prioritized water infrastructure inclusive of Kainji 
and Jebba hydropower dams and several small dams in Mali, Niger, Benin and Guinea; and (iii) 
restoring and managing degraded environment; all of which will contribute toward poverty 
reduction and in turn foster cooperation and economic growth throughout the Basin. Even though 
the project does not directly engage in new water infrastructure investments, it will support 
studies for the assessment of future investment options. Whilst rehabilitation of Kainji and Jebba 
hydropower facilities will provide additional energy supply to the riparian countries and ease 
Nigeria’s electricity demand, the project through this rehabilitation, will lay the ground for 
consolidating regional integration. Furthermore, rehabilitation of these dams is a concrete step 
forward to support riparian countries’ commitment under the current West African Power Pool 
(WAPP) project to develop the “North Corridor” transmission Line. WAPP project entails 
electricity supply upgrade from 132 kV to 330 kV between Nigeria and Niger and possibly 
Benin with a potential extension to northern Mali.  
 
Component 1: NBA institutional strengthening and capacity building: (US$ 3 Million). This 
component will enhance the capacity of NBA and its national cellules. The key identified sub-
components are outlined below:  
 
a) 
Strengthening of NBA institutions and capacity building enhancement. Key activities 
will: (i) promote transparent and effective institutional operations including personnel 
management and overall performance evaluation; (ii) strengthen the institution’s communication 
capabilities for sharing information, knowledge and experience through the introduction of 
Information Technology (IT) services within NBA inclusive of computerization, internet 
facilities, IT based sharing of knowledge and establishment of a comprehensive basin-wide GIS 
system; and (iii) develop and implement a tailored capacity building program for NBA’s staff 
andthose of national focal structures.  
 
b) 
Development of institutional mechanisms and legal instruments for efficient water 
resources management. Activities under this sub-component will: (i) support the establishment of 
a
regional planning committee; (ii) establish a basin-wide permanent water commission and sub-
basin commissions; (iii) prepare and harmonize regional environmental standards compatible 
with national standards; (iv) prepare legal instruments package including (joint financing and 
guarantee of infrastructure; joint ownership and management of infrastructure; dispute resolution 
and arbitrage; enforcement of environmental regulations and policies; water resource allocation; 
and potential for private-public partnerships in joint development); and (v) prepare a water 
charter for the Niger River Basin.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Rehabilitation and upgrading of existing infrastructure (US$ 33 million). This 
component will focus on rehabilitation and upgrading of existing prioritized large  water 
infrastructure of national and regional relevance. The design of the sub-components is inclusive 
of critical aspects such as safety, rehabilitation, improvement, multipurpose development and 
social and environmental management. These sub-components include:  
 
a) 
Rehabilitating and Upgrading of infrastructure of national and regional relevance. This 
sub-component will focus on rehabilitation of Kainji and Jebba hydropower dams located in 
Nigeria.  These dams have the potential to increase the energy production at a least cost and to 
supply additional energy to other Basin countries namely Niger and Benin. Several agreements 
are already in place thus supporting the regional dimension and complements likely benefits to 
accrue from dam rehabilitation. These agreements include: (i) the 1972 bilateral agreement 
between Nigeria and Niger to provide 40 MW of firm power supply over a 20 year period from 
Kainji dam; (ii) the 1992 re-negotiated bilateral agreement to allow for the export of an 
additional 30 MW to Niger; and (iii) the extension of the existing bilateral agreements to 2007. 
Building on these agreements, key activities for dam rehabilitation will include:  
 
-
For Kainji hydropower dam: (i) repairing bottom seals of gates 2 and 3; (ii) rehabilitating 
power generating units 6, 7 and 8; (iii) improving flood warning systems; (iv) assessing reservoir 
sedimentation and undertaking bathymetric survey at the plunge pool;  (v) modernizing the 
readout units for the dam pendulums and electrical piezometers; (vi) assessing generation 
expansion by installation of four units in the already existing civil works; (vii) preparing a 
decision support system to be integrated with Jebba dam.  
 
-
For Jebba hydropower dam: (i) intervention on electro-mechanical equipments inclusive 
of  (leakage control, flood evacuation refurbishing of structures provision of auxiliary equipment, 
mechanical, electrical and rewinding workshops and major spare parts) (ii) repairing the spillway 
channel erosion; (iii) repairing the foundation grouting in leaking areas; (iv) improving the flood 
warning system including increasing rainfall gauging stations, automation of gauging stations in 
the tributaries and downstream of the Jebba dam; (v) assessing reservoir sedimentation; (vi) 
instrumentation and monitoring upgrading; (vii) preparing water weeds management plan.  
 
b) 
Supporting options assessment for new water resources infrastructure development: This 
sub-component will support the strategic planning of water infrastructure in the Basin. Key 
activities will: (i) support the feasibility studies for identified dam sites including Mambilla 
(4,000MW) and Zunguero (960 MW) in Nigeria and Fomi (250 MW) in Guinea; (ii) provide 
complementary studies for the multipurpose dam sites of Taoussa (120MW) in Mali and 
Kandadji (90 MW) in Niger; (iii) prepare a strategic options and stakeholders assessment for 
selection of the most suitable infrastructure in the Basin. This last activity will also include 
preparation of a Strategic Regional Environmental and Social Assessment for the Basin, 
including major environmental and social dimensions of the selected hydropower options.  
 
c) 
Rehabilitation and improvement of small water infrastructure of national and local 
relevance. This sub-component will target existing small water infrastructure with multi-purpose 
development activities in Guinea, Mali, Benin and Niger. Key activities include: (i) rehabilitation 
and upgrading of small water infrastructure; (ii) improvement of management and maintenance 
Page  4
efficiency; (iii) support to multi-purpose activities for selected water infrastructure; and (i) 
dredging and improvement of drainage canals in specific zones.  
 
Component 3: Restoration and preservation of selected degraded environments (US$ 10 
Million). This component will address the increasing environmental degradation in selected areas 
of the Basin. The aim is to combine water infrastructure development and management with 
environmental restoration and preservation as well as income generation activities that will act as 
an incentive for active participation. The key activities include: (i) watershed management and 
afforestation in selected areas of Fouta Djallon and in the headwater tributaries in Benin; (ii) 
river bank stabilization and soil erosion control in selected areas along the Kori and Dallols in 
Niger and Mali. These restoration activities will include the design and implementation of 
targeted socio-economic activities such as traditional fisheries, flood recession agriculture and 
restoration of pastures in the Inner-Delta in Mali and the development of small irrigation 
schemes that will combine environmental restoration and income generation activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will respectively be located in the five member states of the Niger Basin Authority 
(NBA) namely, Benin, Guinea, Mali, Niger and Nigeria.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity in addressing safeguards’ issues will be further assessed 
and the Government’s team and NBA will receive needed guidance from the World Bank's 
safeguards specialists on the project team in fulfillment of the World Bank’s safeguards 
requirements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The planned activities will have potential environmental impacts that will trigger OP 4.01. 
During project preparation, the Borrower will prepare a Strategic Regional Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (SRESMF). The exact locations of the small scale water 
infrastructure investment are not yet known. The SRESMF will be submitted and disclosed 
according to World Bank disclosure policies in all Borrower countries and in the Infoshop in 
Washington D.C. prior to appraisal. In addition, the Borrower will undertake Environmental 
Audits for Kainji and Jebba Dams. These environmental audits will, among other things, assess 
residual environmental impacts from the dams and investigate options for adapting the release 
policy of the dams to restore environmental and social amenity flows for downstream users.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project activities are not currently expected to have significant impacts on natural 
habitats in the Basin. However, these will be further assessed while undertaking environmental 
and social assessments.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Activities under Component 3 will likely cover agro-forestry, savannah forest restoration and 
support the establishment of community forest reserves or woodlots in highly degraded areas in 
order to enhance their sustainability. These activities might trigger OP 4.36 for which the 
Borrower will be responsible to ensure forestry and agro-forestry management plans are prepared 
and implemented.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
As a result of potential irrigation activities along the Niger River, the project could lead to 
intensification and increased use of pesticides or purchase of pesticides or herbicides. In 
compliance with OP 4.09, a harmonized pest management plan (PMP) will be prepared by NBA.  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The project activities are not currently expected to have significant impacts on physical 
cultural property. However, these will be further assessed while undertaking environmental and 
social assessments.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Involuntary Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 is triggered. The Borrower will prepare a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF will be submitted and disclosed according to 
World Bank disclosure policies in all Borrower countries and in the Infoshop in Washington 
D.C. prior to appraisal.  A study will be prepared to identify if there any social legacy issues with 
regard to the dams to be rehabilitated. This study will identify if the affected people still endure 
socio-economic hardship as a consequence of lost livelihoods and if community compensation 
will be required to reduce the poverty level of these communities.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
OP 4.37 will be triggered. A dam safety inspection will be coordinated by NBA.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Some key project activities will extract water from the Niger River, which by its nature, is an 
international water body. The riparian notification will be done through the NBA in which all 
Niger River riparian countries are represented.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/17/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
All of the Borrowers assessments and feasibility studies (SRESMF, Environmental Audits, 
RPF, and PMP) are expected to be launched tentatively in March, 2006 and the completed 
assessments disclosed prior to appraisal proposed for September, 2006.  The study to identify 
the social legacy issues related to the dams to be rehabilitated will be launched in the same 
period.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ousmane Dione 
03/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
03/14/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
