Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1961 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P094917 
Project Name: WAPP APL 1 (2nd Phase  - COASTAL TRANSMISSION BACKBONE) 
Task Team Leader: Amarquaye Armar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
40.00 
 
ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK 
15.00 
 
WEST AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
15.00
85.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
WAPP APL: The goal of West Africa Power Pool (WAPP) is to establish a well-functioning, 
cooperative, power pooling mechanism for West Africa, as a means to increase access of the 
citizens of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to stable and reliable 
electricity at affordable costs. On June 30, 2005, the Bank’s Executive Board of Directors 
endorsed the application of the adjustable program lending (APL) instrument, within the 
framework of the World Bank’s Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for West Africa, as the 
vehicle for providing IDA credit support to the WAPP initiative. By so doing, the Bank has 
earmarked substantial IDA resources to put in place a multi-year programmatic framework to 
help close the financing gap and thereby ensure timely implementation of priority WAPP 
investments and technical assistance activities of the Revised ECOWAS Master Plan for the 
Generation and Transmission of Electrical Energy. The WAPP APL is designed to provide IDA 
credit support to prospective borrowers in a flexible, implementation-oriented and results-driven 
manner – when prospective borrowers have satisfied the policy triggers (country commitments 
Page  2
under the EEP) and when individual WAPP priority investments are ready to receive IDA credit 
support  
 
The developmental objective of the Coastal Transmission Backbone (CTB) Project of the 
WAPP APL (WAPP APL 1) is to increase access of national power systems of Cote d’Ivoire, 
Ghana, Togo, Benin and Nigeria (collectively, the WAPP “Zone A” coastal states) to more stable 
and reliable electricity as a means to alleviate power supply deficits and/or to reduce their 
collective vulnerability to drought-induced power supply disruptions.  This developmental 
objective is to be achieved, inter alia, by: (a) establishing a robust 330 kV transmission link from 
the Prestea, Aboadze and Volta substations (Ghana) through the Mome Hagou sub-station 
(Togo) and Sakete sub-station (Benin) to the Ikeja West substation near Lagos, Nigeria; and (b) 
assisting transmission system operators of WAPP “Zone A” Coastal States to collectively put in 
place and fully deploy a WAPP “Operational Security and Mitigation Plan”. Both components of 
the CTB Project of the WAPP APL program are deemed necessary, alongside the West Africa 
Gas Pipeline Project, to facilitate unconstrained cross-border electricity exchanges between 
WAPP “Zone A” coastal states until at least the year 2020.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
On June 30, 2005, the Bank’s Executive Board of Directors approved the first constituent 
lending operation under the WAPP APL, an IDA credit of $ 40 million equivalent to 
Ghana/VRA. That FY05 project (WAPP APL 1 – Phase 1 of Coastal Transmission Backbone) 
covers (a) development (supply of conductors and insulators and supply and installation of 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition and communications systems) of the Aboadze-Volta 
segment of the CTB; plus related investments and technical assistance required to help put in 
place the WAPP “Operational Security and Mitigation Plan”, including the upgrade of the VRA 
System Control Center at Volta (Tema) and the replacement of obsolete circuit breakers and 
relays at the switchyard of the Akosombo Generation Station and the Volta sub-station. A 
consortium of IFIs, led by the African Development Bank (AfDB), is putting together a parallel 
financing package for the joint construction by CEB and VRA of the remaining Sakete (Benin) – 
Mome Hagou (Togo) – Volta (Ghana) segment of the CTB (estimated investment required is 
between US$ 40-60 million equivalent).  
 
This FY06 project (WAPP APL 1 – Phase 2 of Coastal Transmission Backbone) will provide 
IDA credits to Ghana/VRA ($ 45 million equivalent) and Benin/CEB ($ 15 million equivalent) to 
finance an additional complement of investments needed to put in place and fully deploy the 
proposed WAPP “Operational Security and Mitigation Plan” for the CTB.  
 
The components to be financed under WAPP APL 1 – Phase 2 are:  
 
Component 1: Transmission Infrastructure Development  
 
CEB – Rehabilitation of the existing 161 kV transmission lines (Mome Hagou – Lome, Mome 
Hagou-Avakpa-Cotonou, and Sakete-Cotonou segments) in order to improve supply reliability 
from the CTB into the two main CEB load centers. The component consists of 
replacement/refurbishment of existing towers, foundations, cables and other hardware. The 
Page  3
existing access road all along the right of way will also be fixed to facilitate inspection, 
maintenance and repairs; and  
 
VRA 
–
Extension of the Akosombo and Volta Sub-stations; upgrade/replace obsolete circuit 
breakers and relays at the switchyard of the Kpong Generation Station; construction of 3rd Bulk 
Supply Point for the Accra/Tema load centers in order to improve supply reliability from the 
CTB; and pre-investment studies for the Aboadze-Prestea-Kumasi and Tumu-Han-Wa 
transmission lines.  
 
Component 2: Upgrade of System Control Centers/SCADA  
 
CEB – Upgrade of System Control Center (no civil works)  
 
VRA – Upgrade of SCADA and Metering Systems of sub-stations in the southern 161kV 
transmission loop within Ghana.  
 
Component 3: Upgrade of Strategic Power Generation Stations  
 
VRA – Rehabilitation of cranes at the Akosombo Generation Station and also 
development/deployment of “Emergency Preparedness Plans” for the Akosombo and Kpong 
Generation Stations.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Capacity Building for WAPP (No civil works)  
 
CEB – Extension/renovation of CEB Facility (to accommodate WAPP Organization); and  
 
VRA – Upgrade of VRA Training Center for WAPP; and capacity building support tothe ETU.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The investment components of WAPP APL 1 (Phase 2) are located in Ghana, Togo and Benin 
and will be implemented by VRA and CEB.  
 
The VRA components of the WAPP APL 1 Phase 2 project consist of the construction of a 3rd 
Bulk Supply Point for the Accra/Tema load centers, the replacement/addition of existing 
equipment in the existing network of transmission sub-stations in southern Ghana, the upgrade 
(replacement of obsolete circuit breakers and relays) at existing switchyard of the Kpong 
Generation Station, and the rehabilitation of cranes at the Akosombo Generation Station.  
 
The CEB components of the WAPP APL 1 Phase 2 project consists primarily of 
replacement/refurbishment of equipment and transmission facilities that link the Mome Hagou 
sub-station to the major load centers of Lome (Togo) and Cotonou (Benin) and on to Sakete 
(Benin) to connect with the line into Nigeria, plus the upgrade of the CEB System Control 
Center.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Both beneficiary power utilities of WAPP APL 1 (Phase 2) namely CEB and VRA, have 
implemented numerous World Bank projects, in accordance with the World Bank's rules.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Mr Dan R. Aronson (AFTU2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental concerns are limited to avoiding readily managed construction impacts and 
attending to any site remediation issues at existing substations.  VRA and CEB will prepare 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) to ensure these matters are attended to during project 
implementation through environmental specifications in construction contracts, and technical 
audits of and, perhaps, remediation work at, substation sites.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/10/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EMPs are due to be completed by CEB and VRA by mid-February 2006. The SMU has 
agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amarquaye Armar 
02/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
