Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3023 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P094919 
Project Name: WAPP APL 3 (INTER-ZONAL TRANSMISSION HUB) 
Task Team Leader: Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00 
 
African Development Bank 
35.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
WAPP APL: The goal of West Africa Power Pool (WAPP) is to establish a well-functioning, 
cooperative, power pooling mechanism for West Africa, as a means to increase access of the 
citizens of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to stable and reliable 
electricity at affordable costs.  
 
The developmental objective of the Inter-Zonal Transmission Hub WAPP APL3 (Phase 1) 
project is to lower the cost of and improve access to electricity supply to Burkina Faso through 
avoided diesel generation, and to increase the overall reliability and stability of the Burkina Faso 
and Ghana grid. The avoidance of diesel generation also generates a global benefit, as it 
potentially reduces the emission of carbon dioxide. A carbon finance component for this project 
is being considered. Project outcomes will be measured in accordance with the Results 
Framework as developed for the WAPP APL program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Inter-Zonal Transmission Hub WAPP APL3 (Phase 1) project, will finance the following 
complement of investments and technical assistance:  
Page  2
Component 1: 225 kV Transmission Line between Bolgatanga, Ghana, and Ouagadougou, 
Burkina Faso (US$ 75 million). This component involves the construction of a 225 kV 
transmission line from Bolgatanga in the northern part of Ghana to the capital of Burkina Faso. It 
includes the following elements:  
 
•
Construction of 198 km of 225 kV transmission line;  
 
•
Construction of one new 225/90/33 kV substation in Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso);  
 
•
Extension of the 161 kV substation in Bolgatanga (Ghana);  
 
•
Construction of one new 225/161 kV substation in Bolgatanga (Ghana).  
 
Component 2: Reinforcement of Domestic Networks (US$ 25 million). This component 
involves the construction of a 161 kV line of a length of 133 km between the north-western 
Ghanaian cities of Tumu, Han and Wa - the 161 kV Tumu-Han-Wa Transmission Line (Ghana). 
Without the construction of this line, Ghana's export capacity to Burkina Faso would be limited 
to 20 MW (Volta River Authority Masterplan, 2001). The line also closes the northern loop of 
Ghana's transmission system, thereby providing an (N-1) reliability level to the loads in this area, 
which is required for power voltages in the northern part of Ghana in excess of 100 MW. Under 
this component complementary investments in Burkina Faso's distribution network to allow for 
evacuation of power from the transmission line is also envisaged. The scope of this investment is 
to be confirmed at pre-appraisal.  
 
Component 3: Implementation of "WAPP Action Plans"(US$ 10 million). This component will 
provide (i) necessary complementary investment for system control, communication and 
SCADA, to be confirmed by the updated feasibility study for the 225 kV line, once completed. 
The use of a Optical Transmission System (OTS) based on optical ground wire on the 225 kV 
line is being considered as primary communication channel; (ii) technical assistance to upgrade 
the existing power supply agreement between VRA and SONABEL to allow for trades of up to 
100 MW.; and (iii) technical assistance for the WAPP Expert Advisory Panel to be expanded to 
the Intra-zonal Transmission Hub with the aim of developing and implementing an Operational 
Security and Mitigation Plan for the Inter-Zonal Transmission Hub WAPP APL3 (Phase 1).  
 
Burkina Faso will cover about 60% of the overall project cost, and Ghana will cover about 40% 
of the overall project costs. The feasibility studies, Environmental Impact Assessment and 
Resettlement Actions Plans, and the bidding documentation are being financed by USAID and 
the NEPAD IPPF through AfDB. The project is being developed to complement the Burkina 
Faso Energy Access project (P078091), which is has been endorsed by the World Bank's Board.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in both Burkina Faso and northern Ghana. The transmission line 
connecting Burkina Faso and Ghana will connect the cities of Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso) and 
Bolgatanga (Ghana) through the most dir4ect routing. The closure of the northern loop 
tranmission line in Ghana will connect the towns of Wa, Han, and Tumu. An interconnection 
between Lawra and Han will be considered.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
Ghana: The implementing agency, VRA, has long-standing experience with the implementation 
of environmental and social safeguard policies as required by World Bank standards. Moreover, 
Ghana's environment and social safeguard standards have been assessed in 2006/2007 under a 
country pilot for the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard 
Issues under OP4.00 under the new Ghana Energy Development and Access project (GEDAP). 
This assessment concluded that the World Bank and Ghana systems for environmental 
assessment and physical cultural property are equivalent with minor gaps only. The Ghanaian 
part of the project is being considered for potential use of a second country pilot for Use of 
Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues under OP4.00.  
 
Burkina Faso: SONABEL, Burkina Faso's implementing agency, has long standing experience 
with the implementation of environmental and social safeguard policies in energy projects as 
required by World Bank standards. For a similar project, the 225 kV Bobo-Dioulasso - 
Ouagadougou interconnection, which is being procured, a safeguard policy framework has been 
developed, which is expected to be easily transferable to the proposed 225 kV Ouagadougou - 
Bolgatanga line.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
For WAPP APL3, Phase 1 project, category B is proposed in view of the limited complexity 
of the investment undertaken. The routing of the transmission line will follow existing roads, and 
the final selection of routing will be based on environmental and social criteria. For the proposed 
investment a full environmental and resettlement assessment will be undertaken to be available 
for project appraisal, as recommended under the World Bank's safeguard and social impact 
policies. Responsibility for safeguards will remain with the Bank's safeguards team.  
 
The risks that trigger OP/BP 4.01 are impacts on the natural environment, human health and 
safety, physical cultural resources, and transboundary and global concerns. Potential risks to the 
natural environment apply under the proposed project to the about 30 m strip along the 
transmission line that is to be constructed, as well as possible extension of substations. No 
permanent impacts on the natural environment are expected. After completion of works, the 30 
m
strip around the transmission line should be kept free of trees exceeding a height of 2 m. 
Whether or not bird flight might be impeded needs to be determined. The impact on human 
health and safety is expected to be limited, as incidents such as falls and electrocution are very 
rare. The global environment is likely to benefit through reduced greenhouse gas emissions, as 
the transmission line will lead to import into Burkina Faso of electricity that is produced based 
on a gas/hydro mix, and which will reduce the need for electricity produced from diesel in the 
future. Procurement of the Environmental Impact Assessments of both the Ouagadougou - 
Bolgatanga and the Tumu-Han-Wa line is underway.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Applicability of OP/BP 4.04 will be assessed based
on the findings of the EIA and RAP, 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
which are expected to be available in December 2007.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Applicability of OP/BP 4.04 will be assessed based on the findings of the EIA and RAP, 
which are expected to be available in December 2007.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Applicability of OP/BP 4.04 will be assessed based on the findings of the EIA and RAP, 
which are expected to be available in December 2007.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Applicability of OP/BP 4.04 will be assessed based on the findings of the EIA and RAP, 
which are expected to be available in December 2007.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Applicability of OP/BP 4.04 will be assessed based on the findings of the EIA and RAP, 
which are expected to be available in December 2007.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The risks that trigger OP/BP 4.12 refer to any loss of land or other assets resulting in 
relocation, loss of assets or access to assets, and loss of income sources as a means of livelihood. 
The proposed project will establish a strip of about 30 m along the transmission line that is to be 
constructed. During construction, cultivation along that strip might be impeded, and following 
completion cultivation of trees in excess of 2 meters is not allowed. It needs to be assessed 
whether and how this leads to loss of income by farmers along the route. A full Resettlement 
Action Plan will be prepared. Procurement of the Resettlement Action Plans of both the 
Ouagadougou - Bolgatanga and the Tumu-Han-Wa line is underway. See also details presented 
above for OP/BP 4.01.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
Both Environmental Impact Analyses and the Resettlement Action Plans are to be completed 
over the next 6 months. Drafts are expected for December 2007, and disclosure of safeguard 
documentation is expected for January 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius 
07/03/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
07/03/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
07/03/2007 
Comments:   
