Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC2781
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P093806 
Project Name:  Niger Basin Water Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems 
Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ousmane Dione 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (55%);Power (40%);Central 
government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Regional integration (P);Environmental policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
156.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
4.94 
 
African Development Bank 
34.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 4.72 
 
EC: European Commission 
3.54
47.20 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to achieve a sustainable increase in the productivity 
of existing infrastructures and activities which rely on water resources to foster economic 
development in selected countries of the Niger River Basin. To achieve this objective, the 
project will focus on: (i) strengthening the institutional capacity of the Niger Basin 
Authority (NBA) and its national focal structures; (ii) rehabilitating, optimizing and 
developing regional water infrastructure; and (iii) restoring selected degraded ecosystems 
in association with income generation activities.  
 
The expected outcomes include: (i) improved management capacity of NBA and its 
national focal structures; (ii) improved institutional mechanisms and legal instruments for 
the integrated regional management and development of water resources in the Niger 
Basin; (iii) improved performances of the hydroelectric plants of Kainji and Jebba and of 
Page  2
priority national infrastructure; and (iv) sustainable productive water and land use 
strengthened in the Basin. The project is expected to directly benefit 5 million people in 
the Basin and indirectly benefit approximately 10 million people.   
 
3. Project Description 
Lending instrument and rationale. The proposed Adaptable Program Loan (APL) will 
span twelve years and will be implemented in two successive phases of five and seven 
years. The rationale for using the APL instrument is to ensure long term sustainability in 
phasing the different interventions in the Basin. This takes into account countries? 
readiness and consensus to promote a Shared Vision, a holistic approach of the basin 
development which will be detailed with the completion of the Sustainable Development 
Action Plan (SDAP). Furthermore, the APL approach will consolidate NBA?s renewed 
organization. It will also allow NBA to progressively adjust its legal and institutional 
framework with a cooperative agenda addressing regional issues. Adaptable Program 
Loan provides phased support for long-term development programs. It is proposed to 
have this IDA credit using the APL instrument: horizontally, on a regional basis, to help 
NBA consolidate its institutional and legal reforms; and vertically, to increase water 
resources development and management activities at the national and local levels with 
substantial impact on regional planning. In addition, the commitment of substantial IDA 
resources can be expected and will concretely complement other donor supported 
activities.  
 
Program Objective and Phases  
 
Overview of Program design. The Niger Basin Water Resources Development and 
Ecosystem management is aligned with the World Bank?s RIAS. The program overall 
cost is estimated at US$ 500 million. U$ 156 million will fund the first phase with five 
different credits: US$ 9 million to Benin, US$ 9 million to Guinea, US$ 15 million to 
Niger, US$ 18 million to Mali, US$ 105 million to the Federal Republic of Nigeria. 
Individual sector investment activities were considered as an alternative. However, this 
will neither strategically support the implementation of the SDAP nor advance the 
regional integration agenda. The nine riparian countries agreed that the first phase of the 
project focuses on five countries on the Niger River main stem. However, it is understood 
that the completion of the SDAP will include the remaining four countries (Burkina Faso, 
Chad, Cameroun, and Cote d?Ivoire) and broaden countries involvement in the 
program?s second phase. The Program will support the Paris Declaration by 
strengthening cooperation. This will be done through three key targeted activities: (i) 
enhance the capacity of regional and national institutions to sustainably manage water 
resources agenda across the basin; (ii) upgrade, develop and optimize regional water 
infrastructure for regional growth; (iii) improve social and environmental conditions in 
the basin.  
 
The program is therefore designed to support NBA and its riparian countries to develop 
a
robust framework of actions including the sustainable management of water 
infrastructure and ecosystems in a short, medium and long term approach. The first phase 
of the program includes three main components. Component 1 focuses on institutional 
Page  3
Strengthening and Capacity Building of NBA and national structures involved in 
project?s implementation. Component 2 addresses the rehabilitation, optimization and 
development of regional infrastructure. Component 3 deals with rehabilitation of small 
water infrastructure and sustainable management of selected degraded ecosystems to 
address the issues outlined above while providing incentives to communities.  
 
Following consultations with NBA?s council of ministers, the riparian countries and 
implementing agencies have agreed on clear triggers for the second phase of the program:  
 
?
The policy, legal and institutional triggers are the endorsement and subscription 
by NBA?s member countries to the legal instruments and institutional mechanisms for an 
efficient regional water resources optimization and management including: (i) a Niger 
Basin regional environmental code;  (ii) legal instruments for managing and developing 
water infrastructure such as top up financing, joint guarantees of infrastructure, dispute 
resolution and arbitrage enforcement (iii) finalization of the Niger Basin Water Charter; 
and (iv) creation of a Permanent Water Commission (PWC);  
 
?
The technical triggers that constitute the minimum threshold for the approval of 
WRDSEM 2 are the following: (i) PHCN has met the expected output in terms of 
availability of the rehabilitated units of Kainji; (ii) at least 6 targeted small dams are 
rehabilitated in Niger and Benin.  
 
WRDSEM 2 will build upon the completion of the due diligence processes to be 
implemented under WRDSEM 1  by bringing all planned major regional infrastructure at 
the same level of knowledge. These processes will timely inform on the suitable sites to 
be further supported by WRDSEM 2. WRDSEM 2 will also benefit from the lessons 
learnt through the ecosystem management activities of phase 1 to scale up these activities 
across the Basin. In addition, this second phase will very likely include priority actions 
from the SDAP, and add the four remaining riparian countries in the program. The 
activities already identified for the second phase include: (i) contribution to the financing 
of selected dams including Fomi (Guinea), Taoussa (Mali), Kandadji (Niger) and 
Zungeru (Nigeria); (ii) remaining activities on the equipment of Kainji dam; (iii) 
rehabilitation of Ladgo dam and the Garoua port on the Benue in Cameroon; (iv) 
preparation of a master plan for the development of the Benue sub-basin; (v) scaling up 
of income generation activities associated with ecosystem management and mitigation 
measures for the development of additional water resources infrastructure. Lessons learnt 
from activities undertaken in WRDSEM 1 will also help to make the necessary 
adjustments for sound transition to the design of phase two.  
 
Project component (WRDSEM APL1)  
 
Component 1: NBA institutional strengthening and capacity building: (US$ 11.4 
million). This component will enhance the capacity of NBA and its National Focal 
Structures including other national institutions involved in the project implementation. 
The key identified sub-components are:  
 
Page  4
a. 
Strengthening and capacity building of NBA (US$ 3.25 million). Key activities 
include: (i) reinforcement of administrative and management skills of NBA  to set up of 
an Overall Performance Evaluation system; (ii) strengthening NBA?s communication 
capabilities and practices for sharing information, knowledge and experience in 
implementing its communication?s strategy and to reinforce NBA?s Information 
Technology; (iii) updating and implementing jointly with other partners NBA?s capacity 
building program.  
 
b. 
Strengthening and capacity building of national water resources management 
institutions (US$ 5.73 million). This sub-component includes: (i) establishment of 
NBA?s National Focal Structures inclusive of staff trainings; (ii) reinforcement of the 
coordination between National Focal Structures and the Executive Secretariat of NBA; 
(iii) assistance to national implementing agencies (PHCN, CeRPA, DNGR, DNAER and 
the DAERA) for the Project?s effective management.  
 
c. 
Institutional strengthening of regional water resources management and planning 
(US$ 2.42 million). Activities under this sub-component will: (i) support the 
establishment of a Regional Consultative Group (RCG) to build a participatory consensus 
on water infrastructure development in the Niger Basin; (ii) provide an Independent Panel 
of Expert (POE) to support the RCG with the ?infrastructure management and 
optimization options? and ?recommendations for coordinated regional infrastructure 
management rules? to be prepared under sub component 2.c); (iii) support the creation of 
a
Permanent Water Commission (PWC) as a regulatory water management mechanism in 
the Niger Basin; (iv) establish sub-basin commissions to provide opportunity for 
implementation of the SDAP at adequate subsidiary levels; (v) prepare a Niger Basin 
regional environmental code; (iv) prepare legal instruments for developing and managing 
water infrastructure including top up financing, joint guarantee, joint management of 
infrastructure, dispute resolution and arbitrage enforcement; and (v) support the 
implementation of the Niger Basin Water Charter.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation, optimization and development of regional infrastructures 
(US$ 107.4 million). This component will focus on rehabilitation and upgrading of 
existing prioritized large  water infrastructure of regional relevance. Kainji and Jebba 
hydropower dams located in Nigeria have the potential to increase the energy production 
at a least cost and to supply additional energy to other Basin countries namely Niger and 
Benin. The design of the sub-components will include critical aspects such as safety, 
rehabilitation, improvement and multipurpose development. These sub-components are:  
 
a) 
Rehabilitation of Kainji hydropower dam (US$ 86.43 million) including: (i) 
Rehabilitation and harmonization of productive electromechanical equipments ; (ii) 
Rehabilitation of auxiliary services; (iii) Rehabilitation of the navigation lock; (iv) 
Upgrading instrumentation and monitoring equipments; (v) Together with Jebba dam, 
improvement of the flood warning systems and development of a joint decision support 
and management system.  
 
Page  5
b) 
Rehabilitation of Jebba hydropower dam (US$ 9.77 million): consisting of (i) 
Rehabilitation of electro-mechanical equipments; (ii) Rehabilitation of auxiliary services; 
(iii) Civil works; (iv) Upgrading of instrumentation and monitoring equipment; (v) 
Prevention of tree invasion; (vi) Reinforcement of the maintenance workshops.  
 
c) 
Assessing optimization and management options for regional water infrastructure 
(US$ 11.2 million). The key activities will include: (i) complementary studies and due 
diligence process for Fomi (Guinea), due diligence process for Taoussa (Mali), and 
Kandadji dam sites in Niger to comply with the World Bank environmental and social 
procedures; (ii) feasibility and detailed engineering studies for Zungeru dam site in 
Nigeria; and (iii) preparation of water resources management rules to maximize the 
benefits from the basin?s water infrastructure.  
 
Component 3: Sustainable management of selected degraded ecosystems and 
rehabilitation of small water infrastructure (US$ 37.2 million)  
 
This component will combine the rehabilitation of small water infrastructure and 
ecosystems management in order to stimulate appropriate income-generating activities. 
Such local level behavior will collectively translate into effective management of 
common goods at the regional level. NBA and the riparian countries have agreed on 
technical, social and political criteria to select the project areas. The technical criteria are 
related to the severity of environmental degradation and locations? suitability for 
restoration and for maximum project impact. The social criteria are related to the degree 
of poverty and integration of vulnerable groups, including women and youth. The areas 
and related activities were selected in a participatory process to promote local, national 
and regional constituencies for sustainable management.  The priority areas for action 
include: the upper basin in Guinea (region of Faranah); the headwaters tributaries in 
Benin (upper Alibori, Goungoun, Sota and Goroubi ? Karimama district); the Inner Delta 
in Mali (Circles of Mopti, Douentza, Djenne and Tenenkou); and the Niger River middle 
section in Niger Republic (regions of Tillab?ri and Dossou). The selected activities are 
the following:  
 
a. 
Rehabilitation and diversification of small dams:  Key activities include (i) 
rehabilitation and diversification of twelve small dams in the departments of Borgou and 
Alibori (Benin); and (ii) rehabilitation of Aboka and Theme dams in Niger for irrigated 
vegetables in addition to livestock water supply.  
 
b. 
Rehabilitation and extension of small irrigation schemes: Key activities include: 
(i) rehabilitation of irrigation schemes in the region of Tillab?ri in Niger through drainage 
restoration and development of flood and silt protections; (ii) development of small 
irrigation schemes for horticulture in Karimama district in Benin; and (v) development of 
recessional agriculture in Djambacourou valley in Mali.  
 
c. 
Support to the development of traditional fisheries: Key activities in Tillabery 
region in Niger and in Timbuktu and Gao regions in Mali will: (i) promote sustainable 
fishing practices and fish production processing; (iii) upgrade technology to enhance the 
Page  6
livelihoods of fishermen (training and equipment such as nets, boats, ovens, processing 
and storage facilities); (iv) support co-management of fishery activities in selected areas; 
(v) support institutional strengthening and capacity building for sustainable development 
of fishery activities; and (vi) support development of local fishery management plans.  
 
d. 
Watershed Restoration and Agro-forestry:  
 
i. 
Development of lowland areas (bas-fonds): Key activities in the Niger Basin 
headwaters in Guinea include: (i) development of a watershed management plan; (ii) 
afforestation of key vulnerable and degraded areas in the Faranah Region; (iii) 
identification of key areas suitable for agricultural activities based on land suitability and 
water conditions; and (iv) training in appropriate agricultural practices for watershed 
management.  
 
ii. 
River banks Stabilization and erosion control: This sub-component will focus on 
restoration the Dallols Foga and Maouri (Niger) and protection of rehabilitated 
infrastructure in the Niger basin middle section. Activities include: (i) river bank 
stabilization in Sofara and Diondori (Mali) and sediment flow control in priority Koris 
(Niger); (ii) sand dunes stabilization in selected Dallos (Niger); (iii) restoration and 
afforestation of degraded slopes and plateaus using appropriate techniques (Niger); and 
(vi) communities training across the basin.  
 
iii. 
Restoration of pastureland ecosystems: Key activities will: (i) develop 
management plans for Bourgou production and regeneration in the Inner Delta in Mali; 
and (ii) support community participation and management of Bourgou including effective 
management of proceeds and provision of appropriate tools.  
 
iv. 
Development of agro-forestry: Key activities in the Niger Basin headwaters in 
Benin and in Guinea include: (i) design of community plans for sustainable development 
and management of forest and forestation activities; (ii) afforestation of degraded hot 
spots areas; (iii) introduction of seedling nurseries; and (iv) community organizations 
training.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All project activities will be carried in the Niger River Basin in the five participating 
countries namely Guinea, Mali, Niger, Benin and Nigeria.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
Page  7
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
WRDSEM 1 does not include any investments in large water infrastructure, but rather 
targets the rehabilitation of Kainji and Jebba electromechanical equipments which will 
not result in significant impacts. WRDSEM 2 will finance socio-economic infrastructure 
around the two reservoirs including improved fisheries development and management in 
these two reservoirs. Considering the possibility of large-scale water infrastructure 
investments in WRDSEM  2, the program (WRDSEM 1 and WRDSEM  2) is classified 
as category   Environmental Assessment category in support of good practices.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an Environmental and 
Social Audit (ESA) for Kainji and Jebba Dams, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
and a Social Assessment have been prepared by the borrower and cover the entire Niger 
River Basin and address potential environmental and social impacts of sub-projects in the 
5
countries on the main stem of the Niger river. It is expected that the sub-projects will 
individually have relatively low environmental and social impacts; however, cumulative 
impacts might be more severe. The individual and the cumulative impacts will therefore 
be assessed through application of the ESMF for the sub-project. On this basis, 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) will be carried out for those subprojects with 
potentially high impacts based on their evaluation using the ESMF.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only project alternative is a ?no project? alternative.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower prepared an Environmental and Social Audit for the rehabilitation of Kainji 
and Jebba Dams and an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for 
Page  8
activities which have not yet been precisely defined. For interventions that could result in 
involuntary resettlement and/or the loss of land, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
has been prepared   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations of the stakeholders and disclosure have started with the project 
identification and will continue during implementation. Key stakeholders are the farmers, 
herders, fishers in the Niger River Basin and their local governments. Key stakeholders 
include also the NBA, its national focal structures as well as the national implementing 
agencies of the five participating countries in the Niger Basin.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/04/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/20/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
Yes 
Page  9
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  10
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ousmane Dione 
03/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
03/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
03/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
03/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
03/27/2007 
Comments:   
