Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC2839
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P100785 
Project Name:  West and Central Africa Air Transport Safety & Security Project - APL 
Phase 2 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Aviation (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(S);Regulation and competition policy (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
46.65 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
These overarching Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are, within each participating 
country, to: 1) Improve Civil Aviation Agencies'(CAAs) compliance with the 
International Civil Aviation Organization's (ICAO) safety standards, 2) Increase CAA's 
compliance with ICAO's security standards, and 3) Enhance main international airports' 
compliance with ICAO's security standards. In order to measure to which level these 
PDOs will be achieved; the following key outcome indicators will be used for each 
country participating in the project:  
 
PDO 1 - Improve CAA's compliance with ICAO's safety standards:  
 
1)
Compliance rate with ICAO aggregate safety standards based on ICAO's audits;  
 
2)
Percentage of technical personnel in compliance with ICAO's safety standards; and  
 
3)
Total CAA's budget amount.  
 
PDO 2 - Improve CAA's compliance with ICAO's security standards:  
 
1)
Compliance rate with ICAO's aggregate security standards based on ICAO's audit;  
 
2)
Percentage of CAA's ICAO's certified security inspectors trained during the last three 
years;  
 
3)
Level of CAA's budget dedicated to security; and  
Page  2
PDO 3 - Enhance main international airports' compliance with ICAO's security 
standards:  
 
1)
Percentage of airport security personnel with three or more years of experience;  
 
2)
Number of serious problems recorded during annual airport crisis exercises; and  
 
3)
Percentage of embarking passengers stopped in possession of illegal objects, as 
defined by the ICAO, by airlines security personnel.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support the development of a regional Air Transport Program within the 
context of the Yamoussoukro Decision (YD) implementation. It will complement the 
work that will be undertaken by regional institutions (with donors' support) in the area of 
Air Transport Economic Regulation harmonization, while primarily focusing on airport 
and aviation safety and security. Although the project will be implemented at a national 
level in four countries (i.e., Burkina Faso, Mali, Guinea and Cameroon), its components 
are designed to complement ongoing regional Cooperative Development of Operational 
Safety and Continued Airworthiness (COSCAP) projects in the Economic Community of 
Western African States (ECOWAS) and Economic and Monetary Community of Central 
Africa (CEMAC) countries which are financed through grants by bi and multilateral 
donors.  
 
This division of roles was agreed upon with these donors during project preparation 
after it was confirmed that the Bank's charter precludes it from financing regional 
initiatives (i.e. COSCAPs) involving direct lending to regional organizations (i.e. 
ECOWAS, WAEMU and CEMAC). Accordingly, while the project will focus on: i) 
strengthening national CAAs safety and security oversight capacities and ii) enhancing 
national airport security and safety standards, the COSCAP projects will seek to develop 
regional safety oversight capacities that will complement those of local CAAs.  
 
The two Secretariat Units located within ECOWAS and CEMAC will have overall (i.e. 
regional and national) project management responsibilities in order to promote effective 
coordination and harmonization at the regional level. However, national project 
component will effectively be implemented independently by existing local project 
implementation units (PIUs), whenever these already exist so as to ensure economical 
effectiveness or national CAAs.  
 
The project has three main components:  
 
a) 
Strengthening of CAAs' safety and security oversight capacities: this component 
will finance Nigeria's CAA technical assistance necessary mainly for: a) the training of 
civil aviation staff in the areas of civil aviation security and safety oversights; b) the 
acquisition of basic communications and inspections equipments (e.g., two-ways radios, 
inspection vehicle, computers, etc.), and c) the procurement of library equipment (e.g., 
relevant ICAO's manuals, directives, online library, training materials, etc.).  
 
b)
Improvements in airport security and safety standards: This activity will involve 
establishing appropriate aviation security legislation, development of security programs 
(national, airports and airlines programs), provision of security and safety equipment at 
Page  3
the main international airports, replacement of navigational aids at the primary airports 
and capacity building. The main areas of focus of this program will be: a) the 
implementation of measures to reinforce security at the various airport accesses 
(identification equipment, security cameras, patrol vehicles, communications systems and 
reorganization of passenger flows); b) the rehabilitation and/or construction within 
existing airport building premises of crisis centers, including acquisition of necessary 
communication and surveillance tools to equip these centers; c) the training of airport 
security and safety personnel; d) the development of airport security through the 
acquisition of passengers and cargo X-ray machines; e) the acquisition and rehabilitation 
of navigational aids and communications systems, and f) the purchase of firefighting 
equipment.  
 
c) 
Others: This activity, entitled "others", is meant to encompass: a) the financing of 
project operating costs covering inter alia annual financing audits and day-to-day 
management; and b) money set-aside as non-allocated to cover any uncertainties 
regarding planned project activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location will be the headquarters of the Ministry of Aviation in Abuja and the 
international airports in the following cities: Abuja, Kano, Lagos and Port Harcourt.  
 
Safeguard policies triggered by this project is OP/BP 4.01 (environmental assessment).  
 
The environmental impacts are not expected to be ?significant? and a full EA is 
therefore not required. An Environmental and Social Management Framework has been 
adapted for the project. The primary objective of this ESMF is to improve decision 
making and to ensure that the design, construction, expansion, upgrading of airports and 
beneficiary agencies infrastructures are environmentally and socially sound and 
sustainable.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
During project preparation, possible social and environmental impacts were associated 
with limited construction and rehabilitation work to be carried within several airport 
operational premises of beneficiary agencies headquarters. Most of the impacts will be 
small-scale and site-specific. Consequently, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework has been developed and will be disclosed before project appraisal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No project alternatives were considered to minimize adverse impact as the security 
perimeter defined for each airport encompasses the minimal land area necessary to ensure 
safety and security of air operations.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Aviation is responsible for coordinating the development, management 
and maintenance of airport and aviation facility. Specifically with regards to this ESMF, 
the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) located within the Ministry will oversee any 
construction/rehabilitation work to ensure that they are performed as per the clauses laid 
out in each work contract. The PIU will retain the service of an environmental specialist, 
who will be responsible for following up the recommendations of the ESMF and ensuring 
that environmental clauses are included in contracts and Bills of Quantities (BOQs). He 
will also be responsible for screening all the construction sub-projects in the different 
airport locations using the ESMF and ascertaining if further environmental work like an 
EIA or ESIA would be necessary.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.  
 
Key stakeholders who have been fully consulted during project preparation and are 
aware of the importance of safeguards policies include:  
 
Federal Ministry of Aviation  
 
Federal Ministry of Environment and Housing  
 
Nigeria Civil Aviation Agency (NCAA)  
 
Nigeria Airspace Management Agency (NAMA)  
 
Federal Airport Authority of Nigeria (FAAN)  
 
Nigeria College of Aviation Technology (NCAT)   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
04/25/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
04/25/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
04/25/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
04/25/2007 
Comments:   
