Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/19/2007 
Report No.:  AC2687
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P084404 
Project Name:  Southern African Power Market Program (APL2) 
Task Team Leader:  Wendy E. Hughes 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 9, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
93.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The APL 2 Development Objectives are to (i) diversify Malawi?s supplies of energy such 
that drought risk is mitigated and energy affordability and reliability improved, and (ii) 
expand Malawi and Mozambique?s opportunities to benefit from bilateral and regional 
power trading on the Southern African Power Pool.   
 
3. Project Description 
Overview  
 
APL 2, Project 1 will be financed by two IDA Credits, one to the Government of 
Malawi and one to the Government of Mozambique. These credits will be on-lent to the 
respective electric power utilities: ESCOM and EDM, which would be the implementing 
agencies.  
 
The project will consist of three components: (A) Mozambique- Malawi 
Interconnection; (B) Capacity Building and Technical Support for Upgrade and 
Expansion to Support Power Trading; and (C) Improved Infrastructure to support 
Electricity Trading.  
 
COMPONENT A:  Mozambique-Malawi Interconnection  
 
Page  2
This component will cover about 210 km long transmission interconnection between the 
electricity grid systems of Malawi and Mozambique. This link would also join Malawi to 
the Southern Africa Power Pool (SAPP) and help it reap the benefits of being part of a 
large, interconnected grid. Based on the detailed feasibility analysis by the consultants, it 
has been established that the interconnection would be through a double circuit 220 kV 
twin bundle conductor line emanating from existing Matambo substation in Mozambique, 
which receives energy from the Hidroelectrica de Cahora Bassa (HCB).   A new 220 kV 
substation shall be built at Phombeya to connect this transmission link with the ESCOM, 
Malawi grid. The component also covers associated studies, works, engineering and 
project management support to complete the interconnection, and investments for better 
operation and maintenance of this critical link.  
 
Alternatives Studied:  The feasibility for this interconnection was studied by an 
international consultant, Lahmeyer International Gmbh, Germany in 2005. The study was 
reviewed by EDM, ESCOM and subsequently by the World Bank team. Considering the 
length for interconnection, three main alternatives were considered for this 
interconnection ? i) Single Circuit 400 kV; ii) Single circuit 220 kV; and iii) double 
circuit 220 kV. Though the alternative with double circuit 220 kV line was more 
expensive, it was the only alternative which could meet the network stability requirement 
for such long interconnection between the grid systems of Malawi and northern 
Mozambique which are both relatively vulnerable to system-wide black-out.  The other 
alternatives would have caused instability and black-outs in the two systems, in case of 
sudden tripping of the line due to faults. The cost of black-outs would have been much 
higher than the savings in capital cost with other alternatives.  
 
Subsequently, several optimization options were analyzed for the selected alternative of 
double circuit 220 kV line, such as conductor configuration of single conductor vs. twin 
bundle, type of tower supports and building the line initially with single circuit and 
subsequently stringing the second circuit, when the power flow on the line reaches higher 
level. However, the final selection was done considering the possible role of this line as 
part of SAPP system and the likely use of this link as an import and export link for both 
countries. The selected configuration of the line, as detailed below also provides the 
advantage of maximizing the utilization the right of way corridor.  
 
The selected configuration of the line is a double circuit 220 kV line to transfer 
minimum 300 MW of power through a double circuit line with twin bundle (2*431 mm2  
?BISON?)  conductor in each phase. The self supporting steel lattice towers are proposed 
to be of cross-rope, suspension type. The line would carry in one of its conductors an 
optical fiber (OPGW) link for the control and protection of the transmission 
interconnection. The OPGW would have spare capacity, which could be used for voice 
and data transfer between the two countries. The line would pass through a distance of 
about 134 km in Mozambique, as per the initial survey, including the  river crossing at 
Zambezi River and then about 76 km in Malawi territory.  
 
The associated works for the line included in the project are environment and social 
studies and implementation of the RPF and environmental management plans, 
Page  3
preliminary and detailed survey for the route and alignment, license costs, engineering, 
support for procurement, contracting and supervision and the project management during 
implementation.  
 
The associated work for the substations comprise of  
 
i) 
Extension of the existing 220 kV Matambo substation, in Tete region of 
Mozambique, to provide for connecting the two circuits of the 220 kV line and associated 
compensation equipment, as well as the work to provide necessary SCADA 
interconnection etc.  
 
ii) 
A new 220 kV substation at Phombeya, in Blantyre region of Malawi, to receive 
and transform the electrical power to 132 kV Voltage for connecting to ESCOM, 
Malawi?s grid.  
 
The component envisages funding of hotline maintenance equipment for both the 
utilities and procurement of emergency restoration system  for Malawi, to handle any 
tower outage contingency. The procurement of this equipment and training for the 
utilities? staff would help to ensure a high availability of the critical link and reduce the 
down time of the link in case of a fault.  
 
COMPONENT B - Capacity Building and Technical Support for Upgrade and 
Expansion to Support Power Trading  
 
This component would provide technical support to ESCOM, Malawi and EDM, 
Mozambique. The identified activities are described below. It is envisaged that this 
component would also accommodate any small requests for technical support for the two 
utilities, identified during the tenure of the credit.  
 
ESCOM, Malawi Component: This would provide institutional support for the 
development of ESCOM in the areas including planning, improved operational and 
commercial performance, power trading, environment and social management.  This 
assistance will help in identifying critical bottlenecks in the system and would be 
preparatory step for efficient and better implementation of the future investments in 
identified key areas like transmission and distribution critical rehabilitation, new hydro 
generation, system operation, etc.  
 
Some of the areas identified for support, under this component include:  
 
o
Update of power system development master plan for Malawi Power System  
 
o
Studies for transmission network urgent rehabilitation and system operation and 
maintenance practices improvement.  
 
o
SCADA and communication system review and design of its upgrade, with 
bidding documents and technical specifications.  
 
o
Assessment of rehabilitation needs of hydro power plants, respective EIAs, and 
preparation of designs, specifications and bidding documents for the agreed scope.  
 
o
Consultant services and training for: (i) Design and implementation of a financial 
and operational performance enhancement plan, and (ii) Revenue stream diagnostic study 
Page  4
and equipment and technical assistance in implementation of a revenue management 
strategy based on study?s recommendations;  
 
o
Environmental and Social training and technical assistance;  
 
o
Capacity building and strengthening of project management unit for effective 
implementation of the project;  
 
o
Power trading  and system operation technical assistance and training;  
 
o
Other studies, to be identified later.  
 
EDM, Mozambique Component:  This would provide institutional support for the 
development of EDM.  This would include mainly, the feasibility study for extension of 
the interconnector to Nampula in North Mozambique; update of the power system 
development plan; technical support for effective implementation of the project.  The 
identified areas include:  
 
o
Feasibility study for extension of Matambo-Phombeya line to Nampula and 
update pf Power system development plan.  
 
o
Capacity building and strengthening of the project implementation unit  
 
o
Training & Other studies (Environmental and resettlement, loss reduction study, 
etc.)  
 
COMPONENT C - Improved Infrastructure to Support Electricity Trading  
 
This component will fund limited, urgent rehabilitation and reinforcement of the Malawi 
and northern Mozambique grids, required to support electricity trading.  
 
ESCOM, Malawi Component: This component would fund replacement of worn-out 
circuit breakers and other switchgear, control and protection equipment, some critical 
communication links from important load centers and generating stations to link the 
national control centre for better system operation control and assessing the flow. Further 
urgent rehabilitation activities to facilitate power exchange through the interconnector 
may be identified as a result of the studies to be undertaken in Component B activities, 
for example completion of critical missing overhead optical fibre links on existing 
transmission lines to get data for critical generating stations and load centers at control 
centers; associated communication equipment and OPGW splitters etc.; telephone 
exchanges; replacement of overloaded distribution transformers with larger capacity at 
the same location, replacement of small-sized conductor with bigger conductor on same 
poles, etc..  This component would also finance key investment in support of the revenue 
improvement activities, as per recommendations in the revenue diagnostic study, e.g. 
meters etc.  None of these activities would have any environmental or social issues 
implications, beyond those which can be addressed in contractor specifications (e.g. low 
noise equipment, PCB free material, better erection techniques, etc.).  
 
EDM, Mozambique Component: The power supply to the industrially-growing area of 
Tete is of very poor quality and reliability. The supply problem was aggravated with the 
damage due to fire of the 220/66/33 kV power transformer at Matambo substation, which 
had been the main source of power supply to these areas. This component would fund the 
provision of an 80 MVA 220/66/33 kV new transformer in the extended portion of the 
Page  5
Matambo substation and its interconnection with the 66 and 33 kV system and associated 
civil works, control and protection work.  In a situation where EDM imports power from 
Malawi, this strengthening of the Matambo transformer capacity will be critical in 
ensuring that the traded electricity reaches customers in northern Mozambique.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in north-west Mozambique and southern Malawi.  The major 
proposed investments are (i) upgrade of an existing sub-station at Matambo, near Tete in 
Mozambique, (ii) construction of a new approximately 210 km transmission line west 
from Matambo to Phombeya in Malawi, 134km in Mozambique, 76km in Malawi. The 
exact routing of the line is not determined.  More detailed information will be obtained at 
an early stage of project implementation; (iii) construction of a new substation at 
Phombeya in Malawi.  It is also proposed to finance some critical rehabilitation / 
strengthening of the transmission and distribution networks as described above.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Impact on displacement and dispossession is very limited. Based on a thorough social 
analysis in each country along the entire wider transmission line corridor and the areas of 
the two substations, a corridor with limited human activities has been retained for the 
construction of the transmission line, to avoid the hardship of displacement. The data of 
the social analysis have been represented in two Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPF) - 
one for Mozambique, one for Malawi.It was determined that RPFs, rather than 
Resettlement Action Plans, would be appropriate since the exact location of the towers 
and line route within the broader corridor was not known at the time of disclosure. At the 
early stage of implementation a technical study and a survey will be conducted to 
Page  6
determine the exact location of the transmission line and towers within the corridor, and a 
record the people and assets that will be affected will be developed.  Based on the results, 
and if needed, a Resettlement Action Plan or an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan 
will be prepared, approved, disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop and implemented 
before the start of any investment and construction work.  
 
For both countries an Environmental Assessment (EA) was prepared. The project 
corridor in Mozambique and Malawi passes mostly through agricultural land or low 
biodiversity-value bush-land. In Malawi an important forest reserve has been avoided by 
selecting another corridor outside the Thambani Forest Reserve, one of the few remaining 
forest areas in the country. The project will not cause any major or irreversible 
environmental impacts in Mozambique or Malawi.  
 
Some very limited spots along the transmission line route may need to be cleared of 
landmines.  A World Bank field visit revealed that the environmental impacts on natural 
habitat and the demining activities to be financed under the project were less severe than 
formerly anticipated. Clearing of landmines is only intended in one or two spots along the 
transmission line and not along the entire route in Mozambique as was formerly 
considered. In Malawi, a high biodiversity forest reserve has been avoided by changing 
the corridor. For these reasons the project EA category was changed from A into B.  
 
The urgent rehabilitation and reinforcement activities under Component C, were defined 
only after disclosure of the above EAs. None of these activities to be included in 
Component C would have any environmental or social issues implications, beyond those 
which can be addressed in contractor specifications (e.g. low noise equipment, PCB free 
material, better erection techniques, etc.).  The environmental management aspects will 
be handled according to the same standards as described in both EA studies. In particular, 
the disposal of any hazardous wastes will be handled according to international standards.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Because of the existence of high electrical voltage, the right of way areas will be 
protected and public access may be restricted. Loss of land and other assets will be 
addressed through the RAP.  Passage ways will be provided for the public.  There will be 
no potential indirect and/or long term environmental impacts in either country.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During preparation, for each country two possible corridors were considered. The 
corridor that represents the least adverse impacts has been selected.  The transmission 
line routing in Malawi has been changed in order to avoid the Thambani Forest Reserve, 
an important high biodiversity area in Malawi. There are no other feasible alternative 
routing options.   
 
Page  7
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During preparation, both EdM in Mozambique and ESCOM in Malawi have prepared an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) and a RPF.   Both EAs contain an environmental and 
social management and environmental capacity building plan.  
 
ESCOM and EDM both have existing environmental and social units, which have been 
supported by former or on-going World Bank-financed projects.  Within these units, 
Resettlement Officers have been identified and designated.  
 
Both units will need strengthening during implementation. Technical assistance and 
training is included in Component B.  The resettlement and environmental officers of 
both environmental and social units will be trained, beginning at the launch of the project, 
in the area of World Bank safeguards, according to a training program designed with 
input from World Bank specialists (ASPEN).  The safeguard officers will be in charge of 
the implementation and monitoring of the RAPs and the EAs with technical assistance as 
required.  EdM and ESCOM will hire international environmental management technical 
assistance during the construction of the Interconnector in order to strengthen the existing 
environmental management capacity within EdM and ESCOM. World Bank specialists 
(ASPEN) will closely monitor the implementation of the safeguard mitigation measures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
ESCOM and EdM conducted social assessments respectively in Malawi and 
Mozambique to assess the impact of the project on the country at large and the local 
population where the transmission lines will be implemented.  The local population, local 
authorities, technicians as well as representatives of civil society at large were consulted 
and their point of views used in the project design and the choice of the corridors for the 
transmission lines.  Interviews and focus groups were used among other consultation 
techniques.  The two RPFs and two EAs have been disclosed and debated in public areas 
accessible to the public and have been disclosed in the Infoshop in Washington.  
Disclosure of the RAPs, still to be prepared, will follow the same procedures.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/30/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/24/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/13/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/14/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2007 
 
Page  8
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Wendy E. Hughes 
04/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
04/19/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
04/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/19/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/19/2007 
Comments:   
