Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2840 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/22/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P100785 
Project Name: West and Central Africa Air Transport Safety & Security Project - APL 
Phase 2 
Task Team Leader: Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Aviation (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(S);Regulation and competition policy (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
46.65 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
These overarching Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are, within each participating 
country, to: 1) Improve CAAs' compliance with ICAO's safety standards, 2) Increase CAA's 
compliance with ICAO's security standards, and 3) Enhance main international airports' 
compliance with ICAO's security standards. In order to measure attainment of these PDOs, the 
following key outcome indicators whose target values will be used for each country participating 
in the project:  
 
PDO 1: Improve CAA's compliance with ICAO's safety standards:  
 
1)
Compliance rate with ICAO aggregate safety standards based on ICAO's audits;  
 
2)
Percentage of technical personnel in compliance with ICAO's safety standards; and  
 
3)
Total CAA's budget amount.  
 
PDO 2: Improve CAA's compliance with ICAO's security standards:  
 
1)
Compliance rate with ICAO's aggregate security standards based on ICAO's audit;  
 
2)
Percentage of CAA's ICAO's certified security inspectors trained during the last three years;  
 
3)
Level of CAA's budget dedicated to security; and  
Page  2
PDO 3: Enhance main international airports' compliance with ICAO's security standards:  
 
1)
Percentage of airport security personnel with three or more years of experience;  
 
2)
Number of serious problems recorded during annual airport crisis exercises; and  
 
3)
Percentage of embarking passengers stopped in possession of illegal objects, as defined by 
the ICAO, by airlines security personnel.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support the development of a regional Air Transport Program within the context 
of the Yamoussoukro Decision (YD) implementation. It will complement the work that will be 
undertaken by regional institutions (with donors' support) in the area of Air Transport Economic 
Regulation harmonization, while primarily focusing on airport and aviation safety and security. 
Although the project will be implemented at a national level, its components are designed to 
complement ongoing regional Cooperative Development of Operational Safety and Continued 
Airworthiness (COSCAP) projects in the Economic Community of Western African States 
(ECOWAS) and Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) countries 
which are financed through grants by bi and multilateral donors.  
 
This division of roles was agreed upon with these donors during project preparation after it was 
confirmed that the Bank's charter precludes it from financing regional initiatives (i.e. COSCAPs) 
involving direct lending to regional organizations (i.e. ECOWAS, WAEMU and CEMAC). 
Accordingly, while the project will focus on: i) strengthening national CAAs safety and security 
oversight capacities and ii) enhancing national airport security and safety standards, the 
COSCAP projects will seek to develop regional safety oversight capacities that will complement 
those of local CAAs.  
 
The two Secretariat Units located within ECOWAS and CEMAC will have overall (i.e. regional 
and national) project management responsibilities in order to promote effective coordination and 
harmonization at the regional level. However, national project component will effectively be 
implemented independently by existing local project implementation units (PIUs), whenever 
these already exist so as to ensure economical effectiveness or national CAAs.  
 
The project has three main components:  
 
a) 
Strengthening of CAAs' safety and security oversight capacities: This component will 
finance Nigeria's CAA technical assistance necessary mainly for: a) the training of civil aviation 
staff in the areas of civil aviation security and safety oversights; b) the acquisition of basic 
communications and inspections equipments (e.g., two-ways radios, inspection vehicle, 
computers, etc.), and c) the procurement of library equipment (e.g., relevant ICAO's manuals, 
directives, online library, training materials, etc.).  
 
b)
Improvements in airport security and safety standards: This activity will involve 
establishing appropriate aviation security legislation, development of security programs 
(national, airports and airlines programs), provision of security and safety equipment at the main 
international airports, replacement of navigational aids at the primary airports and capacity 
building. The main areas of focus of this program will be: a) the implementation of measures to 
reinforce security at the various airport accesses (identification equipment, security cameras, 
patrol vehicles, communications systems and reorganization of passenger flows); b) the 
Page  3
rehabilitation and/or construction within existing airport building premises of crisis centers, 
including acquisition of necessary communication and surveillance tools to equip these centers; 
c) the training of airport security and safety personnel; d) the development of airport security 
through the acquisition of passengers and cargo X-ray machines; e) the acquisition and 
rehabilitation of navigational aids and communications systems, and f) the purchase of 
firefighting equipment.  
 
c) 
Others: This activity, entitled "others", is meant to encompass: a) the financing of project 
operating costs covering inter alia annual financing audits and day-to-day management; and b) 
money set-aside as non-allocated to cover any uncertainties regarding planned project activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Four international airports in Nigeria: Lagos, Port Harcourt, Abuja and Kaduna. In addition, the 
Ministry of Aviation in Abuja and the Aviation Training School at Zaria.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
During project preparation, possible social and environmental impacts were associated with 
limited construction and rehabilitation work to be carried within several airport operational 
premises of beneficiary agencies headquarters. Most of the impacts will be small-scale and site-
specific. Consequently, an Environmental and Social Management Framework has been 
developed and will be disclosed before project appraisal.  
 
The Ministry of Aviation is responsible for coordinating the development, management and 
maintenance of airport and aviation facility. Specifically with regards to this ESMF, the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) located within the Ministry will oversee any 
construction/rehabilitation work to ensure that they are performed as per the clauses laid out in 
each work contract. The PIU will retain the service of an environmental specialist, who will be 
responsible for following up the recommendations of the ESMF and ensuring that environmental 
clauses are included in contracts and BOQs. He will also be responsible for  screening all the 
construction sub-projects in the different airport locations using the ESMF and ascertaining if 
further environmental work like an EIA or ESIA would be necessary   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Safeguard policies triggered by this project is OP/BP 4.01 (environmental assessment). The 
environmental impacts are not expected to be "significant" and a full EA is therefore not 
required. An Environmental and Social Management Framework has been adapted for the 
project. The primary objective of this ESMF is to improve decision making and to ensure that the 
design, construction, expansion, upgrading of airports and beneficiary agencies infrastructures 
are environmentally and socially sound and sustainable.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/05/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework has been developed and will be 
disclosed before project appraisal. The SMU has agreed to accept the transfer of the 
safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
03/18/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/22/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
03/22/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
