Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3100 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P107255 
Project Name: Southern Africa Technical Advisory Services Project 
Task Team Leader: Charles A. Husband 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 24, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 11, 2008 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (35%);General transportation sector (35%);Mining and 
other extractive (30%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
Many developing countries in Southern Africa are experiencing a rapidly growing need 
for technical advisory services to facilitate and approve large-scale regional infra?structure and 
natural resource investments. These countries often have very low capacity to respond 
adequately to the complex, highly technical proposals put forward by private sector investors 
interested in developing large infrastructure projects in the region. As such, the countries are not 
able to maximize the developmental impact of such projects.  
 
2. 
Specifically, these countries need world-class ?just-in-time? expertise to respond to 
complex proposals and development plans, often under tight deadlines, submitted by private 
sector investors. The Governments of Malawi, Mozambique, and Zambia have requested 
assistance from the World Bank to provide a financial facility to fund such expert on-demand 
advisory assistance and on which the respective governments could draw when necessary. The 
proposed Project would also help the governments to: (i) develop capacity in their natural 
resource and infrastructure ministries to better handle large private sector infrastructure and 
natural resource investments; (ii) identify rapid response and on-demand consulting technical 
Page  2
and advisory ser?vices needed to prepare planned infrastructure projects; (iii) attract private 
sector investments; (iv) respond to interest and ad hoc requests from the private sector; (v) 
develop the regulatory and legal frameworks required to facilitate private sector investment; and 
(vi) harmonize policy and legal frameworks across countries in the region.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
3. 
The Proposed Project's development objective is to provide nimble, flexible and just-in-
time technical advisory support for infrastructure development and natural resource development 
projects in order to maximize their development and poverty alleviation potential and accelerate 
regional integration. The project amount is US$30 million, which will be equally shared among 
the three participating countries initially comprising Malawi, Mozambique, and Zambia over a 
three year period.  Within each country, funds are to be accessed on a first-come, first-served 
basis by the energy, transport and natural resources sectors.  
 
4. 
The project comprises two components to harmonize regional development frameworks 
and to accelerate and expand the regional development impact of private infrastructure and 
natural resource developments:  
 
-
Component 1: Harmonization of Regional Development Plans and Policy Frameworks, and 
Implementation of SADC Protocols.  This component would support activities that improve the 
scale and/or efficiency of regional infrastructure; facilitate trans-bound?ary project 
develop?ment, harmonization of regional development plans and policy frameworks; and 
implement relevant SADC protocols. Activities supported under this component include: (a) 
harmoni?zation of legal, regulatory, and fiscal regimes/frameworks; (b) high-impact single-
country reform of the legal, regulatory, and fiscal regimes covering public-private partnerships 
and/or other private sector investments that promote regional integration; (c) mitigation of trans-
boundary environ?mental and social impacts; (d) development of regional economic linkages; (e) 
establishment of regional institutional frameworks; and (f) implementation of relevant SADC 
protocols.  
 
-
Component 2: Maximization of Regional Development and Poverty Reduction Potential of 
Large Infrastructure and Natural Resource Development Projects  Through providing advisory 
support to Governments in transactions with the private sector including: (i) attracting private 
sector proposals for investment through assembling bid packages and tender documents; (ii) 
evaluation of proposals and environmental assessments; (iii) development or evaluation of 
framework agreements; (iv) negotiation of contracts; and (v) pre and post construction 
monitoring of projects/contracts/agreements for SADC priority infrastructure projects with 
regional benefit.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
5. 
The proposed Project would be a horizontal Adaptable Program Loan (APL) to allow 
other interested countries to join at a later phase. The first, three-year phase would cover Malawi, 
Mozambique, and Zambia, with a second phase planned to cover other contiguous countries 
within the SADC Region.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
6. 
Since the proposed Project is technical assistance, it will not have any direct social or 
environmental impacts. Nonetheless, there may be social and environmental impacts associated 
with the resulting large infrastructure and natural resource development projects in the event the 
assistance provided under the proposed Project is successful. The proposed Project will address 
social and environmental aspects in several ways, which include:  
 
-
Criteria for Project Assistance. The proposed Project will include a set of criteria against 
which funding for eligible proposals put forth by the Borrowers will be assessed. Proposals will 
be vetted by the Bank Task Team Leader and relevant Bank Country Team members (e.g., 
Financial Management Specialist, Procurement Specialist, Environment and Social Safeguards 
Adviser) to ensure that they are technically sound, economically viable and provide for measures 
to identify and address any environmental and/or social impacts. If assistance is being sought for 
advice on infrastructure projects that are likely to have significant or potentially adverse 
environmental and/or social impacts, the Borrower will be required to take reasonable measures 
to ensure that an Environmental Impact Assessment or Environmental Assessment (as relevant), 
in line with World Bank standards, has been or will be prepared. In the event this is not possible, 
project funds could be used (or other resources mobilized) to ensure that the EIA/EA is prepared.  
 
-
Other Sources of Funding. In the event that a proposal is not accepted for funding under the 
proposed project due to concerns over potential environmental and/or social impacts, but is 
funded through other sources, the Bank will submit a written record to the government and 
financier of concerns related to environmental and/or social impacts.  
 
-
Advisory Assistance. Expert technical advisory assistance supported by the proposed Project 
would include a review and advice on the social and environmental aspects and impacts of the 
infrastructure development projects under consideration as set out in the associated EIAs.  In this 
regard, assistance would aim to improve the level of social and environmental impact mitigation 
associated with such underlying projects.  Assistance could also be provided with development 
of upstream strategic EAs (SEAs), including broad consideration of options and alternatives.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jean-Michel G. Pavy (AFTEN) 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
See above Section E.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/01/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
7.  Per Section E above, specific studies prior to Project implementation are not envisaged.  
However, the measures described above in Section E will be taken to ensure that potential 
environmental and social safeguard impacts of infrastructure projects for which assistance is 
proposed are taken into account.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Charles A. Husband 
08/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
10/16/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
