                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDSDATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

 Report No.:

 Date ISDS PreparedIUpdated: May 25,2006

 I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data

 Country: Regional (Namibia, Botswana,        I ProjectID: PO97136
 South Africa and Zambia
                                               Additional Project ID: NA
 Project Name: Open Africa North South Tourism Corridor
 Task Team Leader: Jean-Michel Pavy
 Estimated Amraisal Date: Nov. 2006           I Estimated Board Date: NA
                                              /                                           1
                                               Lending Instrument: GEF MSP
                                     and forestry sector (50%); General industry and trade
 sector (50%)
 Theme: Biodiversity (P)
 IBRD Amount (US$m.): NA
 IDA Amount (US$m.): NA
 GEF Amount (US$m.): $1.0 m
 PCF Amount (US$m.): NA
(Other financing amounts by source: $1.0 m (corporate cofinancing)                       -A
                                                                    -       -

 Environmental Category: C                                                              - 1
 SimplifiedProcessing                 Simple [ x]               Repeater 1]              1
1Isthis a transferred project         Yes [ ]                   No [x]                   AI


 B. Project Objectives:

 GEF supported projects have a development objective and a global environment objective.
 - Development Objective: A significant number of people living within the defined corridor's
 biodiversity hotspots enter the economic mainstream by leveraging their tourism and self-
 empowerment potential.
 - Global Objective: Communities along the newly established routes factor better biodiversity
 management into their mode of existence and use of biodiversity resources.

 C. Project Description:

 Open Africa's intends to implement a project which would become a replicable inodel of
 community-based tourism development symbiotic with conservation, applicable in any area in
 Africa or elsewhere in the world, with the broad impact of positively changing grassroots level
 behavior. The initial design of this project envisions encompassing four separate coniponents.
 These are the components of the MSP and are listed below with the estimated budget for each.

Component 1: Develop Routes Specific to the Corridor ($l.Om):                  This compoiient is
expected to include the following activities: (1) Undertake a reconnaissance mission and rapid
assessment of each region-move       into route specific activities, (2) Conduct initial comnunity
(route) stakeholder meetings, (3) Identify the route-specific nature conservation indicator; using
Indigenous Knowledge, (4) Vet the route-specific indicators through an appropriate thirc party,
i.e., graduate level university student/professor, (5) Conduct second stakeholder meetings, (6)
Community elects a forum and chairperson to manage the newly developed route in each
instance, (7) Community establishes a name (brand) for the new route, (8) Capture pertinent
route information: stories, photos, contact information, GIs coordinates and comment;ry, (9)
Collate the data and load into www.africandream.org, (10) Issue Open Africa Affirmation of
Afrikatourism Ethics Charter which participants sign, (1I) Hold route festivals where each
route is officially launched, and (12) Begin aftercare activities including monitoriiig and
evaluation, route networking and knowledge sharing.

Component 2: Mainstream Nature Conservation into Existing Routes ($0.4m):                      This
component is expected to include: (1) Revisit existing routes in the corridor area (i.e., the five
pre-OANSTC routes already developed plus the three presently being developed) and identify
route-specific nature conservation indicators using Indigenous Knowledge, (2) Vet the route-
specific indicators through an appropriate third party, i.e., graduate level uiliversity
student/professor, (3) Hold community stakeholder meeting to impress the importance of the
protection and improvement of the route-specific indicators

Component 3: Build Capacity for Tourism Marketing, Monitoring & Evaluation and
Knowledge Management ($0.4m): This component is expected to include the fi~llowing
activities: (1) Nurture the development of marketing skills including (a) Produce a network
identity manual, (b) Devise strategies to assist routes in web-based target marketing e.g.,
connecting routes with birds to birding clubs and develop an "open" manual on target m irketing,
(c) Devise a strategy for communal representation of routes at tourism exhibitions under the
Open Africa banner, (d) Develop a database of tour operators for the purpose of inform ng them
regularly about what is available on routes for possible inclusion in their packages, (e) Develop a
route forum fundraising toolkit, (f) Develop a route forum public relations toolkit, and (g)
Develop a best practice method for route participants to gather tourists information in order to
stay in contact with them and promote word-of-mouth marketing, (2) Upgrade the Open Africa
website data carrying and analysis capacity, (3) Enhance the M&E system and move it to a web
environment for remote access, (4) Enhance linkages with demand markets, (5) Hold annual
conferences for the exchange of success stories among route chairpersons, (6) Publish and
disseminate best practice handbooks among the routes

Component 4: Project Administration Management ($0.2m): This component is enected to
include the following activities: (1) Create a project handbook, (2) Install a project management
system, and (3) Produce appropriate reports and documentation in a timely and routine manner.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

Zambia, Botswana, Namibia and South Africa were chosen for this project because each of the
four countries (1) have identified tourism as a key industry for economic development and more
particularly nature-based tourism and (2) are endowed with globally significant ecosyst~:msand
biodiversity that are under increasing pressure. Tourism development usually benef ts from
well-preserved biodiversity and contributes to its conservation.

The biodiversity resources within the ecoregions currently pre-identified under OANSYC have
major global significance. They also cross provincial and national boundaries, where the
economic deprivation threats that apply are similar, as are the limited choices of ec:onomic
activity. The commonality of these conditions supports the notion of establishing a network
among them, also with regard to including PA gateway communities in the efforts to promote
conservation.




ECOREGION              Country & location of potential routes                           7

1. CENTRAL             Zambia: Traditional elephant corridor area between North Luailgwa &
                                    (Shiwa Ngandu, Waterfall areas, Mutinondo); wilhin the
    MIOMBO             Miombos Ecoregion, this "highland miombos" has high plant diversity
                                    mist and gallery forests near the falls as identified in the
                                            strategy and action plan.                   2

2. ZAMBEZIAIV  Zambia Kafinda Bangweulu GMA and wetland in open areas inking
   FLOODED    the Bangweulu to the various NP around it (e.g Kasanka IVP); already a
   GRASSLANDS UNDP GEF reclassification project; this wetland is a major stop over
               for ethiopian and paleartic migrants; it is also home of endangered
               species such as the shoebill stork.
              Botswana: Area linking conservation areas around the Moremi F.eserve
               in the Okavango delta; this wetland is of worldwide importance.
3. WESTERN    Zambia: ~usalanguGMA and open areas in Losi Kingdom around
   ZAMBIAN    Liuwa National Park, Sioma Ngwezi NP (one route already under
   GRASSLANDS development); this area is a top priority in the Zambia biodiversity
              strategy. It is known as the second great migratory route for tlie blue
              wildebeest (the other being Serengeti with the brown wildebeest)
4. KALAHARI   Namibia: Caprivi GP and open area between the Caprivi and Elthosha
   ACACIA-    NP (One route already under development); The Caprivi strip itself is
   BAIKIAEA   not a particular importance for biodiversity, however, it is of utmost
   WOODLAND   importance as a migratory route for large herds of elephants, b~ffaloes
              and associated predators from Chobe (where the elephant popu1;rtion is
              too high) to the Western Zambian grassland (Sioma Ngwezi IJP and
              north)
              Botswana: Area linking Chobe NP to Moremi to the South anc. to the
              Zambezi valley & "four corner" areas to the north. This is par: of the
              priority "4-comer TFCA."
5. THE        Botswana:     Area along the Kgalagadi NP linking to the savanna
   KALAHARI   woodland of Namibia. Species adapted to the arid land ecosystem have
   XERIC      developed strategies to cope with variations in annual conditions but
   SAVANNA    national parks are insufficient ground for their survival as indicated in
              the Namibia biodiversity strategy. This is the rationale behind "dropped-
              fence" conservancies and park buffers, which immensely broaden the
              natural habitat available for these species, but are themselves re iant on
              tourism for income.
5. NAMIBIAN   Namibia: Area in between the Kgalagadi NP of Botswana to the Ai-Ais
   SAVANNA    NP as well as the Fish River Canyon and to the succulent Karoo of the
   WOODLAND   Richtersveld in SA (One route already under development). Although
              supportive of less diversity, this area is considered a major zone of
              evolution for such groups as melons (Cucurbitaceae), some families of
              succulent plants, fishmoths (Lepismatidae), solifuges or sun-spiders
              (Solifugae), geckos, lizards, tortoises and many bird families such as
              francolins, coursers, sandgrouse and larks. About 30% of the breeding
              non-migrant bird species occurring in Namibia are endemic to southern
              Africa; and in 90% of these, Namibia supports more than 40% of their
              respective world populations.
7. THENAMIB   Namibia: Area along the coast of the Namib Desert NP south of'walvis
  DESERT      Bay (1 route already under development) The Namib Desert coastal
              region is an area characterized by aridity, the influence of fog and a
              great variety of landforms. These provide diverse habitats for p.ant and
              animal life. As
              --inothercoastalregions,theinteractionbetweenmarine

                        and terrestrial ecosystems provides some unique adaptations ainongst
                       plants and animals, exemplified by the high level of endemism amongst
                       certain groups of plants and animals in the region.
8. SUCCULENT            south Africa: Area in Namaqualand around Namaqua NP and
    KAROO              Kamieskroon (One route is already established) and area around
                       Richtersveld NP linking to the namib savanna woodland of the Fi;h
                       River Canyon & Ai-Ais NP (One route already established). The
                        Succulent Karoo is the only arid region recognized as a biodiversity
                       hotspot. The hotspot covers 116,000 square kilometers of desert and is
                       one of the 25 richest and most threatened reservoirs of plant and animal
                       life on Earth.
9. CAPE                South Africa: Area from Kamieskroon to the south through the
    FLORISTIC          Cedarberg to various areas around Cape Town such as Cape NP (Two
    REGION             routes already established);the biodiversity of the Cape floral kingdom
                       is highly unique and highly threatened. The Cape Floristic Region
                       Hotspot is home to the highest density of plant species in the wor,d. The
                       hotspot harbors more than 9,000 plant species, 70 percent of which are
                       found nowhere else. Plant species that demonstrate the diversity of
                       plants found here include South Africa's national flower, the king
                       protea; the marsh rose; and the silver tree. It is well protected in national
                       parks and reserves but not yet in areas controlled by private owners and
                       communities.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for SafeguardPolicies:

Open Africa is a registered tax exempt Public Benefit Institution obliged to adhere to the
Companies Act of South Africa. Its vision is to link the splendours of Africa through a network
of tourism routes, with the mission of doing this in a manner that conserves and nourishes their
resource base, for which purpose it devised and is implementing a unique system that junctions
at community level and utilizes integrated Geographic Information Systems (GIs) and Internet
technologies. It launched its first route in 1999 and now has 59 in the network, which stretches
across five countries and includes 1 457 SMME's that together support 12 163 direct full time
and 4 831part time jobs.

Open Africa executive secretariat operates from Cape Town, South Africa. It employ:; a small
team of experts in community route development under the leadership of its chairperson.
However, Open Africa has never managed a World Bank project and has not been exposed to
safeguard until now. If necessary, they will employ a consultant to advise them on thest: matters
and prepare the safeguard frameworks.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialistson the Team:

The Bank team will be led by Jean-Michel Pavy (senior environment sp.).                Environment
safeguard issues are not triggered. So no environment safeguard expert is part of team. Social
issues will be overseen by Mohamed Arbi Ben Achour. Should he later identify ally social

  issues that triggers a safeguard he will signal it and attend to its implementation. Otker team
  members are Gabrielle Rechbauer (Consultant environment sp.) and Shaun Mann (tourism sp.).

  11. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

 1                                                                                            En
  Safeguard Policies Tri~geredfulease ex~lainwhv)                     Yes         No      I

 I
      The project seeks positive environmental and social benefits through
  establishment of community tourism route and helping communities
  assets, including biodiversity assets, that also have tourism value.
  Natural Habitats (OPBP 4.04)                                                     X
      Same as above. The project seeks to mainstream biodiversity conservation in
  landscape. No negative impact on natural habitat is expected.
  Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                             X
 1    Same as above. No negative impact on forest is expected.  u                             2
  Pest Management (OP 4.09)
      The project does not support agriculture development through pest
  Cultural Pro~ertv(OPN 11.03)
      Cultural property is sometimes a tourism asset. The project seeks to assist community
  generate benefits from natural and other cultural assets when they have tourism value. No
  negative impact on cultural property is expected.
  Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                  X
      The project areas do not include indigenous people.
  Involuntary Resettlement (OPJBP 4.12)                                            X
      The project does not intend to involuntary limit access to land or land resources or to displace   1
  communities.                                                                               2
1 Safety of Dams (OPBP 4.37)                                                       X      1-4I
      The project does not intend to be involved in the construction of dams.                2
1 Projects on International Waterways (OPBP 7.50
r   ~   h~roiectwill not affect the management orflok of intLmationa1witerwavs.
             e
  Projects in Disputed Areas (OPBP 7.60)
     The areas where the project intends to operate are not disputed.

  111. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

  A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
     would be prepared: NA.

  B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
     ISDS: An MSP does not require a PAD. A final ISDS will be prepared after submission by
     Open Africa of the final MSP Proposal in August or September 2006 before that prol~osalis
     appraised and submitted to the GEF Secretariat.

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing1should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: IVA.

The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.

IV. APPROVALS

 /Si~nedand submitted bv:          "
  Task Team Leader:                               Jean-Michel Pavy
                                                                                                                 05/26/:1006
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards                              Warren Waters
  Coordinator:                                                                                                 &-/so,&
                                                                                                        I
     Comments:
  Acting Sector Manager:
                                                                                                              44~
     Comments:




1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentia ly affected
persons.

