Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1948 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P097201 
Project Name: 3A-Reg&Domestic Pwr Mkt  Dev. SIL (FY07) 
Task Team Leader: Philippe Charles Benoit 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 9, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
275.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
145.00
157.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the project are (a) to improve the efficient utilization of existing 
power generation for the purpose of: (i) increasing government revenues from the export of 
electricity, and to support regional power trade and market integration; and (ii) increasing 
domestic availability of power to serve unmet demand; and (b) to improve sector management by 
strengthening the financial management of the utility and Government capacity for developing 
sector strategies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would consist of five components as follows:  
 
(a)  Generation Component (US$217 million) comprising:  (i) Rehabilitation of the 
hydroelectric facilities at Inga, including civil works to improve the water flow through the water 
intakes and rehabilitation of turbines (US$200 million).This component would increase the 
operational capacity of the Inga plant (1 and 2) from its current maximum of about 700 MW to a 
Page  2
reliable generation capacity of about 1350 MW (which assumes maximum available generation 
of about 1500 MW).  Consideration will be given to separating the turbines into two staggered 
lots and undertaking a study on possible efficiency gains (e.g., turbine redesign) which could 
affect the second lot. (ii) Targeted rehabilitation of three hydropower generation plants in the 
Katanga region (US$17 million), which complements the rehabilitation under the SAPM of the 
Inga/Katanga DC line to support the export to the SADC countries of about 500 MW.  
 
(b)  Transmission Component (US$ 130 million) for a 400 KV Inga-Kinshasa transmission line 
to complement the existing 220 KV line, as well as the construction of two 2x100MVA 
substations. The second line (a double-circuit or other configuration with equivalent capacity) 
will increase the nominal capacity to about 1200 KV, thereby relieving the current saturation of 
the line and allowing a more reliable transport to Kinshasa (as well as beyond to Brazzaville) of 
700 MW or more at more reasonable load factors.  
 
(c)   Expansion of the distribution system in Kinshasa ($40 million), including the acquisition of 
low voltage cables and transformers with a view to connecting about 50,000 new customers 
(including in currently un-electrified areas of Kinshasa) and linking the new substations to the 
distribution system.  
 
(d)  Feasibility Studies and Engineering Service Component (US$ 15 million).  This will 
include feasibility, environmental and social impact assessments and engineering services for 
design and supervision of components (a), (b) and (c) above.  
 
(e)  Institutional and Capacity Building Component (US$ 30 million, including $10 million for 
metering).  Support to initiate a reform process for the power sector and to strengthen sector 
management capacity and performance, with a particular focus on SNEL’s financial management 
and its commercial management of the Kinshasa region.  Activites include:  (a) financial 
management study and implementation of actions to improve financial accounting, reporting and 
internal controls; (b) a distribution business functions management options study, including 
organization, management and staffing strategy study for SNEL with a view to increasing 
revenues; (c) system losses reduction study and implementation of actions to reduce technical 
and non-technical losses; and (d) analysis of demand side management opportunities and 
delivery mechanisms.  The component will also finance the acquisition of meters for Kinshasa 
(focused on currently un-metered medium voltage customers), and support for a SNEL training 
center (currently estimated at $5 million). The component will also include support to the 
Ministry: (i) for formulation of a strategy to further develop the Inga hydropower resources 
(including the proposed Inga 3 project and related Western Corridor project, and opportunities 
for export into the Central Africa Power Pool), and (ii) for analysis of restructuring options 
regarding SNEL and the sector.  The project will build on the results of the tariff, rural 
electrification and sector studies being executed under the EMRRP.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will operate at the hydroelectric site of Inga, along the corridor that connects Inga to 
the city of Kinshasa and in Kinshasa as well.  There will be additional limited activities at 
locations in the Katanga region.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be evaluated during project 
preparation, as part of the EA process, and will build on the Borrower’s compliance under the 
ongoing emergency rehabilitation, the Southern Africa Power Market Project and other projects 
currently under implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Some adverse impacts are possible, though neither major nor complex, notably from the 
rehabilitation of some power and water infrastructure, and the construction of  a second 
transmission line.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Need to ascertain whether second transmission line would affect natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Some small amounts of land and other assets may need to be acquired for the construction of 
a
transmission line.  Resettlement is unlikely, but is possible in very small numbers.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Project involves rehabilitation of the existing Inga dam facilities, but does not involve new 
construction.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Inga is located on the Congo river   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/12/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An environmental assessment should be completed by September 2006 or earlier.  The 
documentation would be disclosed in-country.  It is currently anticipated that the documents 
would be disclosed at the Ministry of Energy, as well as at regional/local government offices 
and/or other public buildings (e.g. libraries) in Kinshasa, Matadi and other key locations (to 
be decided based in part on the locations of project activities), as well as in the World Bank 
office in Kinshasa and at the InfoShop.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
01/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joel J. Maweni 
01/10/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
