Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/25/2006 
Report No.:  AC2459
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P096263 
Project Name:  Land Administration and Management Project (LAMP) 
Task Team Leader:  Wael Zakout 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 14, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 8, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Sub-national government 
administration (40%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
19.96 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
1.54 
 
MUNICIPALITIES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
9.00 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  4.50
21.04 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall goal of the project is to facilitate the development of efficient land and 
property markets through enhancing tenure security and improving land administration 
and management.  
 
The specific objective of the project is to improve land management and orderly 
development through enhanced tenure security and building capacity of local government 
in land-use planning and development control. This would be achieved through: (i) 
improving service delivery of the IPRO and enhancing transparency and accountability of 
its functions; (ii) completing the first registration of immovable property rights, with a 
focus on urban and peri-urban areas; (iii) improving capacities of selected municipalities 
in urban land management practices and enforcement; (v) improving revenue generation; 
and (vi) improving priority urban infrastructure in the participating municipalities.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project will include the following components:  
 
Component A: Security of Tenure and Registration of Immovable Property Rights 
(US$19.40 million)  
 
The objective of component A is to improve service delivery, efficiency and 
transparency of IPRO and complete most of the first registration of immovable property 
rights. The component will cover the entire country but initially, will concentrate on 
urban, peri-urban and coastal areas. The component will include the following sub-
components:  
 
Sub-Component A.1: Improvement in Service Delivery of IPRO  
 
The sub-component will support the improvement of service delivery of IPRO in land 
registration and property transactions and will include: re-engineering of office functions,  
introduction of information technology and improvement of the accuracy and 
completeness of the existing information in the registry,  training and capacity building,  
internal and external monitoring of service standards, data access and sharing protocols, 
and improvement of facilities, provision of equipment and furniture.  
 
Sub-Component A.2: Completion of First Registration of Immovable Property  
 
The sub-component would support the completion of first registration of about 500,000, 
mainly urban and peri-urban properties. It will include the following activities: public 
awareness and customer outreach, mapping and adjudication for first registration, and 
quality control and finalization of first registration.  
 
Sub-component A.3: Further Development of Regulatory Framework  
 
The sub-component will finance the development or revisions of critical laws and 
regulations which would support the completion of first registration, improve IPRO 
services, and enhance tenure security. These would include the regulations concerning 
protection of registered rights, data access and sharing protocols, fee and finance 
structure of registration, etc.  
 
Sub-Component A.4: Training and Study Tours  
 
The sub-component will support the development of a training needs assessment and the 
provision of training to management and staff of IPRO, including management training, 
technical subjects, quality control in support of first registration, and training for IPRO 
staff in new office procedures. The project will also finance the establishment of a 
training center in IPRO central office. The sub-component will also finance several study 
tours and training of trainers.  
 
Sub-component A.5: Administrative and Management Support to IPRO.  
 
The sub-component will finance the incremental operating costs and other expense 
needed to manage the project including the costs of component management.  
Furthermore, the project will provide support to IPRO to strengthen its administrative and 
management functions, including in such areas as: (i) strategic planning and change 
Page  3
management; (ii) human resource development planning; (iii) monitoring, reporting and 
evaluation.  
 
Component B:  Urban Land Management (US$4.96 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of municipalities in urban 
land management through the support to: (1) establishing a market-responsive, 
participatory urban planning and development control system via technical assistance to 
revisions in urban planning law and development of regulatory plans for participating 
cities; and (2) mobilizing municipal revenues and correcting property market distortions 
through property valuation and taxation. The component will consist of the following 
sub-components:  
 
Sub-component B.1: Urban Land Management  
 
The sub-component will support eligible municipalities in urban land management, 
including the development of regulatory plans (including City Development Strategies, 
Infrastructure Investment Plans, and Regulatory Plans) in the largest 10 municipalities in 
Albania and municipalities of cultural significance.  
 
Eligibility.  The support under this component would be extended to municipalities that 
are in need for timely intervention to ensure their orderly development. Key criteria 
include: (a) cities facing demographic pressure (with the population size above 50,000); 
and (2) cities with a substantial cultural significance, facing sizable development 
pressure. As a result, eleven cities are eligible for Component B: Tirana, Durres, Elbasan, 
Shkodra, Fier, Vlore, Berat, Korca, Lushnje, Kamez, and Gjirokaster.  
 
While meeting the aforementioned criteria, Tirana, Elbasan, and Fier are not included in 
the support for the development of regulatory plans, as they already either completed or 
secured funding for the development of regulatory plans.  However, these municipalities 
will be eligible for the property valuation and taxation sub-component. Due to its size and 
the substantial need for the investments, Tirana is not included in the implementation of 
address system.  
 
Sub-component B.2: Property Valuation and Taxation  
 
The sub-component will support the preparation of property valuation law and the 
introduction of market value-based property taxation in the participating municipalities. 
The component will also provide the support to the equipment and training of municipal 
staff in mass appraisal techniques.  
 
Sub-component B.3: Formulation of Urban Land Management Regulations  
 
The sub-component will finance the preparation, through consultative processes and 
public hearings, of the urban law and the key implementing regulations, including a 
condominium law, public land management policy, policy study on tax and fee structure 
on property, etc.  
 
Sub-component B.4: Training  
Page  4
The sub-component will provide training to the municipal staff in land use planning and 
development control, and cover costs of study tours.  
 
Sub-component B.5: Support to the Ministry of Public Works, Transport and 
Telecommunication  
 
The project will support the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and 
Telecommunication to coordinate component B activities. The financing will be also 
provided to: (i) capacity building in monitoring of compliance with regulatory plans; and 
(ii) incremental operating cost of project coordination team, including contractors? costs.  
 
Component C: Municipal Infrastructure (US$ 31.61 million)  
 
The objectives of this component is to enable proactive urban growth management and 
enhancing urban land market efficiency by prioritizing and implementing selected 
infrastructure investments and services, in accordance with strategic investment plans. 
The component will also support the implementation of the address system.  
 
Sub-component C.1: Municipal Investments  
 
The sub-component will help eligible municipalities to implement city investment plans 
and carry out improvement works to municipal infrastructure and services.  
Municipalities will receive support for investments in two phases:  
 
?
Phase I  in the maximum amount US$400,000 from the loan (which will enable 
municipalities to implement projects with a total cost of up to US$800,000) after their 
regulatory plans are approved at the municipal level and the household property tax 
collection rate reaches 50% (of the total number of households);  
 
?
Phase II of a maximum US$800,000 from the loan (which will enable 
municipalities to implement projects with a total cost of up to US$1,600,000) will be 
available once the respective municipality?s regulatory plan was approved by the 
National Council for Territorial Adjustment; the municipality initiated establishment of 
the property tax system based on market value and collected taxes from 75% of 
households; developed strategic investment plan; finalized investments in Phase I; and 
certified, by the operational review, a full compliance with the implementation protocol 
and the governance filters. Municipalities will have 2 years from project effectiveness 
date to access the second phase for investment financing. During project mid-term 
review, any uncommitted funds will be reallocated to the best performing municipalities.  
 
Financing of investment sub-projects under phase I and II is proposed on a cost-sharing 
basis, with the Bank loan/credit financing 50%, and the remaining part to be financed by 
the municipalities (30%) and national government in an amount equal to the value-added 
tax (20%).  
 
Sub-component C.2: Implementation of Address System  
 
The sub-component will finance the implementation of the address system in the 
eligible municipalities. Financing will include the system and database to maintain the 
Page  5
address system as well as financing the public infrastructure, such as street signs and 
poles.  
 
Sub-component C.3: Procurement and Financial Management Training for Municipal 
Staff.  
 
To ensure good practice in implementing infrastructure investments, this sub-component 
will support training for municipalities on fiduciary aspects, including procurement and 
financial management.  
 
Sub-component C.4: Component Management  
 
The sub-component will finance the management costs of the Ministry of Interior and 
Local Government to manage this component, including incremental operating costs, 
office equipment, and short term international and national consultants.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The specific investments under the municipal infrastructure sub-component (part of 
Component C) as well as some proposed under the project?s Component A will not be 
entirely known at the time of project appraisal. Investments under the Component A will 
cover the entire country, but will mainly focus on first registration in urban and peri-
urban areas and do not pose any negative threat to the environment. Proposed 
investments affiliated with this component that could have minor negative impacts on the 
environment are related to construction of new office buildings that will increase the 
administrative management capacity of the IPRO. Component C will support all 
municipalities with a population of over 50,000 (excluding Tirana and Durres).  This 
criterion qualifies the following nine cities: Elbasan, Shkodra, Fier, Vlore, Berat, Korca, 
Lushnje, Kamez, and Gjirokaster. The municipal investment program under this 
component will start once the selected municipalities achieved the completion of their 
city investment plans, and will mainly include improvements and expansions to existing 
urban infrastructure with an immediate impact on the revitalization of the city centers and 
other specific municipal restorations that would enhance the city?s identity.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been proposed as an environmental category financial intermediary (FI) 
with likely sub-projects category B and C and triggers the following safeguards policies: 
OP/BPs 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, 
OPN 11.03 on Cultural Property, and OP/BP 7.50 on international waterways. The 
environmental impact of the project is mostly expected from the investments supporting 
specific improvement works to existing municipal infrastructure in urban areas 
(Component C.1). These investments will be limited to the rehabilitation of, or 
improvements and expansions to priority urban infrastructure as defined by the city 
investment plan. Furthermore, there may be some new construction of small office 
buildings or renovations of existing office building under Component A that could have 
minor negative impacts on the environment. Overall, the range of physical investments 
that could be financed  under the Project would include: (i) enhancement of parks and 
recreational green areas, (ii) restoration of building facades, (iii) rehabilitation of market 
places, (iv) restitution of river embankments, (v) repair and upgrade of urban and non-
urban roads with rehabilitation of the affiliated drainage systems or buried pipes, (vi) 
rehabilitation of existing water supply distribution network and sanitation systems; (vii) 
improvement of traffic management including proper signs and lights, (viii) installation 
of appropriate street lightening system, (ix) renovation of promenades, and (x) 
construction of and/or rehabilitation of office buildings for IPRO.  
 
It is unlikely the project activities will result in any significant adverse social impacts, 
including the physical relocation of people or the acquisition of privately owned land. But 
a
potential for displacements exists in activities under Component C.1 (municipal 
investments), and to a limited extent, in component A (construction of new IPRO local 
offices), triggering World Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlement. Therefore, as a 
condition of project appraisal, a set of social guidelines in the form of a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), has been developed. The document not only describes the 
procedures and measures to be taken in case of land acquisition, but it also specifies the 
circumstances when land titling cannot be supported by the project.  
Page  7
In order to protect the rights of all eligible land owners and to safeguard against 
displacement as part of the completion of registration rights (Component A), no titling 
would take place where property rights are disputed between private parties or where the 
government expects to retain title to land where the land is already occupied by private 
parties.  
 
The project will finance the rehabilitation of existing drainage systems, water supply 
distribution network and sanitation systems. These rehabilitation works will only 
strengthen the protection of drainage areas in the project locations and reduce the leakage 
risks without having any adverse effect on the quality of the waters flowing into the 
Adriatic Sea, or the Adriatic Sea itself. Consequently, the Project falls within the 
exceptions to the notification requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of the Policy OP7.50. An 
exemption to notification has been sought from and approved by the Vice President.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social implications of the physical investments to be 
supported under the project are described in the Environmental Policy Framework (EPF) 
and the Land Acquisition and Policy Framework (LAPF) developed by the Government 
during project preparation. The investments supported are intended to improve priority 
urban infrastructure in selected municipalities as defined by the cities investment plans in 
order to increase the quality of life of the citizens in the project area and will be designed 
to minimize adverse effects. No significant indirect or long-term environmental impacts 
are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
All land for the construction of the IPRO offices will be purchased in accordance to 
commercial practices.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of project preparation, the Government has prepared two documents, the EPF and 
RPF, to address environment, potential land acquisition as well as cultural property issues 
associated with the infrastructure investments. These two documents meet the current 
Albanian legislation and the World Bank?s operation policies on EA, involuntary 
resettlement and cultural property.  
 
The EPF reviews the Albanian environmental safeguard systems and administrative 
framework and sets procedures to be followed during implementation (e.g., procedures 
for public consultations, the approach to streamline the EA screening process applicable 
to those investments proposed under the Project, preparation of a specific sub-project 
EMP and its implementation and monitoring, etc.)  
 
Page  8
Some institutions responsible for project implementation (MoPWTT, MoE) have been 
already involved with the implementation of World Bank projects and therefore have 
institutional capacity to apply the Banks? operational policies, including sub-projects 
screening and mitigation of environmental impacts. The project will also support capacity 
building to the IPRO, theUrban Department within MoPWTT and the municipalities for 
further strengthening their environmental capacity to supervise affiliated investments, 
including provision of equipment (maps, computers, GIS software, office furniture) and 
training.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the project include the MoPWTT, MOE, MoF, Ministry of Interior 
IPRO, Tirana University and the Urban Institute, the selected municipalities as well as 
international organizations (SIDA, Japan). The PCU will be located in the Urban 
Department within the MoPWTT and will monitor the project implementation in close 
coordination with the local authorities in the selected municipalities.  
 
The EPF and RPF public consultation meetings were held in Fier and Elbasani on July 
25th and 27th 2006. Over thirty people in Fier and about 20 in Elbasani representing 
NGOs, local environmental agencies, academia and local authorities attended these 
meetings were no major concerns were raised. Participants expressed their support for the 
proposed project investments and assured of their constant participation during the 
project implementation. The revised final reports of these frameworks have been 
disclosed in Albania and Washington, DC on August 15, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/01/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  9
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Public consultations took place in Fier and Elbasani (two of the targeted municipalities) 
in July 2006. The final EPF and RPF have been translated into Albanian language and 
have been made available in public places in selected municipalities as well as the web 
page of the Ministry of Public Works and the IPRO.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
09/01/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
09/01/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
09/01/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
10/18/2006 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
10/25/2006 
Comments:  cleared. 
