Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/19/2006 
Report No.:  AC2247
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P096643 
Project Name:  Business Environment Reform and Institutional Strengthening 
Task Team Leader:  Silvia Minotti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 31, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 24, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Other domestic and international trade (40%);General public administration 
sector (30%);Central government administration (30%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Export development and competitiveness (P);Other accountability/anti-
corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.54
0.54 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Business Environment Reform and Institutional Strengthening (BERIS) 
project will support the Government???s efforts to strengthen the public sector capacity 
to improve the business environment so as to attract investments and stimulate exports. In 
doing this, the project will also assist the Government in implementing selected parts of 
the European Partnership (EP) signed between the European Commission (EC) and the 
Government in December 2005, by addressing many of the priority areas identified by 
the EP.  
 
Project objectives are fully consistent with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), 
dated January 10, 2006, which outlines a holistic approach to sustainable economic 
growth, based on enhanced investment and robust exports.  
 
The overall objective of the BERIS is to assist the Government in: (i) facilitating 
business entry and operations in the formal economy; and (ii) strengthening the enterprise 
sector???s capability to increase exports towards regional and EU markets. Expected 
project outcomes would include:  
Page  2
?? 
reduced costs, time and steps for businesses to comply with regulations affecting 
business entry and operations;  
 
?? 
improved access to information on business regulations; and  
 
?? 
increased accountability and transparency of public institutions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of the following three components:  
 
(i) Facilitating business entry and operations. This component aims at addressing the 
Government???s weak capacity to establish and implement business friendly and pro-
competitive regulatory regimes.  The overall objective of the component is to remove 
administrative and regulatory barriers to entry and operations.  This objective will be 
achieved through the following sub-components:  
 
(a) Improving quality of regulations affecting business entry and operations. This sub-
component ??? which has been designed with FIAS support ??? will assist in 
strengthening the institutional framework and capacities necessary to improve in a 
systematic manner the quality of regulations affecting business activity.This will be done 
by: (a) building regulatory capacities and a regulatory management system in line-
ministry and at the central level; (b) developing the capacity to improve the quality of 
new regulations, through the Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) , public consultation 
and complementary methods; (c) upgrading the quality of existing regulations. Partially 
via targeted reviews of regulation in selected areas/industries, and partially via improving 
the access to business-related laws and regulations in Albania; and; (d) developing and 
implementing a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for regulatory reforms.  
Finally, the sub-component will support small business surveys and two ARCSs which 
will be used to assess outcomes of the component.  
 
(b) Strengthening the institutional capacity to implement a sound competition policy 
regime. This sub-component aims at addressing the lack of healthy market competition 
by strengthening Albania???s capacity to implement an EU-compliant competition policy 
regime.  This will be done by: (a) strengthening the capacity of the Competition 
Authority (CA) and the State-aid Unit (SaU) to implement a competition policy regime 
closer to the acquis communautaire; (b) increasing public awareness of competition 
policy issues, including the functioning of state-aid among relevant stakeholders; (c) 
providing training for relevant stakeholders (e.g., officials of selected line ministries, 
judges, lawyers, etc.) in competition policy, competition law and state-aid regime; and (d) 
strengthening the capacity of the Competition Policy Unit (CPU) of the Ministry of 
Economy, Trade and Energy (METE)to assess impact of regulations on market 
competition.  
 
(ii) Strengthening the enterprise sector???s capability to export to regional andEU 
markets: Strengthening the Metrology, Standardization, Testing and Quality (MSTQ) 
system.  This component aims at addressing the enterprise sector???s difficulties in 
competing in domestic and foreign markets related to poor national MSTQ infrastructure 
and services.  The overall objective of this component is to strengthen the enterprise 
sector ability to export towards EU markets by strengthening the capacity of the national 
MSTQ system to deliver EU-compatible services.This will be achieved through:  (a) 
assisting in drafting and implementing a comprehensive medium-term strategy, including 
reviewing the institutional and legislative framework, to bring each of the MSTQ 
Page  3
institutions closer to EU requirements and to meet industry???s needs; (b) increasing the 
business sector awareness of the challenges and opportunities of competing in EU 
markets; (c) supporting privatization and consolidation of public food, veterinary and 
other laboratories to improve testing services for enterprises, (d) strengthening the 
capacity of the General Directorate of Metrology and Calibration (GDOMC), including 
modernizing the metrology infrastructure and, in particular, construction of a modern 
metrology laboratory, to perform basic measurements and calibrations services; (e) 
strengthening the capacity of the General Directorate of Standardization (GDOS), 
including improving standards system through the translation and adoption of most 
frequently used EU standards; and (f) strengthening the capacity of the Directorate of 
Accreditation (DOA).  
 
(iii) Project Coordination Support.  This component aims at ensuring proper 
implementation and coordination of the project activities, including support for financial 
management, procurement, Monitoring&Evaluation (M&E) requirements. It will also 
support organization of periodic business surveys, integrated public information 
campaigns for the MSTQ system and competition policy, and building of a more 
effective public-private sector dialogue on reforms. The component will also assist in the 
dissemination of progress made by the Government in improving the business 
environment among the business community, policy makers and other relevant 
stakeholders.  
 
Key project beneficiaries would be public sector institutions involved in drafting 
business sector-related and in the delivery of public services (MSTQ institutions, CA, 
etc.) for businesses and regulations as well as domestic and foreign businesses. Consumer 
protection and business associations ??? although non-direct project beneficiaries ??? will 
continue to be involved during project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The beneficiaries of the proposed project are located in Tirana and few (some MSTQ 
institutions) have presentation in different locations in Albania. The beneficiaries would 
include the Measurement, Standards, Testing and Quality institutions, including the 
General Directorate of Metrology and Calibration, the General Directorate of 
Standardization, the Directorate of Accreditation, Testing and Certification Laboratories. 
They would also include other public sector institutions such as the Competition 
Authority, State Aid Unit, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Energy and others.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Due to the construction of the laboratory for the GDOMC, the project is classified as 
Category ???B??? (low risk, with a brief Environmental Management Plan, EMP).In 
compliance with Bank policies, the GDOMC has prepared and disclosed a basic EMP 
describing mitigation measures and standards for the construction of the metrology 
laboratory.  The EMP ??? which was disclosed on March 31, 2006 - identifiesmitigation 
measures in the following areas: air pollution, earth erosion, water environment, noises, 
flora and fauna.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The EMP prepared by the GDMOC has been reviewed and cleared by the Bank.  
According to the EMP, the construction of the labs will address safeguard policy issues 
(e.g., no lead-based painting will be used during construction). Costs of implementing 
these mitigation measures will be included in the cost of the design and construction of 
the labs and will be financed by the project.  
 
The project will also finance the services of an architechtural firm to ensure good 
quality design and close supervision of the construction of the metrology laboratories.  It 
will also fund a local civil engineer to assist the GDOMC in the design and construction 
of the building.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the MSTQ institutions, all the businesses requiring MSTQ 
services and consumers of domestic and foreign goods and services .  The EMP was 
disclosed on March 31, 2006 in Albania and all relevant information has been  made 
available to the public. The EMP was sent to the Infoshop on March 31, 2006. Following 
the Bank's review of the EMP, some formal minor incorrecteness were identified. They 
have been addressed in a revised EMP which was cleared by the Bank and disclosed 
thereafter.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/19/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Silvia Minotti 
04/19/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Silvia Minotti 
04/19/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/19/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
04/19/2006 
Comments:   
