Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/22/2006 
Report No.:  AC2426
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P078949 
Project Name:  TRANSPORT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 27, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (98%);Ports, waterways and shipping (1%);General 
transportation sector (1%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
19.00 
 OPEC 
FUND 
15.00
34.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main Project Development Objective is to reduce user costs on the Milot to Rreshen 
section of the Durres - Milot - Morine corridor and improve access for the hinterland 
population, to introduce innovation in road maintenance on a pilot basis, and to 
contribute to the development of the  institutional framework and implementation of road 
safety activities throughout Albania.  The project proposes to achieve this objective 
through the following: (i) the construction of the 26 kilometer section of the Milot to 
Rreshen road, thereby contributing to a reduction in journey time for roads users and an 
improvement in access to one of the poorest parts of Albania; (ii) the introduction of 
innovation in road maintenance on a pilot basis through the testing of output and 
performance based road maintenance contracts; and (iii) institutional development and 
support to improving road safety in Albania.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will consist of four main components: The first component involves the civil 
works and consultant supervision to undertake the construction of the three lots of the 26 
Page  2
kilometer Milot - Rreshen section of the Milot - Morine road corridor. The proposed road 
is located mostly within the Mirdite District which has a poverty incidence ranging 
between 20-40 percent of the population, and improving access to this impoverished area 
is a key policy objective of the Government.The proposed new road has been designed as 
a
single carriageway road (7.5 meter two-lane, with a total width of 11.1 meters, 9.3 
meters on the paved area), with a design speed 80 km/hr.  The World Bank will co-
finance Lots 1 and 2 with the GoA, whilst Lot 3 is expected to be financed by the OPEC 
Fund .  
 
The second component involves the introduction of Output/Performance Based 
Maintenance Contracts on a pilot basis of output or performance based road maintenance 
contracts in two pilot regions, and consultant supervision.  This initiative follows the 
introduction of these approaches in an earlier World Bank project in Serbia, within the 
region, where provisional indications suggest a significant reduction in unit operating 
costs.  
 
The third component is a road safety component and will build on the recently 
completed road safety component in the Road Maintenance Project, and the recent Action 
Plan prepared by the National Road Safety Council.  This will involve the provision of 
necessary technical assistance to assist the implementation of the National Action Plan, 
undertaking a road safety audit on the Tirana to Durres highway, and the provision of 
necessary goods for the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and 
Telecommunication, and the Traffic Police under the Ministry of Interior.  
 
The final component involves the provision of necessary Technical Assistance and 
Goods. The final component will involve the provision of necessary technical assistance 
to the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Telecommunication.  This will 
include the following: (i) technical assistance to establish the maritime administration, 
implement the new port authority law, and prepare new maritime by-laws in conformity 
with EU standards; (ii) undertaking a sector specific fiduciary assessment; (iii) technical 
assistance to the Project Implementation Team in GRD for a defined term; (iv) training; 
(v) limited office expenses; (vi) two vehicles for the PIT; (vii) road roughness measuring 
equipment; and (viii) equipment for counting/classifying motor vehicles on the network.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance construction of the 26 kilometer section of the Durres to Morine 
corridor, between Milot and Rreshen. This road section is located mostly within the 
Mirdite District. The route passes along the Matit river and River Fani River Valleys 
between Milot and Rreshen on an existing earth road. The area is sparsely populated and 
may be considered poor and rural. Some sections contain farmland and others are steep 
terrain forested areas. A church and associated monastery at Rubik dating back to 1162 
A.D. is on a hill overlooking the River Fani above the project route.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASEG) 
Page  3
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The chief potential environmental issues associated with the project include soil erosion 
(construction and during use), health effects to construction workers during construction, 
land disturbance (construction), water pollution (construction and accidental spillage 
during use), noise (primarily during construction), the perception of an enhanced risk of 
flooding of residential areas in or near the village of Fushe-Milot. The flooding risk to 
Fushe-Milot was identified during the second public consultation.  There was initial 
concern that a 12th Century Church and Monastry could be affected during construction, 
but the new alignment is on the opposite side of the valley and river from this side.  An 
action plan was agreed with the Government to rehabilitate the flood protection walls on 
the north and south side of the Matit River.  The nature of these works were not 
considered to trigger OP4.37, but careful consideration will be given to design and 
implementation during supervision of the project.  All other environmental issues can be 
readily mitigated with good engineering design and construction practices.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The improved road conditions should have positive economic impacts on the local 
residents, making it easier for them to access markets with their produce. The current 
road users will enjoy lower journey time and vehicle operating costs in their journeys 
along this section of the road, which will have the additional advantage of reduced 
vehicular emissions due to the removal of frequent stopping/starting and rapid 
acceleration/deceleration.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Three different route alternatives were considered for the overall Durres Morine Corridor, 
and three alternatives for the Milot-Rreshen segment were considered. The routes 
Page  4
selected were all deemed satisfactory from the environmental viewpoint. The selected 
route did not present any unique or unusual potential environmental issues. All potential 
impacts could be readily managed with proper design and good engineering construction 
practices.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an EA document including an Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) that is acceptable to the World Bank. The Environmental Assessment was 
undertaken in a number of steps: An initial EA report was prepared in 2003 by the design 
consultant, funded by the then Government.  However, OP 4.01 requires the EA to be 
prepared by independent experts not affiliated with the project. To satisfy this 
requirement, an independent consultant reviewed and updated the prepared EA for the 
original alignment, as part of the preparation of the, subsequently suspended, FY04 
Transport Project.  The alignment was then changed, and an updated EA document was 
prepared by another independent consultant.  The suspension of the FY04 Transport 
Project, reactivated in January 2006, engendered a need for a new round of consultation.  
This latest EA document: (a) fully reflects the current project alignment and design; (b) 
fully complies with World Bank EA policies.  
 
An Environmental Unit was established within the GRD in early 2004.  The Unit 
comprises two members selected from core GRD staff, based on their experience and 
training.  This unit was central to the preparation of the Environmental Impact 
Assessment, the Environmental Management Plan and the Resettlement Action Plan for 
this project. The Project Implementation Team will draw on their expertise in monitoring 
environmental issues during project implementation. During project appraisal the Task 
Team will evaluate the Borrower capacity for implementing the EMP and incorporate 
into the loan any necessary institutional strengthening to insure adequate capability for 
EMP implementation.  
 
The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for this project was prepared by the Expropriation 
Department of the General Roads Directorate, in consultation with the World Bank.  The 
RAP has been prepared according to national laws and regulations and the World Bank 
Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (Operational Policy 4.12).  
 
The final version of the RAP for the Milot-Rreshen area was supplied to the Bank on the 
11th May 2006 and formally approved.  It was subsequently translated and disclosed 
publicly on the 4th June 2006, with an announcement appearing in the ?Rilindja 
Demokratike? newspaper, thus meeting the formal requirements of the World Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In accordance with World Bank safeguard policies and procedures for Environmental 
Assessment (EA, OP/BP/GP 4.01) the project was assigned to Category A and a detailed 
EA document (see OP 4.01 Annex B, ?Content of an Environmental Assessment Report 
for a Category A Project) was required. In 2003 before World Bank involvement with the 
Page  5
project, an initial EA report was prepared by the design consultant.  However, OP 4.01 
requires independent EA experts not affiliated with the project to implement the EA 
process. To satisfy this requirement, an independent consultant reviewed and updated the 
EA in 2004 based upon a preliminary alignment and engineering design produced by ITP. 
This alignment underwent a significant revision, and an updated EA document was 
prepared by another independent consultant. This latest EA document: (a) fully reflects 
the current project alignment and design, (b) has been approved by the Albanian Ministry 
of Environment; and (c) fully complies with World Bank EA policies and procedures as 
cited above.   
 
Three public consultations were conducted.  A consultation to discuss the Terms of 
Reference for the Environmental Assessment was conducted on June 16, 2003 in 
Shkodra, June 17, 2003 in Kukes, and on July 22, 2003 in Rreshen. Consultations to 
discuss the first draft of the EA report were conducted on March 3, 2004 in Milot, March 
28, 2004 in Rubik, and March 29, 2004 in Rreshen. A final consultation was conducted in 
Fushe-Milot on January 22, 2006 and in Vau I Shkjezes on February 19, 2006.  The Final 
Version of the EIA was supplied to the Bank on the 23rd May 2006 and formally 
approved.  It was subsequently translated and disclosed publicly on the 4th June 2006, 
with an announcement appearing in the ?Rilindja Demokratike? newspaper, advising the 
location of the document for public access.  The EIA and RAP were formally transmitted 
to the Infoshop on the 27th June 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
06/29/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  6
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
08/31/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
09/05/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
09/05/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
09/05/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
08/31/2006 
Comments:   
