Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1903 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/02/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Albania 
Project ID: P096643 
Project Name: Business Environment Reform and Institutional Strengthening 
Task Team Leader: Silvia Minotti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 26, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Other domestic and international trade (40%);General public administration 
sector (30%);Central government administration (30%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S);Export development and 
competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the BERIS is to assist the Government in fostering exports and 
increasing investments by: (i) strengthening the regulatory and technical capacity to facilitate 
exports towards EU markets; and (ii) strengthening the institutional capacity to systematically 
improve the quality of business sector-related regulations according to transparent and pro-
competitive regulatory governance rules and in close consultation with the business community. 
In doing this, the BERIS will also strengthen the Government’s capacity to implement selected 
parts of the European Partnership between the EC and Albania.  Expected project outcomes 
would include:  
 
ïƒ˜ 
strengthened capacity to enhance competitiveness of Albanian goods in domestic and 
foreign markets, and increased compliance with EU requirements (including number of EU-
compatible standards adopted, number of certified enterprises, and of accredited bodies);  
 
ïƒ˜ 
lower costs for businesses to comply with business sector-related regulations;  
 
ïƒ˜ 
increased  transparency and predictability of processes and procedures to open and 
operate a business (number and sequences of procedures and related costs);  
Page  2
ïƒ˜ 
improved access of the business sector to information related to business entry and 
operations; and;  
 
ïƒ˜ 
increased accountability of the Government’s institutions involved in the regulatory 
reform process.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A. 
Strengthening the public sector capacity to formulate and implement a strategy for the 
integrated development of the national MSTQ system in an EU-oriented context and according 
to the industry’s needs.  
 
This component would not target investment on any particular sector/industry but rather support 
implementation of broader industry-wide cost effective solutions for the benefit all the sectors of 
the economy. This approach would also help guide/facilitate any sectoral-oriented intervention in 
this area.  
 
The component would finance the following gaps:  
 
(i) Development Strategy for the MSTQ system.  Assistance to: (i) develop and implement an 
integrated strategy for the development of the national MSTQ system, including definition of 
plans to guide the MSTQ institutions in the process for the acquisition of international 
recognition; (ii) stimulate industry use of innovation and MSTQ services to foster private 
sector’s adoption of new technologies and equipment enabling improvements of products and 
processes, and increases of quality and standards (including getting ISO certification where 
required); (iii) develop information campaigns for the public (consumers and businesses) to 
disseminate functions of the MSTQ system and business sector’s requirements to export to EU 
markets;  
 
(ii) Metrology.  Support to the General Directorate of Metrology and Calibration to upgrade its 
physical facilities/laboratories, equipment and staff skills for headquarters and regional centers;  
 
(iii) Standards. Support to the General Directorate of Standardization for the translation of EU 
standards into Albanian language to foster their use by Albanian industry;  
 
(iv) Accreditation. Support to the Directorate of Accreditation in building its assessment 
capacity and to develop an external pool of experts to carry out assessments of laboratories and 
personnel;  
 
(v) Testing and Certification Labs. Support for the privatization (and subsequent accreditation) 
of public sector national and district food, veterinary and other labs in order to promote the 
creation of accredited testing and certification laboratories to be owned and managed by the 
private sector or business associations.  
 
B. 
Building public sector capacities to undertake (pro-competitive) regulatory reforms on an 
ongoing basis  
 
The component would finance:  
 
(i) Support to set up/strengthen the institutional framework for carrying out systematic 
regulatory reforms.  
 
This would include assistance to: (i) develop a regulatory policy to set out and prioritize reform 
targets; and (ii) build the institutional capacity to implement and supervise regulatory reforms 
according to clear accountability lines and transparent inter-ministerial coordination 
mechanisms; and  
 
(ii) Support to develop/strengthen appropriate regulatory tools and mechanisms to improve 
quality of new and existing regulations and access to information on regulations.  
Page  3
This would include support for: (i) gradual introduction of properly adapted regulatory impact 
analysis (RIA); (ii) reviews of selected regulations with a view to eliminate and/or simplify 
unnecessary and discretionary regulatory practices; (iii) establishment of systematic and 
transparent consultation mechanisms with all the interested parties; and (iv) measures to improve 
access of the business sector to information about regulations affecting business activities, 
including steps, procedures and related costs.  
 
In close cooperation with FIAS, the team is currently advising the Government on the 
formulation of the action plan which will guide regulatory reforms efforts in several business 
environment areas such as business registration, business licensing and inspections. The BERIS 
will build the capacity for implementation of regulatory reforms through the adoption of proper 
regulatory tools to improve quality of regulations and clear regulatory governance rules (so as to 
increase transparency and accountability of relevant public institutions and ensure regular 
consultation with the business community).  
 
This component will be integrated by a competition policy subcomponent to promote the 
development of a competition culture and increase the advocacy role of the Competition 
Authority (CA) in regulatory reforms.  Assistance would be provided to support the CA to: (i) 
forcefully advocate for competition; (ii) enhance the dialogue with the sectoral regulators of the 
energy and telecom sectors; (iii) monitor and analyze the market; (iv) conduct investigations, ex 
officio or otherwise, on competition matters, enabling technically competent high-quality 
decisions; and (v) increase consumers and business awareness through wide-ranging public 
information campaigns.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The beneficiaries of the proposed project are located in Tirana and few (some MSTQ 
institutions) have presentation in different locations in Albania. The beneficiaries would include 
Measurement, Standards, Testing and Quality institutions, including the General Directorate of 
Metrology and Calibration, the General Directorate of Standardization, the Directorate of 
Accreditation, Testing and Certification Laboratories. They would also include public sector 
institutions involved in pro-competitive regulatory reforms, including the Competition Authority 
and others.  
 
With regards to supporting the General Directorate of Metrology and Calibration, the project 
will finance construction of its new 3-story laboratory and procurement of the laboratory 
equipment. The Minister of Economy, Trade and Energy is in the process of identifying a land 
parcel 
–about 4000 square meters - which can be used to construct a metrology laboratory of 
about 1500 square meters.  Two potential pieces of have been selected and the Ministry is in the 
process of getting confirmation of the State ownership of the property. In any case, no 
expropriation of land is expected, and the laboratories will be placed on government-owned land 
or new land will be purchased on the private market.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is rated B, and a brief EMP will be prepared before Appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
TBD once the Ministry has selected the piece of land on which the laboratory will be built.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/14/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project is a low risk category B project which will require a succinct Environmental 
Management Plan to cover the key issues surrounding the construction of the metrology 
laboratory (for example dust, noise, was disposal) and their operations (for example air or 
wastewater emissions, handling of used chemicals, etc.), as well as of the parcel of land that 
is being identified. The Environmental Management Plan will also consider whether Cultural 
Property might be impacted (or could be avoided). The Plan shall be disclosed before 
Appraisal.  
 
As for the social safeguards policies, the vast bulk of the proposed project activities reflect 
the results of the 2005 Administrative and Regulatory Cost Survey (ARCS) and Government 
Self-Assessment. Both the studies and related recommendations were endorsed by FIAS, 
including their methodology.  In particular, these assessments focus 
–inter alia- on the 
existing processes (i. e., how things currently work), and the roles and interests of the various 
stakeholders, including their relationships and incentives.  In light of the above, any social 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
institutional assessment would replicate activities previously undertaken without leading to 
any significant additional benefit.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Silvia Minotti 
02/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/01/2006 
Comments:  Cleared at the PCN stage 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
02/28/2006 
Comments:  Cleared 
