Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2193
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P078933 
Project Name:  Education Excellence and Equity Program 
Task Team Leader:  Keiko Miwa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 1, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (40%);Secondary education (25%);Tertiary education 
(20%);Central government administration (10%);Sub-national government administration 
(5%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S);Decentralization (S);Education for the 
knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00 
 COUNCIL 
OF 
EUROPE 
15.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
30.00
75.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed EEE-P would support Government in the implementation of the first phase 
of Albania’s National Education Strategy (NES).  The objective of EEE-P isimproved 
quality of learning conditions for all students, and increased enrollment in general 
secondary education especially for the poor.  The intermediate goals are that leadership, 
management and governance of the education system are improved, teachers use new 
methods of teaching and wider variety of learning aids in schools, the quality of school 
infrastructure and the efficiency of its use are improved, and the initial steps of higher 
education reform are taken.   
 
3. Project Description 
The priority areas of the proposed program are: (i) strengthening leadership, management 
and governance of the education system, (ii) improving conditions for teaching and 
Page  2
learning, (iii) improving and rationalizing education infrastructure, and (iv) setting the 
stage for higher education reform.  
 
1.  Strengthening leadership, management and governance of the education system  
 
This priority area aims to strengthen the leadership and management capacities, and to 
enhance governance and accountability of the education system.  This includes activities 
associated with the decentralization, strengthening the leadership, professional 
development of school principals, decision making and resource management at the 
school level, increasing the communities’ participation, introduction of performance-
based management system, and full utilization of the Education Management Information 
System (EMIS) for decision making.  Decentralized service delivery would be piloted in 
2-3 regions before deciding on a rollout plan.  This is expected to form an institutional 
foundation to address other priority areas.  
 
2.  Improving  conditions for teaching and learning  
 
This priority area focuses on the quality of teaching and learning conditions in a holistic 
manner.  It would pay special attention to supporting teachers’ professional development.  
It would also address the issues of curriculum reform, including the development of a 
national curriculum framework, rationalization of subjects, integration and textbook 
development.  To implement curriculum reform, teacher education policies and practices 
have to be closely aligned.  The development of assessment and evaluation of education 
would continue through strengthening the capacity of the National Center for Evaluation 
and Assessment, development of a national plan for evaluation in education, and 
improving the transparency and integrity of the national examination system.  This 
priority area enables teachers and students to use a wider range of appropriate educational 
tools and methods in teaching and learning process.  
 
3. Improving and rationalizing education infrastructure, especially in secondary 
education  
 
This priority area addresses more efficient investment and (re)allocation in physical 
infrastructure and human recourses especially at the secondary education level.  It would 
support the MoES in making investment decision based on school mapping, which takes 
into consideration the demographic development in Albania.Science laboratories and ICT 
facilities would be provided to general secondary schools in line with the new curriculum 
and teacher training to be supported in priority area two.  
 
4. Setting the stage for higher education reform  
 
This priority area focuses on the reform of the higher education.  It supports the MoES 
and universities to carry out a review of the system to identify and sequence reform 
activities, which include strengthening of university governance, increasing financial 
autonomy and accountability of universities, strengthening the quality assurance 
mechanism, and promoting university partnership arrangements.  It also aims to expand 
Page  3
the opportunities for students by mobilizing private financing and provision and making 
the use of public resources more efficient.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
To be decided/nationwide (the proposed program adopts a sector-wide approach to 
support the national education strategy, and specific location where funds will be spent 
cannot be ascertained).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This program has been classified as category B due to anticipated rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of schools and educational facilities through the proposed credit as part of 
the government education expenditures.  An environmental review that is based on the 
previous project has been conducted to assess the application of Albanian environmental 
laws, permits, and practice to schools construction in Albania in line with this credit’s 
reliance on national systems.  This hasbeen compared with the typical requirements of 
World Bank environmental safeguards to assess similarities and gaps in practice.  
 
The review of existing Environmental Management documents concluded that the 
construction proposed under this program would not trigger a full Environmental Impact 
Assessment under either the Albanian laws or World Bank policies.  The type of 
environmental impacts of concern are localized in nature and more adequately addressed 
through environment permits and good construction practice, or in the case of World 
Bank policies through an environmental management plan (EMP).  Issues to be addressed 
through these instruments include proper waste management and disposal of construction 
debris (inc. asbestos), proper waste water treatment; heating and fuel system assembly, 
lab operation safety plans where applicable, dust and noise control, sensitivity of designs 
Page  4
to cultural settings; and cultural heritage/chance finds procedures.  An environmental 
management plan for the project has been prepared as an example of the issues that will 
be addressed through the permitting, construction, contracting, and operations of the 
facilities.  
 
In practice, these issues will be addressed through a series of local permits, through 
contractor site supervisor oversight, through the local municipality requirements, and in 
some cases through a small construction unit in the MoES.  Responsibilities for school 
construction in Albania has been decentralized to the municipal level, however school 
construction with national funding remain with some central oversight.  MoES plays a 
role in establishing guidance to all municipalities through the establishment of a “Code of 
Good Practice”. The EEE-P will support the finalization of the Ministry of Education’s 
Code of Good Practice to ensure that it incorporates international and EU standards for 
the environment as a more systemic way to capture the environmental management plan 
issues.  The loan would also support training, dissemination and awareness-raising by the 
MoES on Best Practice.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient has good experience in implementing an environmental management plan, 
through the Education Reform Project which just recently closed.  An environmental 
review has been conducted for the EEE-P and an environmental management plan (EMP) 
addressing key issues is being finalized.  A Code of Good Practice will be developed to 
guide municipalities, and ensure that international and EU standards for the environment 
will be incorporated in the EMP.  The EEE-P will support training, dissemination and 
awareness-raising by the MoES.  The World Bank team will conduct a post-review at 
mid-term to identify any follow-up actions required to meet safeguard requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders: MOES, local communities and municipalities, NGOs, contractors, 
engineers, architects.  
 
A
session/workshop to disseminate the EMP will be sponsored by the MOES prior to 
appraisal.  The Recipient will, throughout program implementation, continue to consult 
with stakeholders, as necessary, to address environmental issues/concerns that maly 
affect them.    
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/05/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/05/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Keiko Miwa 
03/06/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell 
03/06/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maureen Anne McLaughlin 
03/06/2006 
Comments:   
