Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1969 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/10/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Angola 
Project ID: P093699 
Project Name: Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project 
Task Team Leader: Eduardo Luis Leao de Sous 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P098686 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (34%);Crops (33%);Irrigation and drainage 
(33%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Rural policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.05 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.05 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of this project will be to generate a broad-based and sustainable increase in 
the income of rural smallholders of the targeted areas, through the improved efficiency of 
agricultural production and marketing.  
 
The strategy of the project will be to create an enabling environment to improve the livelihoods 
of rural smallholders by: (a) building on potential synergies with other programs and existing 
infrastructure , (b) maximizing opportunities for quick-win results; (c) strengthening the skills of 
producers and their associations, as well as of extension staff and agricultural service providers 
with which they interact; (d) recapitalizing productive systems and infrastructures; and (e) 
providing access to agricultural services and markets. As far as possible, investments should be 
based on a flexible, participatory and demand-driven approach, and should strive to ensure the 
economic sustainability of agriculture activities.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1. Capacity Building and Institutional Development:  
 
The focus of this component would be to strengthen central and local institutions, develop 
capacity and introduce participatory processes to accelerate the decentralization process. This 
component should also aim to strengthen the technical and managerial skills of the human 
resources involved in agricultural production in the targeted areas. This component entails the 
following sub-components:  
 
a. 
Institutional strengthening of local units of MINADER to complement the support 
underway by the Bank and other donors to ensure that these institutions can better play their 
respective roles in the sector;  
 
b.
Strengthening of the human resource capacity of MINADER to prepare adequate policies 
and strategies to better address the project’s objective, and to be in line with the Bank’s 
Agricultural Strategy for Angola. The current distribution and subsidized sales of fertilizer, for 
instance, should be revised and substituted with less market distorting ways of intervention. The 
private sector will never develop if there is a continuing threat that the government might at any 
time ruin their market by undercutting them with low priced product.  
 
c. 
Forming and strengthening Farmers’ associations, which should include managerial 
capacities, skills on trading, literacy and, and training of vulnerable groups (e.g. female headed 
households).  
 
d.
Capacity building for Land and natural resources conflict management to provide 
mechanisms to solve conflicts over the use of land, water, grazing, wood collection (etc.). Many 
such conflicts may arise because of the massive dislocation of the local population during several 
years or even decades, while places once left may have become unusable or unattractive for 
returnees (i.e.  due to landmines).  
 
Component 2. Recapitalization of Productive Systems:  
 
This component would aim at assessing pre-investments, planning activities and accelerating 
the restoration of the productive and value adding capacity of agricultural production and 
commercialization systems, currently dysfunctional as a result of the war. Cost sharing of this 
component would be flexible and vary according to as yet to be established criteria.  Through a 
specific facility, and provided that component 1 is already in place, the project should provide 
the following three kinds of support:  
 
a) Support to the Preparation of Agricultural Productive Activities:  
 
Planning of production for identified and selected markets, including assessment of 
technological packages and economic viability; and definition of commercialization channels. 
This component should assist eligible participants in the preparation of detailed proposals that 
will allow an informed decision about their feasibility from a technical, financial, social and 
environmental perspective.  
 
b) Support to productive investments and infrastructure:  
 
Page  3
i. 
Individual enterprises, such as smallholder farmers (e.g. planting material, farm tools, 
animal traction, livestock, etc.), or village/small town services providers (blacksmith or repair 
shop toolkits, micro-retail outlet starter kit). Cost-sharing could for example vary from 100% 
project (when in support of vulnerable households), to 75% project/ 25% beneficiary in case of 
new micro-enterprises, to 50% project/ 50% beneficiary in the case of established enterprises; or 
perhaps even 25% project / 75% beneficiary for larger enterprises (e.g. fertilizer dealers) who 
would obtain formal credit to finance their operation (i.e. the project contribution would reduce 
the risk of the enterprise and make it easier to obtain bank loans).  
 
ii. 
Group based productive or value adding infrastructure, such as for instance small-scale 
water harvesting and irrigation structures, storage facilities, and small scale processing 
equipment (e.g. mills).  
 
iii. 
Public infrastructure of a productive nature, such as for instance markets or spot 
improvements of local rural access roads.  
 
c) Support to access to inputs and credit for recurrent expenditures:  
 
The project will provide for the selected associations a starter package, as a matching grant, 
with inputs, including seeds, fertilizer and agrochemicals, if needed. In order to avoid market 
distortions and disincentives for private sector investments, this support could be made through 
the distribution of discounted vouchers , which the smallholders can use to buy the required 
fertilizers and/or seeds directly from private operators. It is very important that this sub-
component envisages a phasing-out process, with clear, transparent and upfront rules. Savings 
and credit associations could also be supported in building up their capital base through the 
(conditional) provision of matching grants.  
 
Component 3. Agricultural and Marketing Services:  
 
This component would support mechanisms that enable farmers to obtain agricultural services, 
as well as market information at their demand:  
 
a. 
 Extension services:  farmer groups or associations could be assisted in accessing 
(purchasing) such services (this potential mechanisms needs to be assessed, but could for 
instance include Farmer Field School type activities, which will be introduced in the project area 
under a parallel FAO project), and resulting in an accelerated change of attitude from supply and 
command driven methods to participatory and demand driven methods;  
 
b.
Applied research: would be supported to test planting material and seed varieties for 
instance and provide base seed, carry out soil or other chemical analyses, explore promising non-
traditional crops, explore and analyse potential new markets or competing production areas, etc;  
 
c. 
 Market information systems: linked to farmers’ and traders associations;  
 
d.
Skills training of existing or emerging service providers: to strengthen technical and 
managerial skills of agri-business services providers (micro, small and medium scale 
entrepreneurs) in the same three provinces, able to efficiently provide inputs, purchase outputs 
and deliver a range of services as demanded by individual farmers or their associations.  
Activities that might be contemplated under the component would include retail outlets of agro-
chemicals or farming tools, blacksmiths, equipment repair workshops, conservation and 
packaging. Other activities could include certification assistance in obtaining organic and fair 
Page  4
trade certification - necessary for accessing premium markets - market information, development 
of traceability systems etc.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, which would consist of two 
sub-components:  
 
i. 
Project management: Ensuring that the project is implemented correctly and in 
accordance with the Loan Agreement. This would be the responsibility of a Project Coordinator 
and a (preferably small) team located at the central level, complemented by provincial or 
municipal level local coordinators (possible alternatives need to be assessed).  
 
ii. 
Project monitoring and evaluation: Verifying the output, effect and eventually the impact 
of project activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project area would include the Provinces of Bie, Huambo, and Malanje. These three 
provinces hold 40% of the total planted area in the country, including 65% of the planted area of 
Irish Potato, 57% of maize, 42% of beans, 40% of sweet potato, and 32% of cassava.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared for this 
project to address issues that may arise from activities under Component 2.b (small infrastructure 
construction and rehabilitation).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Procurement of pesticides might be envisaged. This trigger will also be evaluated more in-
depth after the pre-appraisal mission in September 2006. If it is triggered, a pest management 
plan could be included in the EMSF or in a separate Pest Management Plan.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No displacement or land acquisitions are foreseen in this project.  However, because 
component 2 (capitalization of productive systems) aims at developing and sustaining the basis 
of production through individual and collective investments, including water and land-based 
small investments which might require either land acquisition or/and displacement of people, it 
has been decided to trigger OP/BP 4.12 and prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). 
The RPF, as a mitigation instrument was chosen because at this stage of project preparat
ion, the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
sites and nature of small investment are not yet known.  The RPF will be prepared and disclosed 
in country and in the InfoShop of the World Bank before appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Small water infrastructure sub-projects are envisaged. The size/extend of these activities is 
not yet known, hence it is unclear at this stage if this policy will be triggered. The pre-appraisal 
mission will revisit this aspect.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/17/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Required documents include an EMSF, a RPF, possibly a Pest Management Plan and 
possibly a generic dam safety design. These documents will be disclosed both in-country and 
in the Infoshop by mid-August 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Eduardo Luis Leao de Sousa 
04/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
04/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Frank Fulgence K. Byamugisha 
04/10/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
