                                                                                         39263



                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                     Report No.:

Date ISDS PreparedJUpdated:March 15,2007

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Antigua and Barbuda                   Project ID: PI02358
Project Name: CFC Phase-out                    Task Team Leader: Viraj Vithoontien
ManagementPlan for Antigua and Barbuda
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2007           Total Project Cost ($m.):  US$208,900
Estimated Board Date: No Board date. As
per Bank proceduresfor MP operations,
grant of less than US$2.5 million could be
approvedby the SectorDirector. Target
date is June 2007.
Managing Unit: LCR                             Lending Instrument: SIL
Sector: Global Environment, Other              Theme: Pollution managementand
industry (I 00%)                               environmentalhealth (P);Environrnental
                                               policies and institutions (S)
SafeguardPolicies Specialistsin the task team:
Other Financing Amounts by Source:                                           US$111,600
Multilateral Fund of the Montreal Protocol                                   US$ 97,300

B. Project Objective

The objectiveof this project is to assist the Government of Antigua and Barbuda to completely
phase out its consumption CFCs (CFC-11, CFC-12, and CFC-115) in accordancewith the phase-
out schedule stipulated by the Montreal Protocol.

Antigua and Barbuda is not a producer of any substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol, or
of any substitutes of these chemicals. The total demand of all CFCs has been met through
imports. Average baseline consumption from 1995-97of CFCs is 10.67 ODP tons. According
to the Montreal Protocol, this average consumption level has been used as a baseline for
establishing subsequent interim reduction targets duringthe complianceperiod of 1999-2010.

The project will support the phase-out of CFCs as follows:

        50% reduction of CFC consumptionfrom the baseline level by 2005;
        85% reduction of CFC consumptionfrom the baseline level by 2007; and
         100% reduction of CFC consumptionfrom the baseline level by 2010.

C. Project Description

To achieve the above objective, the CFC Phase-out Management Plan proposes to utilize a
combinationof policies, regulations, and financial incentivesto help phase-out all residual use of

CFCs in the refrigeration and air-conditioning service sector. The project will promote
refrigerant recovery and recycling, training, and technical assistance activities to minimize and
eventually eliminate import of CFCs. The proposed activities will build on the results already
attained by earlier investment and non-investment activities financed by the Multilateral Fund of
the Montreal Protocol.

As of the end of 2004, the Multilateral Fund has approved 3 ozone depleting substance phase-out
activities in Antigua and Barbuda. These include the country program preparation, refrigerant
management plan, and institutional strengthening activities. The design of the CFC Phase-out
Management Plan will build on the achievement and lessons learned from those earlier activities.

The CFC Phase-out Management Plan is expected to finance either a recovery or recycling
machine to five refrigerator and air-conditioning service shops, retrofits of 50 commercial
refrigeration systems, training, and technical assistance activities. Funding from the MLF is
expected to be released to Antigua and Barbuda, through the Bank, for project activities based on
performance indicators.      Antigua and Barbuda has to meet all performance indicators as
presented in annual or biennial implementation program and in the Agreement between Antigua
and Barbuda and the MLF. The project includes three separate components as presented below.

Comvonent 1:This component would finance the training course to strengthen capacity of
servicetechnicians on repair techniques, better recycling practices, retrofit and the use of drop-in
technology. Implementation of this component would be carried out through the local training
center. In addition, this component would also finance training of customs officers, importers,
retailers, distributors, customs brokers, coastguard and police officers in the monitoring, control,
detection and confiscation of CFC equipment and systems and assessment of any possible illegal
trade of CFCs. This capacity is critical to the Government's ability to implement the ban on
CFC imports by end of 2008. As initial work in these areas have already been done by earlier
Multilateral Fund supported activities, the training courses proposed under this component will
build on the experience and lessons learned from the previous activities. The project will also
finance costs of consultants to undertake supervision and monitoring of all recycling units to be
provided by this project and those already provided by earlier MLF funded projects. The project
will also finance a survey of existing stocks of CFC-based domestic and mini food market
refrigerators and MACs.

Comvonent 2: This component would finance equipment and conversion of a limited number of
refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment:
        Provision of recovery and recycling machines to five refrigerator and air-conditioning
        service shops. Criteria for providing these shops with this equipment will be based on the
        financial viability: savings from recycled materials vs. operating costs of recovery and
        recycling machines;
        Retrofits of 50 commercial refrigeration systems ranging from small food market system
        to small industrial units;
        Provisions of drop-in alternatives and technical support to promote the use of non-CFC
         and low-GWP alternatives as refrigerant in the existing CFC refrigerators and air-
         conditioning systems.

Component 3:      The project would finance the operating cost of a Project Management Unit
(PMU) within the Ministry of Finance and Economy. PMU will be staffed by one project
manager. PMU will have an overall management and coordination responsibility in the
implementationof all training activitiesunder this plan. PMU will be responsible for preparation
and implementationof other activitiesincluded in the biennial implementationplan.

This project is the final wrap up project for Antigua and Barbuda on CFC phase-out activities.

D. Project location (if known)
The project plans to finance CFC phase-out activities (investmentand/ortraining) in 40 - 50
service shops that provide maintenance and repair for refrigeration and air-conditioning,
includingportlmarina facilitiesand busltruck service facilities,and small shops in the informal
sector inAntigua and Barbuda. Project activities would take place in the two islands:Antigua,
and Barbuda.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity

The Recipientwould be the Ministry of Finance and Economy. The project would be
implemented through its National Ozone Unit. The Ministry of Finance and Economy has been
in charge of implementationof Montreal Protocol obligations since the ratification of the Vienna
Conventionfor the Protection of the Ozone Layer and the MontrealProtocol on Substancesthat
Depletethe Ozone Layer in 1992. The National Ozone Unit has been in operationswith grant
support fromthe Multilateral Fund since 1998. With additional work entailed in the CFC Phase-
out Management Plan, the project will provide technical assistanceto the National Ozone Unit to
strengthen its capacityto manage the project.


11. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


                Safeguard Policy
Applicable?
                If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
     [ 1        Environmental Assessment(OPBP 4.01)

                The project will help in reducing emissions of ozone depleting substances, CFCs
                which also have high global warming potential (GWP). CFC 12 has a GWP of
                 10,720 and its substitute HFC134a is 1,300. While the substitutes will not
                completely eliminate GWP, they are the lowest among all commerciallyavailable
                substitutes and are accepted by the Montreal Protocol and the international
                community. HFC-134a does not have any known local environmental impact. It
                is not flammable.


    [n.a.]      Natural Habitats (OPJBP4.04)

    [n.a.]       Pest Management (OP 4.09)

    In.a.1       Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)

                 This safeguard policy would not be triggered. There would be no impacts with

                  Safeguard Policy
App'icable?       If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
                  regard to resettlement or livelihoods. Antigua and Barbuda imports CFCs and
                  does not produce them and therefore, changes in CFC consumption will not affect
                  productionjobs. The project will strengthen technical capacity of service
                  technicians to service new non-CFC refrigerators and air-conditioning systems.
                  This project would enable existing service technicians to remain in the business
                  even after supply of CFC stops in 2010.

    [ma.]         Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

    [ma.]         Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

    [n.a.]        Safety of Dams COP/BP 4.37)

    1n.a.)        Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 OPN 11.03)     -

    [ma.]         Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)~

    [n.a.]         Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)




Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [I B [X ] C [ ] FI [I TBD (to be determined)

The project will have a positive global environmental impact. The Task Team proposes that this
is a C category project as no safeguard policies is likely to be triggered.

111. SAFEGUARDPREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared.

    Not applicable.

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
     ISDS.

     This ISDS would serve as the PAD-stage ISDS.

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing1should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.


  By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'claims on the
disputed areas

   As no safeguard issues is likely to be triggered in this project, this ISDS will serve as the
   PAD-stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signedand submiited by:                         Name                       v~bf-                                   Date
 Task Team Leader:                               Viraj Vithoontien                                             July 19,2006
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Reidar Kvam                                                  oJ/s/~F
   Comments
 Sector Manager:                              kAbel Mejia                                                      trrtrAROS.
    Comments




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

