Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2664
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P102316 
Project Name:  Additional Financing Argentina Provincial Agricultural Development 
Project I 
Task Team Leader:  Alvaro J. Soler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 11, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 30, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Animal production (50%);Irrigation and drainage (15%);Roads and highways 
(15%);Agricultural marketing and trade (14%);Health (6%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other 
rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
37.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
7.80
7.80 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives would remain unchanged.  The additional financing 
would continue supporting the key development objectives of the project, including the 
improvement of the effectiveness of basic agricultural support services to increase the 
international competitiveness of agricultural products.  The project would do so by 
introducing new and more productive technologies, increasing quality and improving 
sanitary conditions of products, eradicating diseases that limit access to international 
markets, and improving rural productive infrastructure to reduce production and 
marketing costs.  
 
The AF would fund activities that with the exception of Avian Flu efforts are ongoing 
and were processed under PROSAP's safeguard procedures. Those procedures are set 
forth in detail in an Environmental Manual (EM) and summarized in an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF), which explain how subprojects are screened and 
evaluated to identify and mitigate potential safeguards issues. For the purposes of this 
AF, the project's Environmental Assessment (EA) has been updated to reflect the 
Page  2
safeguards screening and evaluation results for each proposed subproject (including 
Avian Flu efforts).  
 
Like the ongoing phase of PROSAP, while the majority of activities supported are 
Category B-type investments, the AF is a Category A as it includes one Category A 
subproject (Chaco - L?nea Tapeng? Drainageand Agricultural Production Development 
subproject). That subproject, the works for which are already completed, was closely 
supervised by Bank safeguard specialists. The resulting Environmental Impact 
Assessment and Management Plan (EIA-EMP) and Indigenous Peoples Development 
Plan (IPDP) are summarized in the project's updated Environmental Management 
Framework, and have been consulted and disclosed both in-country and through the 
Bank?s InfoShop on December 5, 2006. None of the activities to be financed have 
caused, or will cause, any resettlement.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional loan would finance completion of original activities under the 
above mentioned project, which faced an unanticipated financing gap and cost overrun.  
In addition, a small portion of the additional financing (4.7 percent) would finance a 
minor scale-up in support of the prevention of an avian flu pandemic, which nevertheless 
fall within the project?s original development objectives and is specifically linked to one 
of nine project intervention areas, that of animal health.  With the additional financing, 
the project is expected to achieve its full original objectives.  There are two underlying 
causes for the financing gap.  First was the transfer out in 2002 of $20 million for an 
Emergency Human Health component, driven by Argentina's economic and social crisis 
(but unrelated to the project's original objectives).  This transfer out was agreed by the 
Ministry of Economy and the Bank in face of the crisis and characterized as a cost 
savings, nevertheless required a reduction in scope of the activities planned and a re-
setting of targets.  Second are the subsequent cost overruns resulting from higher-than 
anticipated increases in construction costs following the rebound in economic activity 
after the crisis, affecting 18 of 22 of subprojects under implementation.  
 
Over half of the additional financing would be devoted to animal health activities of 
large economic importance, aimed at (a) restoring and completing project activities 
designed  to eradicate Foot and Mouth disease (FMD), and (b) introducing new activities 
being supported by the Bank at a global scale related to the prevention of an Avian Flu 
pandemic.  These new activities involve monitoring and capacity-builidng efforts related 
to pandemic prevention but would not include control activities if an outbreak were to 
occurr.  These complementary new activities fall under the original objectives of the 
project and imply a minor a scale up of the project.  The remaining balance (slightly less 
than half) of the additional financing would be used to restore and complete ongoing 
project activities under other types of subprojects.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As in the Original Project, the project area includes 9 provinces throughout Argentina: 
Catamarca, Chaco, Chubut, C?rdoba, Entre R?os, Mendoza, Misiones, Neuqu?n and 
Tucum?n.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The AF would fund activities that ?with the exception of Avian Flu efforts?are ongoing 
and already processed under PROSAP?s existing safeguard procedures. Those procedures 
are set forth in an Environmental Management Framework (EMF), which explains how 
subprojects are screened and evaluated to identify and mitigate potential safeguards 
issues. While the majority of activities supported are Category B-type investments, the 
AF is a Category A as it includes one Category A subproject (L?nea Tapeng? Drainage). 
That subproject has been closely supervised by Bank safeguard specialists. The resulting 
EIA-EMP and IPDP, along with the general safeguards screening procedures that will 
accommodate all the activities to be financed (including Avian Flu efforts) are 
summarized in the project?s updated Environmental Management Framework, and have 
been consulted and disclosed both in-country and through the Bank?s InfoShop.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to result in significant negative environmental impacts. The 
majority of project activities are low-impact activities, including rehabilitation or 
improvement of existing infrastructure (such as rural roads or most irrigation 
subprojects), or limited new construction in low-sensitivity areas (such as the sanitary 
barriers or lab construction). Potential negative environmental impacts include soil 
erosion or nutrient loss, water quality effects, and increased use of pesticides and/or 
Page  4
chemicals for animal health control (with resulting environmental and worker health 
implications), and increased use. These impacts are more thoroughly described in the 
project EA.  
 
Rather, the project is expected to result in positive environmental outcomes, through 
attempts to improve the efficiency of agricultural productivity in Argentina?s provinces. 
Improvements in water allocation and efficiency, coupled with technical assistance to 
encourage IPM, and modern production methods, are likely to result in improved 
environmental management in the rural sector. Cumulative impacts are not expected to be 
significant, as the project is nationwide (but limited) in scope, and all activities are being 
implemented in areas already under agricultural production.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EIA-EMP that was done for the L?nea Tapenag? subproject ? which is the only 
Category A subproject ? includes an analysis of alternative designs to achieve the 
subproject?s goal of reducing frequent flooding in the upper portion of the R?o Tapenag? 
Watershed. The alternative that was chosen is the most environmentally benign.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An EMP was developed as part of the EIA setting forth the specific measures to mitigate 
all identified impacts. The EMP includes a construction management plan, which 
addresses traffic, impacts to minor infrastructure (livestock-related), waste management, 
worker and road safety, impacts to public services and infrastructure (roads, railroads), 
environmental protection measures (soil, air, water and landscape), and public 
information. Likewise, the EMP includes measures to be implemented over a four-year 
period following completion of the works, including installation of a monitoring and alert 
system for water, soil and vegetation, and technical assistance to farmers for natural 
resource management (including IPM training, soil and water management, etc.). The 
EMP?s construction management plan was implemented by the contractor, under the 
supervision of the Provincial Water Administration (APA) and the UEC. The activities 
are to be implemented by the APA and the local Water and Soil Management 
Commissions (COMAS). The total EMP budget is US$ 28,100.  
 
IPDP: A site specific IPDP was developed and implemented to ensure culturally 
compatible benefits were provided to those indigenous peoples affected by the L?nea 
Tapeng? Drainage subproject. The IPDP, reviewed, approved and supervised by the Bank 
project team?s social specialist, includes an analysis of flood-related problems in the 
community, as well as an evaluation of other key issues important to the community?s 
economic development. Through the IPDP, the community identified and prioritized a 
number of actions, which were in turn funded by the L?nea Tapeng? subproject. These 
activities were successfully completed to the community?s satisfaction, and included: (1) 
rerouting and treating sewage discharge from a neighboring city (Quitilipi) outside of the 
Tapeng? Watershed; (2) construction of a school and health center; (3) improvement of 
existing roads; (4) expansion of the drinking water well network; (5) expansion of the 
Page  5
watering trough system for cattle; (6) rehabilitation of the community center; (7) 
technical assistance for productive activities; and (8) support for improved 
communication both within the community and with neighboring communities.  
 
The IPDP, which had a budget of US$ 567,000, was successfully implemented under 
the initial PROSAP project phase.  
 
Both the EIA-EMP and IPDP were made publicly available at the project WEB site 
(http://www.sagpya.mecon.gov.ar/) after the documents were approved. Likewise, these 
documents are available through the Bank?s InfoShop.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultation: Public consultations were held for both the EIA-EMP and IPDP. 
Consultations for the EIA-EMP?s Terms of Reference were held in Roque Saenz Pe?a on 
December 1, 2003. Additionally, consultations on the draft EIA were held in Brasail and 
Roque Saenz Pe?a on January 30, 2004.  
 
Likewise, the IPDP is the product of multiple consultations involving the affected 
indigenous community prior to finalizing the TORs for the plan, as well as the final plan. 
Those events were held at the Colonia Abor?gen on January 30, 2004 with approximately 
100 people in attendance and on March 27, 2004 with an approximate attendance of 200 
people.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/16/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/05/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/05/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/21/1995  
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/05/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/05/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  7
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alvaro J. Soler 
12/13/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
12/13/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky 
12/13/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/13/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
 
Comments:   
