Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1743 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/25/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P092840 
Project Name: Governance 21 - Srengthening Public Expenditure Management for 
Territorial Economic Development and Growth 
Task Team Leader: Kathrin A. Plangemann 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 21, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 6, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (50%);Sub-national government 
administration (50%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Decentralization 
(S);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
This project aims at strengthening the transparency, efficiency and effectiveness of public 
expenditure management in financial management and public investment and to strengthen 
management capacity for territorial economic development to mobilize public and private actors 
for regional economic growth. The specific project objectives are to:  
 
(a) Strengthen management capacity for territorial economic development by supporting 
selected demand-driven public sector management instruments such as strategic planning, 
administrative simplification and intergovernmental program coordination to develop 
methodologies and implement pilots to spur regional growth.  
 
(b) Strengthen public investment systems to make public investment more responsive to 
regional priorities by improving management capacity to identify, manage and monitor public 
investment, ex-ante and increasingly ex-post monitoring and evaluation; improvements in the 
control system and greater integration with financial management.  
Page  2
(c) Strengthen financial administration to further improve the efficiency and transparency of 
financial management through the design and implementation of a new web-based technological 
architecture to be implemented at the federal government; enhancing results-oriented budgeting, 
and greater engagement with the legislative and civil society.  
 
(d) Promote change management through effective project management that includes a focus on 
transparency and participation, M&E and change management methodologies to strengthen 
consensus and mitigate risks to enhance greater project sustainability.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
As requested by the government, the proposed project is a Technical Assistance Loan for the 
amount of US$ 25 Million for a four-year implementation period.  
 
Proposed project components:  
 
Component 1: Management Capacity for Territorial Economic Development  
 
This component aims at developing and implementing demand-driven public sector 
management tools to help mobilize public and private actors to engage in territorial strategic 
planning, intergovernmental program coordination, and help reduce public sector obstacles to 
investment.  
 
Taking an incremental approach, the project would support by pilot projects, aimed at 
generating a demonstration effect for broader policy formulation and to be replicated in similar 
territories. The project will primarily operate through horizontal exchanges and lessons learned 
from more advanced provinces to less advanced provinces and selected municipalities.  
 
The component would finance the following subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1: Knowledge-building and M&E for territorial economic development: This 
subcomponent would create and disseminate local and international lessons learned and best 
practices on territorial development that would serve as basis to formulate a territorial economic 
development policy. It would finance publications, training, workshops and conferences on 
selected territorial economic development issues and would help establish an electronic 
information and monitoring system on territorial economic development indicators.  
 
Subcomponent 2: Strategic territorial planning: This subcomponent would finance the design of 
methodologies and the implementation of strategic planning pilots in selected provinces and 
municipalities on the basis of the on-going subnational work with the BAPIN II. It would 
promote public private partnerships in support of intergovernmental territorial economic 
development strategies and action plans, based on extensive consultations with public and 
private stakeholders to foster participation in the design, implementation and monitoring to make 
public investment more responsive to private sector needs.  
 
Subcomponent 3: Administrative simplification for territorial growth: This subcomponent 
would support the design of methodologies and the implementation of administrative 
simplification pilots. Through business process reengineering, and other institutional 
strengthening of the subnational public sector, targeted administrative procedures will be 
simplified which, on the basis of assessments and surveys of the private sector, have been 
selected as key bottlenecks to business entry and operations.  
 
Subcomponent 4: Territorial investment program restructuring and coordination: This 
subcomponent would asses the capacity of territorial economic development programs within the 
Ministry of Economy and Production Economic Policy Secretariat and would help strengthen 
intergovernmental restructuring and coordination of programs in line with subnational and 
Page  3
private sector demands. It would also support intergovernmental performance agreements 
between different levels of governments and the public and private sector, including incentives 
for greater performance and monitoring of such programs.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Results-oriented Public Investment  
 
This component aims at consolidating and leveraging the achievements of the National Public 
Investment System and implementing the recently created Subnational Public Investment 
Systems along with the necessary instruments in order to consolidate an efficient and transparent 
public investment process both at the federal and subnational level.  
 
This component would finance the following two subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1: Institutional Strengthening of the Management and Oversight Capacity of the 
National Directorate for Public Investment (DNIP): This subcomponent will support the 
development of simplified methodologies to formulate, evaluate and monitor projects (both ex 
ante and ex-post) including the estimation of reference prices and the development of rules for 
their application in the formulation  and evaluation of public investment projects; the design of a 
physical and financial monitoring system for the National Investment Plan, including a set of 
adequate, timely and reliable reports on projects execution. It would also finance the 
development of links between the BAPIN II and the financial administration system Web-SIDIF 
to allow for automatic update of budgetary formulation of investment project directly from 
BAPIN II to Web-SIDIF and the financial execution information from the Wed-SIDIF to the 
BAPIN II, as well as greater linkages with the procurement system.  
 
Subcomponent 2: Strengthening Subnational Public Investment Systems: This subcomponent 
would support the development of Subnational Public Investment Systems and their use as 
investment management tools for project formulation and evaluation, to define and implement 
performance indicators and decision criteria for investment projects; and to support common 
investment registration and reporting standards. It would also finance the establishment of a 
monitoring system for project execution and the Provincial Investment Plan and the design and 
implementation of communication, participation and dissemination mechanisms to enhance 
transparency and accountability of public investment.  
 
Component 3: Strengthening Results-oriented Financial Management  
 
This component would continue financing federal-level financial management reforms, by 
strengthening budgeting instruments aiming at generating an effective link between resource 
allocation and results and the expansion and technological upgrade of financial management 
systems. It would also help improve access and dissemination of financial administration 
information to the civil society. It will support the following subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1: Technological Upgrade of Financial Management Information Systems and 
expansion of the SLU: Based on the experience of the SLU, this component would develop, test 
and implement the new web-based open source financial management technological architecture 
(Web-SIDIF) that would completely replace the SLU by 2010. It would also support the 
reengineering of specific financial administration processes and the incorporation of new 
functions such as assets administration, human resource management, and linkages with other 
systems. In addition, this subcomponent would support the completion in the implementation of 
the SLU within the federal public administration.  
 
Subcomponent 2: Institutional Strengthening of the National Public Administration institutions 
for Results-oriented Budgeting and Management: This subcomponent would strengthen the 
Page  4
capacities of the Ministry of  Economy and Production to develop and implement a results-
oriented budgeting approach within the federal administration through the design and 
implementation of instruments aiming at generating stronger linkages between government 
planning, fiscal accounting and budgeting; and consolidating performance management. It would 
also help improve the National Budgeting Office capacities with regards to its management and 
advisory role in results-oriented budgeting  
 
Subcomponent 3: Strengthening Financial Management Capacities, Outreach and Transparency 
of Public Expenditure Management: This subcomponent would help identify public sector 
management needs in terms of financial management information and capacity-strengthening 
and finance training and outreach on financial management, including fora, such as users 
committees to identify and disseminate best practices. It would also help strength the dialogue 
with the legislative branch and the civil society.    
 
Component 4: Project and Change Management  
 
The fourth component is designed to ensure effective project implementation across 
components, to strengthen consensus and mitigate risks to enhance project sustainability. It 
includes overall project management and specific change management instruments. It would 
finance three subcomponents.  
 
Subcomponent 1: Project management: This subcomponent would strengthen the traditional 
functions of project management, including procurement and financial administration and would 
support a gradual reduction of the PCU and its integration into the Ministry.  
 
Subcomponent 2: Change Management:  The subcomponent would help to build greater 
consensus between stakeholders to make the project more sustainable by financing different 
change management methodologies such as stakeholder analysis and extensive consultations for 
the formulation of the territorial economic development policy, and effective communication 
strategies including disseminating lessons learned from the pilots.  
 
Subcomponent 3: Transparency and Participation: Transparency and participation would be 
promoted through strengthening public and civil society oversight, and private sector 
partnerships. Specifically, this subcomponent would finance social accountability mechanisms, 
including the establishment of a web portal for the dissemination of project progress and results 
and the establishment of a Civil Society Observatory.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Buenos Aires, Argentina   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/07/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kathrin A. Plangemann 
04/07/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
04/18/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
