Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2921
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P088258 
Project Name:  Sustainable Forestry Development 
Task Team Leader:  Davis Robert 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P094425 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 12, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (75%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Other rural 
development (P);Participation and civic engagement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
25.00
35.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project?s Development Objective is to mainstream biodiversity conservation into 
plantation forestry practices, which is consistent with the Global Environment Objective 
of conserving globally and regionally significant biodiversity in production landscapes 
located in critical Argentine ecosystems.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of four components that support the objective of mainstreaming 
biodiversity into the plantation forestry sector.  These components are: (1) Institutional 
capacities strengthened (2) Development and dissemination of biodiversity-responsible 
plantation practices and technology transfer (3) Support for the adoption of biodiversity-
responsible plantation practices, and (4) Project Implementation, Monitoring and 
Evaluation.  
 
Institutional capacities strengthened:  This component aims to create the required 
capacity at federal and provincial levels of government within environmental and forestry 
agencies to spearhead the biodiversity mainstreaming process. Specialized in-depth 
Page  2
training on biodiversity and ecosystem integrity and management, enrichment planting, 
environmental impact assessments and strategic environmental assessments, and best 
practices for forest plantations will be provided for senior federal and provincial officials, 
as well as for researchers and extension agents. Financing will support the development 
and extension of biodiversity-conservation techniques to be integrated into production 
practices. The component will also seek to improve and update the legal and policy 
frameworks needed to improve sustainable plantation planning and establishment, and 
invest in tools critical to biodiversity-responsible plantation location and design. This 
includes contributing to the dialog on the legislation which will replace Law 25.080, 
which expires in 2009. Through broad stakeholder participation and technical analysis, 
maps and ecoregional planning tools will be produced and disseminated for guiding 
government plantation promotion, as well as for orienting ongoing private sector 
investments. Strategic Environmental Impact Assessments also will be carried out in the 
project ecoregions to ascertain the broader impacts of forestry activities on the 
ecosystem.  
 
Development and dissemination of biodiversity-responsible  plantation practices and 
technology transfer:  This component will document and disseminate improved forestry 
practices that integrate conservation with production. A special focus will be placed on 
practices for establishing native and mixed species plantations (within forest ecosystem 
settings), opening up the understory to the surrounding ecosystem, and creating set asides 
among approaches that maintain or enhance native ecosystem biodiversity. The economic 
and biodiversity conservation implications of these practices will be monitored through 
Component 4. Native seed banks and nurseries will be supported, and field trials carried 
out to analyze different management approaches. Workshops will be held to bring 
together the private sector (small, medium, and large-scale producers) and public 
(provincial and federal) sector, as well as academia and NGOs, to discuss the 
establishment of standards for biodiversity-responsible practices in the forestry sector and 
to disseminate best practices drawn from studies and field trials.  The dialog on best 
practices will be continued and expanded at a major international workshop linked to the 
World Forestry Congress to be held in Argentina in 2009, which will disseminate the 
mainstreaming approaches advanced with the GEF supported project.  
 
Support for the adoption of biodiversity-responsible plantation practices:  Under this 
subcomponent, SAGPyA and its counterpart institutions will undertake activities 
designed to identify and test biodiversity-responsible land use practices in high priority 
areas, or targeting threatened biodiversity, in the production landscape. Specifically, 
resources will be made available to support activities intended to promote changes in the 
production landscape in target areas, leading to maintenance or enhancing biodiversity of 
global importance and sustained economic development that is compatible with 
conservation objectives. The subcomponent will support improved community and land-
holder practices through targeted interventions that revolve around plantation forestry 
concerns, and will seek to ameliorate threats to globally important biodiversity through 
environmental education and field extension. As the project will engage small-, medium- 
and large-scale producers, each of which has very different needs and resources, the 
project includes two sets of complementary approaches. For small- and medium-scale 
producers, a demand-driven program of grant-supported subprojects will be included, 
complemented by environmental education and monitoring of the biodiversity impacts of 
Page  3
the subprojects and generating lessons-learned from the approaches taken. The objective 
of these subprojects is support owners who are piloting the inclusion of biodiversity-
responsible practices in production landscapes. The component will also facilitate dialog 
with large producers on conservation practices, standards, and certification, and provide 
technical assistance (though not financing) needed to promote the inclusion of 
biodiversity-responsible techniques.  
 
Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation:  The incremental costs associated 
with the project implementation, as well as with setting up a system of monitoring and 
evaluation of outcomes, will be supported through this component.  The GEF will also 
provide support to SAGPyA these incremental costs. This component will also cover 
baseline information collection, mid-term evaluation, and final evaluation under the 
Monitoring and Evaluation program for the project (see also annex 3 Results Framework 
and Monitoring). With regard to globally significant biodiversity and benefits from the 
project, several components of the monitoring program included in annex 3 will support 
this effort and designed to support the tracking process of the GEF at a global level.  The 
indicators include hectares under biodiversity-responsible or mainstreamed management, 
increase in protected areas in the production landscape, while the demand-driven projects 
and best practices may look at specific globally important species or taxa to monitor 
biodiversity effects at a smaller scale.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Several of the mainstreaming components of the project are institutional in nature or 
regulatory and policy related, and therefore may have national as well as more regional 
level implications, with globally positive impacts on biodiversity expected as outcomes. 
The ground-level activities in the ecorregions that are of primary interest for 
mainstreaming include the provinces of Misiones, Corrientes, Entre Rios, and parts of 
Buenos Aires in the northeastern quadrant of Argentina (see maps in attached annexes) 
while the Patagonian provinces of Chubut, Rio Negro, and Neuquen in the Southwest 
will be a second focal area.  
 
Baseline biodiversity studies have been prepared by the proponent of the GEF 
alternative.  These analyses have shown the relevance of the biodiversity in these 
ecorregions based on the number and distribution of endangered, threatened, and endemic 
species as well as landscape analyses that demonstrate some of the best opportunities for 
mainstreaming and conservation of biodiversity in target ecosystems such as the Alto 
Parana Atlantic Forest, Mesopotamian Grasslands, and parts of the Valdivian Forest and 
Patagonian Steppe.  
 
Argentina has advantages for piloting mainstreaming activities in the plantation sector 
given that the coverage of remaining ecosystems (particularly the Alto Parana Atlantic 
Forest and the Valdivian Forest) is greater in this country than in the surrounding 
countries that share its ecosystems such as Chile, Brazil, and Paraguay.  The important 
network of core protected areas (strengthened in part by GEF incremental investments) 
also permits greater effectiveness in establishing corridors for biodiversity within the 
plantation landscape.   
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTS1) 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSAR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is designed as an environmentally beneficial project that seeks to pilot and 
promote practices for biodiversity conservation, while reversing negative trends in human 
productive activities in the production landscape associated with certain plantation 
forestry practices.  Mainstreaming biodiversity into the production landscape is a 
strategic priority of the Global Environment Facility under the Biodiversity Focal Area 
and is a key aspect for implementation of the objectives of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity.  The project has selected strategic interventions based on an in-depth threat 
analysis from both a macro level context and a more regional local analysis within the 
targeted globally important ecosystems.  
 
Given the semi-blended nature of the GEF investment with an IBRD sectoral loan and 
Government of Argentina co-financing, the proponent has prepared environmental and 
social assessments contemplating both the IBRD-funded as well as GEF-funded 
investments in the scope of analysis even though the GEF-funded investments are all 
environmentally positive and some cases even restorative of the landscape.  A summary 
analysis of expected environmental and social issues related to the project components 
and expected activities are attached to the present document.  
 
Components 2 (Technology Transfer) and 3 (Biodiversity Friendly Production) of the 
present project have components that pilot interventions in the plantation landscape that 
are designed to be beneficial to biodiversity, however in order to ensure that the practices 
use are in-line both with best environmental practices and are socially acceptable in light 
of the Bank safeguards, an Operational Manual is to be prepared for guidance of the 
Page  5
Project Implementation Unit of the proponent.  The guidance will incorporate the Natural 
Habitats directives for location of the projects while referring to the Pest Management 
directives should they be required.  In regard to potential participation by indigenous 
groups in pilot activities, the Operational Manual will also ensure that their participation 
is framed within the context of the Bank safeguards on Indigenous Peoples.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential indirect and long-term impacts are designed to be positive.  The focus on 
capacity-building along with substantial investments in environmental education and 
demonstration projects, allows for long-term subsistence of the effects of the investment 
with potential for replication at national and regional levels given the geographic scope of 
the interventions.  
 
In regard to the pilot projects with small and medium producers it is expected that social 
and environmental impacts will be positive given that the project design seeks investment 
to generate global biodiversity benefits with positive local level impacts on economic 
wellbeing and income generation.  The projects are to be demand driven so as to 
maximize the relevance and priority for the beneficiaries improving the possibility of 
positive outcomes.  
 
In regard to large-scale commercial plantation forestry, a controversial activity from a 
social and environmental standpoint in this part of the world, the project does not engage 
in the promotion of plantation forestry.  In order to improve and ensure environmental 
sustainability as well as ensure mainstreaming is maximally incorporated into the 
landscape, the project has components that will engage the private sector in dialogue and 
planning that is beneficial to biodiversity and ensures the maintenance of ecosystems.  
The planning processes as well as the capacity building components provide decision-
makers at national and provincial levels with tools that will allow the greatest balance 
between economic growth and environmental and social sustainability of the plantation 
forestry sector.  
 
An Environmental Management Plan has been prepared by the proponent for those few 
areas that have been noted to have potential impacts.  The areas include: (i). Policy 
studies and proposals that may not benefit biodiversity if improperly designed and 
executed, or due to a deficient consultation process. (ii) Extension programs to benefit 
biodiversity may be poorly designed and implemented or may generate expected positive 
effects on biodiversity but be socially, economically, or culturally rejected.  (iii) These 
same issues might also arise with the Pilot Projects for Mainstreaming in component 3, as 
well as the potential to use pesticides in the projects as mentioned previously.  An 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared by SAGPyA to address these 
issues and the measures therein will be incorporated into the pertinent Operational 
Manuals for use in implementation and supervision.  
 
Following is a summary of the key provisions included within the EMP of the EA 
document:  
Page  6
?
Selection of locations for intervention by the project will be guided by Strategic 
Environmental Assessment that will guide sub-components to have maximum positive 
impacts for biodiversity, avoiding transformation of habitat and greates potential for 
restoration of ecosystems where possible.  
 
?
Individual projects will be designed to support adoption of best practices by 
producers and criteria have been developed for selection of these projects to benefit 
biodiversity.  
 
?
Measures have been established to ensure quality of the projects, participation, 
ownership and inclusion of producers, local governments and organizations, and good 
oversight, monitoring and evaluation during implementation.  
 
?
Pesticide use is expected to be limited to the few field components of the project, 
however Annex 1 of the EA includes policies, measures, and guidelines in this respect.  
The Annex serves as the Pest Management Plan (PMP) for the project and will be 
included in the Operational Manual for implementation and supervision.  The PMP 
emphasizes Integrated Pest Management, includes a list of prohibited and restricted 
pesticides for Argentina, and incorporates the guidelines of the Bank OP 4.09.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During project preparation, consideration was given to establishing specific areas of 
intervention for pilot projects under components 2 and 3.  The alternative of generating a 
demand driven model that would begin implementation after capacity building within 
national and provincial level institutions and following participatory planning processes 
was considered the more environmentally beneficial alternative.  An a priori analysis of a 
project area to pilot low-impact or biodiversity friendly plantation methods would not 
generate or replicate the level of input that a long-term participatory process would 
generate such as is presently proposed.  The demand driven model also ensures that the 
communities, organizations, and local governments are committed to the outcomes of the 
program given that they will generate what they consider priority projects within a 
general framework to be established by the project in the context of mainstreaming 
biodiversity in plantation settings.  Levels of co-financing will also be optimized in a 
demand-driven model whereas a ?supply-side? model may not necessarily generate the 
same level of interest or commitments.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has a good track record for the implementation of Bank-finance projects, 
and a demonstrated capacity for monitoring safeguards on three projects, including the 
recently closed Forestry Development Project. The Terms of Reference and selection of 
personnel of the Project Implementation Unit will include specialists with natural 
resources and biodiversity conservation skills with senior-level capacity in order to 
ensure project implementation and outcomes are executed within the framework of the 
safeguards policies of the Bank.  The project in itself is aimed at generating capacities for 
a
much broader long-term and positive impact on the landscape from production 
activities outside the scope and control of the present GEF-funded project, and ultimately 
should be a catalyst for improved environmental conditions.  
Page  7
The Secretary of Agriculture (SAGPyA) and in particular the Forestry Directorate have 
incorporated into their programs and policies to a certain extent the concept of 
sustainable development and environmental safeguards.  Given their focus on production 
and economic growth however, capacity within the institution is limited in regard to 
?mainstreaming? of the concepts into extension programs, investments, research, and 
policy.  INTA, the National Agricultural Technology Institute, within the realm of 
SAGPyA, however, has pioneered mainstreaming of biodiversity in forestry and 
productive activities in Argentina.  They have participated extensively in the preparation 
of the present project and will continue to support the steering committee to be 
established for project implementation.  There are solid capacities in Geographic 
Information Systems and a specialist in environmental impact on staff in the DF.  One of 
the basic justifications for the GEF incremental investments is the need to generate the 
institutional capacity in this important sector of the Argentine economy for 
mainstreaming biodiversity into plantation forestry activities and to reduce environmental 
impacts in general through best practices.  
 
Argentina is a decentralized country divided into Provinces that are autonomous, and 
whose governments receive and implement an important part of the national budget.  In 
particular, they are charged with the oversight of environmental impact statements and 
authorizations for subsidies provided by the national government.  In this respect, the 
institutional analyses and consultations made during preparation indicate a minimal but 
growing capacity to manage environmental safeguards and planning for long-term 
sustainable growth.  The project seeks to support the planning, capacity building, 
extension, and project level experience necessary at the Provincial level to mainstream 
biodiversity and long-term protection of globally important ecosystems.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are described in the summary Social Assessment provided as an annex 
to the present ISDS.  These include national and provincial level public servants, 
officials, technicians, researchers and extension agents.  Other key stakeholders are 
academic institutions as well as NGOs involved in conservation of biodiversity and 
reducing the environmental impacts of productive activities.  Producers involved in 
plantation forestry at small, medium, and large scale (ranging from tens to over 100,000 
hectares) within priority ecorregions with globally important biodiversity are also 
important stakeholders that have been engaged during design and will continue to be 
involved in the implementation of the project.  A steering committee will be established 
for the project at a national level to support and follow the implementation while specific 
advisory and project committees or roundtables may be established as needed for specific 
aspects such as policy development and dialogue, technology transfer and pilot project 
monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Representatives of the stakeholders have participated and been informed during the 
preparation process in several settings including workshops, interviews, public 
presentations, mass media, and the Internet.  A full list of the participants directly 
Page  8
involved in the process of preparation and consultation to date are listed in annex 11 of 
the PAD.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/05/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/12/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/05/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/12/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Page  9
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Ragland Davis 
04/04/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
01/29/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas 
01/08/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Francis V. Fragano 
02/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr McDonald P. Benjamin 
04/09/2007 
Comments:   
