Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/20/2007 
Report No.: 40112
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P102446 
Project Name:  AR Additional Financing Small Farmer Development Project 
(PROINDER) 
Task Team Leader:  Dorte Verner 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (30%); Crops (30%); General agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%); Agricultural marketing and trade (10%); Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P); Rural services and infrastructure (P); Other 
rural development (P); Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project is a scaling-up of the original Argentina Small Farmers 
Development Project (P006041) which is due to close on June 30, 2007.  The 
Development Objective of the proposed scaled-up project remains the same as the 
original project in substantive terms: (a) increase productive and organizational capacity 
in targeted poor rural communities; and (b) increase emphasis on rural poverty issues in 
sectoral policies, and improve coordination mechanisms at the national and provincial 
levels. 
 
The scaled-up project merely extends the coverage of rural households from the original 
project target of 30,000 households (actual achievement: 50,000 households) to a total of 
at least 72,000 households (some of the additional 22,000 households may have been 
covered under the original project).  The number of sub-projects to be financed through 
Component 1 
–
Rural Development – would increase from about 9,000 (actual 
achievement under the original project) to 12,000 with the AF project.  It will also 
continue to support improvement of rural development policy dialogue process, and some 
capacity building and institutional strengthening activities. 
 
Since the scaled-up project proposes no changes to the original project activities, the 
expected outcomes and the attendant indicators for the original project continue to remain 
relevant.  However, six additional indicators have been incorporated based on experience 
on the ground.  The two broad outcomes, and their respective indicators, are as follows: 
 
(a) Increased productive and organizational capacity in participating poor rural 
communities - Indicators: (i) increased income from productive infrastructure; (ii) 
increased production of food for family consumption; (iii) diversification of 
productive activities; (iv) conversion or integration of beneficiary groups into 
producers’ organizations; (v) group input procurement and produce marketing, 
(vi) improvement of rural habitat; and (vii) increased participation of rural 
families in communities activities.   
 
Page  2
(b) Greater emphasis on rural poverty issues and improved coordination of rural 
development policies and programs - Indicators: (i) provincial rural development 
policies prepared with increased participation of beneficiary population; (ii) rural 
development strategies reflect the database developed under the project; (iii)  
coordination mechanisms incorporated into national level agency procedures, and 
in provincial rural development programs, (iv) information created for the Project 
is required for other institutions, (v) new legislation in support of rural 
development policies is presented to legislative powers, (vi) rural development 
agencies in the Provinces identified and having initiated actions on a local and 
regional level from the start of the Project; and (vii) demands and proposals from 
small farmer organizations presented and addressed at the local and national 
levels. 
 
3. Project Description 
The original project has three components to achieve the PDO:  
 
(a) Rural Investment Component
-
Rural Investment Grants 
–
Financing of small 
grants for demand-based sub-projects (civil works, goods, technical 
assistance); Support Services, including training, system and implementation 
of Participation Action Plan and Indigenous Peoples Strategy (training and 
studies); and Management of Rural Investment Activities at the national, 
provincial and local levels (technical assistance and equipment). 
 
(b) Strengthening Rural Policy Development
-
National Strategy Development 
(studies, establishment of Rural Development Commission, and rural 
development database in the Secretariat of Agriculture); Provincial Strategy 
Development (demand-driven studies and technical assistance); Training for 
sub-national and national agencies; strengthening of small farmers 
organizations; Appropriate Technology Development (studies and competitive 
research grants); Institutional Strengthening for Directorate of Planning and 
Agricultural Development to manage component activities (equipment and 
technical assistance); and  
 
(c) Project Administration and M&E
-
Technical assistance, studies and 
equipment to establish project coordination unit and carry out M&E. 
 
The proposed additional loan will support expansion of component (a), and deepening of 
components (b) and (c) above.  
 
There is no change in the project design, approach or scope compared to the original 
project, barring some refinements which have been introduced from time-to-time during 
the implementation of the original project.  Almost 99 percent of the scaled-up project 
cost relates to project components included in the original project.  These are summarized 
below on a component-by-component basis. 
 
ORIGINAL PROJECT 
PROPOSED SCALED-UP PROJECT 
Component 1: Rural Investment 
 
(a) Rural Investment Grants (to finance pre-
investment, household production, 
commercially-oriented technology transfer, 
community infrastructure, and marketing 
assistance sub-projects  
No change proposed, except remodeling pre-
investment and marketing assistance from individual 
sub-projects to consultancies for evaluation and 
assistance on a territorial basis.  Since this component 
is “sub-project” oriented, these two types of 
assistance would be offered under the sub-component 
“Support Services” in the form of TA 
(b) Support Services (to train and capacity
-
build focused on targeted communities, public 
and private TA providers, and implementing 
agency staff (PSA); to develop marketing 
N
o
change proposed, except adding: (i) the pre
-
investment and marketing TA from Component 1(a) 
to the activity relating to marketing information; (ii) 
TA to prepare territorial development plans in a 
Page  3
information; and to implement the 
Participation Action Plan  
participatory manner, form beneficiary/producer 
groups, assist with implementation, and with M&E; 
and (iii) a special focus on vulnerable groups 
(women, IP, and youth) in capacity building 
activities.  Assistance could be in the form of 
individual specialist consultants at sub-project level 
or multi-disciplinary teams at provincial level, or 
both 
(c) Support for SAGPyA for the 
implementation of the Component 
No change proposed, except scale reduction since 
entities already strengthened under original project 
Component 2: Strengthening Rural 
Development 
 
(a) National Strategy Development (to create 
rural development database, establish the  
Commission for Rural Development, and 
facilitate coordination of rural programs) 
No change proposed, except to develop the next stage 
vision for the Commission, and a database of 
producers  
(b) Provincial Strategy Development (to assist 
with provincial level poverty analysis and 
strategy development, and capacity 
enhancement for management of rural 
programs) 
No change proposed, except getting the provincial 
rural strategy prepared for the remaining provinces, 
creating capacity to implement the rural strategy, and 
giving a territorial focus to the provincial rural 
strategy through civil society consultation 
(c) Training and TA (for national, provincial 
and municipal staff, NGOs, beneficiaries and 
other rural service providers to implement 
project activities.  The original project also 
strengthened the capacity of individual small 
farmers participating in the project) 
No change proposed, except focusing specifically on 
small far
mers’ organizations.  To be able to provide a 
separate fund for this activity, this has been 
introduced as a separate sub-component (see (d) 
below) 
(d) Strengthening small farmers’ 
organizations. (Did not exist as a separate 
sub-component but project support was 
embedded as assistance to individual small 
farmers under (c) above) 
Based on experience, and given the critical role of 
small farmers’ organizations in rural development, 
the scaled-up project will support their development 
through the provision of TA, minor equipment, and 
training under a separate sub-component  
(e) Appropriate Technology Development and 
Dissemination (to create a catalogue of 
technologies, and to provide competitive 
grants for appropriate technology 
development and dissemination 
No change proposed 
(f) Support to DDA for the implementation of 
the Component 
No change proposed, except scale reduction since 
entities already strengthened under original project 
Component 3: Project Administration, 
M&E 
 
(a) Project Administration 
No change proposed 
(b) M&E 
No change proposed  
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
 
As the original project the proposed AF project national in coverage.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) – Social Aspects 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSAR) –Environmental Aspects 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts: 
 
No major changes from the original project are being proposed in terms of project design, 
approach, and implementation arrangements.  The nature, size and geographical coverage 
of the sub-projects, and the targeted beneficiaries will remain the same for the scaled-up 
project activities.   
 
The safeguard policies applicable to the original project continue to remain relevant for 
the scaled-up project, namely, Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Indigenous 
Peoples (OD4.20/OP4.10).  In addition, the policy relating to Forests has also been 
triggered for the scaled-up project.   
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected to occur under the 
scaled-up project.   
 
The original Environmental Assessment prepared for the project indicated that potential 
short-term, small-scale, reversible impacts may result from demand-driven sub-projects 
of the Rural Investment Component
.
This remains the case under the scaled-up project, 
given that the scope, scale, and nature of the interventions are the same as the original 
project design.  The impacts from civil works and agricultural diversification and 
expansion were noted in the EA as potentially the most important from an environmental 
standpoint.  Poorly planned or executed sub-projects, weak consultation and 
communication processes with beneficiaries and large aggregates of projects in target 
areas without adequate design and mitigation, could potentially generate environmental 
impacts.   
 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was been designed and incorporated 
into the Operational Manual of the project to ensure prior screening of sub-projects while 
involving the stakeholders in design and management of environmental aspects.  The 
Operational Manual has been updated periodically and for the scaled-up project, it 
incorporates revisions based on project experience and most recent safeguard policies to 
ensure quality and facilitate compliance.  
 
Under the Strengthening Rural Policy Development Component
,
SAGPyA has developed 
specific policies that incorporate environmental sustainability in institutional 
strengthening activities, and has also incorporated these concepts and safeguards issues 
into appropriate technology research components.  These initiatives will help mainstream 
environmental sustainability into the capacity building, planning, decentralization, and 
extension activities supported by the scaled-up project.   
Page  5
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
The project is national in terms of its geographic scope; however, the sub-projects are 
small-sized and widely dispersed.  Projects could be located in areas close to critical 
natural habitat or protected areas.  Neither the proposed sub-project types nor any other 
project activity contemplated imply significantly degrading or converting of natural 
habitat.   
 
In fact, the focus of increasing productivity and improving policies with regard to 
agricultural production with small-holders will help to reduce degradation of natural 
habitats and minimize use of pesticides potentially benefiting biodiversity.  The EMF 
also incorporates a negative list of activities that require previous review of projects in 
case of potential impacts on native habitat.  Projects within protected areas (national and 
provincial) are not eligible for funding where the legislation forbids them.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
No commercial harvesting of native forests or large-scale plantation forestry is 
contemplated under the AF project, nor has occurred in the first phase of implementation.  
Forestry activities may be included under the Rural Investment Component and involve 
activities such as silvo-pastoral uses of small plantation forests and improved 
management of native forests that earlier showed high levels of degradation or 
unsustainable use.  Small-scale producers of charcoal in several parts of the country have 
been incorporated under the program.   These producers have been the focus of 
improved-use projects seeking to increase sustainability and income from use of forest 
resources (i.e. producing value added products from wood), although direct support for 
charcoal production has been ruled-out based on the negative list established in the EMF.   
 
The scaled-up project and its Operational Manual would incorporate more specific 
guidance for forestry activities including an emphasis on supporting alternatives to 
charcoal production, and on sustainable forestry, where these issues are present, 
consistent with paragraph 12 of OP/BP4.36."" 
 
Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) 
Procurement of pesticides has not been a part of the original project, nor is contemplated 
for the scaled-up project.   
 
However, integrated pest management has been promoted throughout the original project 
duration, and will continue during the scaled-up project period.  A negative list has also 
been prepared to exclude potential acquisition and use of hazardous pesticides, especially 
those in the Class I category of the WHO for sustainability. 
 
Training activities have been on-going with respect to the Environmental Management 
Framework, and will continue during the first year of the project, including focusing on 
issues pertaining to IPM.   
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD4.20/OP4.10) 
Since the project’s targeted poor and vulnerable beneficiary population includes 
indigenous people, the original project triggered OD4.20.  Although the concept, design, 
components, coverage, approach, targeted population and the nature, complexity, size 
and scope of the sub-projects under proposed scaled-up project remain virtually 
unchanged, the Bank’s current indigenous policy, OP4.10 becomes applicable to the 
scaled-up project in place of the earlier OD4.20.   
 
Page  6
Since the scaled-
up
project will use the original project indigenous peoples’ plan, as 
upgraded from time to time during implementation, a note has been prepared which 
reviews the processes undertaken during original project preparation, assesses 
compliance with the current policy relating to IP - OP4.10, highlights the implementation 
successes and challenges for the future, assesses the nature and adequacy of consultations 
as well as their operational impact and relevance, broad community support for the 
project, and implications of internal social differentiation among indigenous peoples.  
This is provided as an attachment to the ISDS.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area: 
 
Long-term impacts are expected to be neutral or positive for the anticipated activities.  
This is due to the fact that the small-farmer initiatives, to a great extent, seek to improve 
environmental as well as economic sustainability of their production modalities, thereby 
reducing impacts such as soil erosion and land degradation.  Increased crop yields and 
value-added production decreases the need to expand on native ecosystems for increasing 
income levels.  The emphasis on Integrated Pest Management also reduces the long-term 
effects of agricultural chemicals in soils, waterways, ecosystems, and to rural family and 
consumer health.  
 
The lessons-learned from the project implementation and technological innovation 
components over the last decade have been documented and are accessible in printed 
form and through the internet to be replicated throughout Argentina and in similar 
environments and situations in other countries. These products of a systematic review and 
documentation are expected to provide a long-term positive effect through promotion of 
environmentally appropriate technology that tends to reduce land degradation, stem the 
loss of biodiversity, improve quality of life of farmers, and generate safer products for 
consumption of the general public.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts. 
 
Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. 
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures 
described. 
 
See attached Note on Social Safeguards attached with the ISDS. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Nature and adequacy of consultations as well as their operational impact and 
relevance  
 
See attached note on Social Safeguards attached with the ISDS. 
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/25/1997 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/25/1997 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
NA  
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/25/1997 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/1997 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
NA 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
NA 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and 
approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical 
natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to 
the Bank? 
NA 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM?  
Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the project team 
include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager 
review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and 
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
NA 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been 
carried out? 
NA 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
NA 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions 
for certification system? 
 
NA 
Page  8
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and 
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local 
NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been 
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of 
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and 
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Dorte Verner 
04/16/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Francis V. Fragano 
04/16/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky 
04/16/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/17/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr McDonald P. Benjamin 
04/17/2007 
Comments:   
