Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2725 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/26/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P104984 
Project Name: Buenos Aires Urban Transport -PTUBA - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Andres G. Pizarro 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 7, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
32.80
32.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The current project?s development objectives are to: (a) support the private-public partnership in 
improving the service quality and coverage of mass transit; (b) support infrastructure 
improvements defined in the concession agreements between the Government and the private 
sector; (c) assist in improving the conditions of traffic safety and environmental quality; and (d) 
help in developing an integrated urban transport (road and rail) system in the AMBA.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The eligible categories of the proposed additional financing, will include a series of subprojects 
that correspond to the original project component classification. Below the subprojects included 
are distributed in the corresponding eligible categories:  
 
A) Components under Financing Gap:  Works: (i) 1 road/rail separated crossing in the Buenos 
Aires metropolitan area (AMBA); (ii) Accessibility improvements to suburban railway stations 
in AMBA.  Technical assistance: (i) Complete the origin-destination and household surveys 
Page  2
initiated under the PTUBA project, and set up and calibrate a traffic forecast model for the GBA, 
both of which were included in the original project design.  
 
B) Components under Project Restructuring:  Works: Installation of additional elevators in 
subway Line A stations. Technical assistance: (i) Study to review and rationalize the urban 
public transport fare policy, including subsidies and tariffs; and (ii) Provide technical assistance 
to cities other than Buenos Aires to prioritize and design urban transport projects, especially the 
cities that will benefit from the GEF Regional Sustainable Transport Project (Tucuman, Rosario, 
C?rdoba, Posadas).  
 
C) Components under Project Scale-up: Works: 6 additional road/rail separated crossings in the 
AMBA that are being studied through an on-going study funded under the project.  Technical 
assistance: Support through expert advice the creation of the Great Buenos Aires Metropolitan 
Transport Agency.  
 
16. 
The subprojects have been organized according to the original project components as 
shown in Table 1. The type of subprojects correspond to a concerted effort to improve public 
transport efficiency in the AMBA; the suburban railway accessibility works have as principal 
motivation the improvement of transport conditions for the lower-income population who are 
more largely dependent on suburban rail, and as corollary, to improve patronage with improved 
physical integration of road based public transport and rail. The road/rail crossings have been 
seen to significantly contribute to the improvement of railway operations and reduce accidents. 
Therefore, the project will scale up this approach and with the technical assistance and study try 
to develop an overall strategy for the remaining road/rail crossings in AMBA.  
 
17. 
The studies and technical assistances are all geared to improving strategic approaches to 
project development in AMBA, in particular to the development of transport planning 
capabilities. Equally, this approach is extended to some provincial cities who have sought 
support and who are involved in significant urban transport improvement schemes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Except for part of the technical assistance component, the project will be implemented in the 
Greater Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA). Therefore, all project related works will take 
place in consolidated urban areas and no effects are expected on natural habitats, resources or 
fragile zones. Special attention will be given to the potential impacts of construction in highly 
urbanized areas and the potential impacts of the project, especially on surrounding communities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The World Bank is providing additional finance to the implementation of the ongoing Urban 
Transport Project for Buenos Aires (PTUBA). Through the PTUBA, the National Secretary of 
Transport has been exposed to the Safeguard Policies of the Bank and is familiar with them. 
During preparation of the additional financing, the team has hired environmental and social 
specialists to conduct an assessment of the experience under the PTUBA, and assessed the 
capacity of PTUBA and municipalities to manage the environmental and social aspects of the 
project.  
 
Page  3
The main recommendations are to include social/environmental specialists in UE PTUBA to 
supervise these aspects during project implementation. Possibly, staff from other national 
secretaries in the process could get involved.  
 
Regarding the municipalities, they need to be closely involved in the process and especially in 
implementing communication programs and creation of grievance procedures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSSO) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
22. The project is expected to have positive environmental impact in the long-run, since it 
aims at improving access and quality of public transport and reducing conflicts between rail and 
motorized traffic, which will reduce congestion and emissions, and improve traffic safety.  To 
maximize the benefits of the project, it incorporates strategies to increase safety and incentives to 
reduce air pollution.  
 
23. 
In general, the works in this project will follow the alignments of existing roads 
and right-of-ways in urbanized areas. Alternatives were assessed to prevent and minimize 
negative environmental and social impacts, especially to avoid involuntary displacement. During 
the screenings process conducted during the preparation of the project only one house was 
identified for potential resettlement and a few street vendor will have to be relocated.  
 
24. 
The main negative impacts identified will occur during construction phase like: 
removal of trees and local vegetation, air quality and noise increase, traffic and pedestrian 
disruptions, access to commerce and businesses.  
 
Component A  
 
A
detailed analysis of the accessibility improvements to train stations proposed under 
Component The final review of the screening process confirmed that these work will have no 
significant impacts that cannot be addressed through the measures of the ESMM and, more 
specifically, the Environmental and Social Contract Clauses.  
 
Component B  
 
The assessment included consultations with local population and confirmed that the 
proposed road/rail crossing will not have any irreversible impacts that cannot be mitigated 
through an improved environmental and social management plan and improved public 
consultation process. The consultant visited project sites, interviewed employees of the involved 
municipalities, representatives of the project implementation unit, NGOs and local community 
organizations. The methodology and results were discussed in workshops involving municipal 
staff.  
 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Component C  
 
3. Component C is comprised of the equipment and installation of eleven elevators in Metro 
Line A stations. The component completes the rehabilitation works initiated under the original 
project. These improvements are likely to have no or minor environmental and social impacts. 
However, due to the historic character of the Metro Line A, specific measures will be 
implemented to ensure that the cultural property is not adversely affected by the works under this 
component.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
It is possible that the civil works and consequent transport improvements might directly 
and/or indirectly affect cultural property in cities; these include chance findings of archaeological 
materials during construction, possible impacts on buildings, monuments or other sites of 
historical or archaeological significance.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The proposed road and urban transport improvements will happen on existing rights-of-ways 
and alternatives will be assessed to avoid any resettlements. Nevertheless, some works might 
require land acquisition, causing physical displacement or economic displacement. Therefore, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/06/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environmental and social work for this project will include the following:  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
1. Environmental and Social Assessment of PTUBA project analyzes the actual 
environmental and social impacts (positive and negative) of the subprojects already 
completed under the original funding and the measures that were implemented to mitigate the 
negative impacts and their results. The assessment describes in detail the community 
consultation and participatory process, provides concrete examples and results of this process 
on project design and implementation, identifies the roles and responsibilities of each actor in 
addressing social and environmental impacts, and evaluates the institutional capacity of each. 
Institutional capacity gaps should be identified and addressed in the new phase of the project.  
 
2.
A
comprehensive Environmental and Social Management Manual (ESMM) will be 
prepared based on this assessment and screening, including more detailed prevention, 
mitigation and compensation measures to be taken during sub-project preparation, 
implementation and operation and assign clear roles and responsibilities to the different 
actors involved in the project (PIU, municipalities, contractors, etc.).  
 
3.
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared prior to appraisal by the 
Government of Argentina in accordance with OP 4.12, to provide a basis for drafting specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) that may become necessary during project implementation 
at the city level.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andres G. Pizarro 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
