Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2361 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/03/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P095515 
Project Name: AR Provincial Maternal-Child Health Investment APL 2 
Task Team Leader: Cristian C. Baeza 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 27, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 24, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Population and reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The APL aims at: (a) increasing access to essential health services to the poor population, 
contributing to reducing the infant mortality rate (IMR); and (b) strengthening the incentive 
framework for efficiency among provinces and service providers through significant financing 
reforms.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The second phase project would have a total expected cost of about US$678 million, of which 
the Bank would finance about US$300 million (including unallocated and front end fee), and it 
would cover an estimated 1.7 million beneficiaries.  The project would include the following 
components:  
 
Component 1: Implementation of the Maternal-Child Health Insurance Program (MCHIP) (US$ 
251 million of Bank financing)  
 
This component would include financing to support:  
 
Page  2
(i) 
Capitation payments for Plan Nacer services by MSN to participating provinces covering 
a
declining share of a package of basic service costs, on per capita basis (US$221 million);  
 
(ii) 
Equipment (medical, transportation and communications) for basic health care facilities 
that supply the MCHIP package; excluding civil works  or complex medical equipment (US$14 
million);  
 
(iii) 
Technical assistance and training programs to MSPs for developing systems, instruments 
and skills necessary for implementing and running the MCHIP including, inter alia: development 
of annual performance agreements with MSN and authorized providers; development and 
implementation of contracting and payments to providers; development and implementation of 
outreach and service delivery strategies and mechanisms to rural and indigenous people and 
other excluded populations (US$5 million);  
 
(iv) 
Training for health care providers in delivering the MCHIP basic services (US$7 
million); and  
 
(v) 
Equipment and consultant services for upgrading and expanding information systems for 
monitoring the implementation of the MCHIP (US$4 million).  
 
Component 2: Strengthening National and Provincial Ministries of Health Stewardship 
Capacity (US$ 15 million of Bank financing)  
 
The focus of this component is to adapt the provincial ministries of health to the demands of 
implementation of Plan Nacer (information, managerial), including the start-up of the national 
and provincial health services purchasing units. Will be responsible for the implementation of the 
project at national and provincial level and will continue as health service purchasing agents for 
the health sector after program completion. The proposed Loan  would finance consultant 
services, investments in office equipment, and training services to improve the performance of 
these ministries in exercising the sector stewardship functions of the National Ministry of Health 
(MSN) and participating Provincial Ministries of Health (MSPs) including:  
 
(i) 
Reorganizing MSP?s and MSN?s mandates, staffing and relationships;  
 
(ii) 
improving epidemiological information, financial and human resource management 
systems;  
 
(iii) 
Streamlining the regulatory and planning capacity of MSN and its dependent public 
health program units;  
 
(iv) 
Completing studies essential for MSN policy formulation  
 
Annually, the MSN and each participating province would agree on a technical assistance 
program for the province and the specific resources needed for its implementation. Those 
agreements would be included in the annual performance agreement.  
 
Component 3: Communications and Community Outreach (US$10 million)  
 
To ensure the effectiveness of Plan Nacer, the Government needs to ensure that the target 
populations, particularly those who have historically been marginalized, have adequate 
knowledge about and motivation to use the services being offered. The proposed loan would 
finance consultant services, incremental ministry operating costs, event organization and 
communication services to support two main lines of communications including:  
Page  3
(i) 
Dissemination of detailed information about the program among major stakeholders 
groups (provincial governments and their populations, Federal Health Council (COFESA), 
medical profession, insurance agency managers and staff) including providing opportunities for 
feedback and dialogue. This would be, primarily, the responsibility of the MSN and the 
participating provinces; and  
 
(ii) 
Community outreach to increase participation of the targeted population by providing 
practical information on (i) beneficiaries rights to services, (ii) the package of basic services 
included in Plan Nacer,  
 
(iii) 
Methods of enrolment,  
 
(iv) 
Sites, times and names of providers, and  
 
(v) 
Information to community contact groups responsible for disseminating information and 
receiving and reacting to feedback to provide an element of citizen control.  It would also 
support the production and implementation of the campaign elements specially adapted to 
language and cultural needs of indigenous population. This would be mainly the responsibility of 
participating provinces.  Provinces would provide details of their community outreach activities 
as part of their annual work programs, covered by annual performance agreements with the 
MSN.  
 
Component 4: Program Monitoring, Evaluation and Concurrent Auditing Systems (US$8 
million)  
 
The program would be expected to change the incentive structure for health services staff and 
facility managers and raise their accountability for achieving results.  To support this, the 
ministries (national and provincial) ability to monitor, evaluate and audit performance would be 
strengthened. The proposed loan would finance Information Technology design services, 
software and equipment, training for staff at the MSN and MSPs to upgrade the monitoring of 
health provider performance, aggregation and reporting of information. It would also finance the 
costs of the process of concurrent auditing of key elements that underlie transfers of capitation 
payments as discussed below in the section on Implementation Arrangements. Lastly, this 
component would finance the project evaluation activities, including the completion of the 
baseline for impact indicators, and a midterm and end of project impact evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All fifteen provinces of Argentina.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower is familiar with the preparation and implementation of Indigenous Peoples 
Implementation Plans. The first phase of the project prepared and is implementing an IPDP in 
the 9 provinces of Argentina--the ones that have a significant concentration of Indigenous 
Peoples in the country.  
 
The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework  (IPPF) to be prepared prior to appraisal will 
include provisions for evaluating provincial-level institutional capacity on this issue -- both as 
part of the overall phase 1 project impact evaluation underway for the 8 current participating 
provinces, as well as during the process of creating IPPs for newly participating provinces where 
Page  4
IP are present -- and, based on the results of the evaluations, institutional strengthening measures 
will be incorporated as needed and  reinforced within the project execution framework.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSEO) 
Mr Luis Orlando Perez (LCSHH) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
77. APL II is completing an Indigenous Population Framework, in accordance to Bank 
safeguard requirements and in the context and aligned with the significant advances Argentina 
has achieved in the last few years on indigenous people policy and institutions.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/27/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The government has completed the preparation of the Indigenous Peoples Implementation 
Framework and submitted it for Bank review. Provincial screening has determined that the 
provinces of Cubut, La Pampa, Mendoza, Neuqu?n, Rio Negro, San Juan y Tierra del Fuego 
will require the completion of the Indigenous People Implementation Plan to become 
participating provinces, in accordance to the Indigenous People Framework.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Cristian C. Baeza 
07/24/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/27/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
07/31/2006 
Comments:   
