Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC2916
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P105288 
Project Name:  AR  Infrastructure Project for the Province of Buenos Aires (APL2) 
Task Team Leader:  Manuel G. Marino 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (40%);Roads and highways (36%);Flood protection (16%);Sub-
national government administration (8%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (P);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (S);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
270.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
92.00
92.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall purpose of the program is to improve the provision of infrastructure services 
in the Province within a framework of fiscal responsibility. Through improved services 
the Project aims to support the return to a sustainable path of economic growth, to 
alleviate poverty and to increase social equity. To this end, the Province prioritized a set 
of interventions through the sector wide Infrastructure Program for the period 2005-2010 
specifically aimed to:  
 
i. Develop a multi-year public expenditure program, in line with the priorities of the 
Province, to implement the Infrastructure Program following sound fiscal policies to 
ensure convergence towards a long-term sustainable fiscal framework.  
 
ii. Improve and maintain high priority segments of the non-concessioned paved road 
network to support the reactivation of the provincial economy and strengthen regional 
competitiveness.  
 
iii. Enhance access to sanitation services, especially for the low-income segments of the 
population living in highly vulnerable areas of the Conurbano Bonaerense.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would benefit over 5 million low-income people in the Province of 
Buenos Aires, through the provision of water, sewerage and sanitation services, adequate 
drainage, reduction of operating and travel time cost, increased production prospects, and 
the creation of significant employment opportunities.  The injection of federal and 
provincial investments in water and wastewater infrastructure serving about 450,000 
people will have a positive social and environmental impact, but also is considered by the 
Government to be the only option to return service provision to an economic-financial 
equilibrium, since the necessary financial improvement of the utilities would not be 
feasible without a clear improvement in the coverage and quality of the services 
provided. The objective of drainage investments is to mitigate flooding caused by 
rainfalls of high intensity and relatively short duration, which cause severe losses to 
households, especially of low income people, and to industries and commercial activities, 
both directly and indirectly due to the interruption of transport and other services.  
Planned investments will benefit about 500,000 people and an area which suffers losses 
estimated in the order of US$ 50 million annually.  
 
Project components  
 
The total Project cost is estimated at US$ 362 million, of which US$ 270 million would 
be Bank financed. The Project components and the estimated amounts, as initially 
proposed by the Provincial Government, are:  
 
Component 1: Provincial Roads (Estimated Cost US$ 159 million of which US$ 107 
million to be Bank financed): This component seeks to:  
 
(a) Rehabilitate high priority segments of the interurban provincial non-concessioned 
road network, both through traditional ad-measurement type contracts and the 
introduction of performance-based CREMA contracts;  
 
(b)Remove critical bottlenecks through: (i) widening provincial routes of the primary 
non-concessioned paved network within the Conurbano Bonaerense that connect 
important industrial zones and ports with production and consumption centers.  Widening 
does not represent a change in the current location for the particular roads and as such, 
widening will take place only on areas already reserved and that are neither occupied nor 
dedicated for any other use and (ii) carrying out critical road safety improvements at 
selected crossings and intersections;  
 
(c)Rehabilitate non-concessioned access roads to communities located near the primary 
road network. Rehabilitation is limited exclusively to repaving and the filling of pot-holes 
and is restricted to the roads themselves; rehabilitation will not have any effect on areas 
adjacent to the roads; and  
 
(d)Implement a well-designed maintenance program for the entire provincial non-
concessioned road network.  
 
Component 2: Water and Sewerage (Total Estimated Cost: US$ 140 million, of which 
U$ 110 million to be Bank financed): The objective of this component is to increase 
coverage in the provision of basic sanitation services in the Province to benefit over 3 
million low-income people. Most of the interventions will be in areas of high sanitary 
vulnerability under the responsibility of ABSA, particularly in the Conurbano 
Bonaerense.  The Government proposes to give priority attention under the proposed 
Page  3
APL2 to investments for the expansion of access to water, sewerage and drainage 
services by building secondary networks in areas where (i) there is a high concentration 
of low-income families; (ii) there is high environmental health vulnerability; and (iii) 
there are already or are planned for construction main supply lines, collectors and 
treatment plants. Under the Project no investments will be financed that include 
resettlement.  
 
Component 3: Drainage (Estimated Cost US$ 41 million, of which U$ 32 million to be 
Bank financed): This component will finance the expansion and optimization of macro-
drainage infrastructure in urban and peri-urban areas of the Conurbano Bonaerense . The 
proposed investments are part of an integrated drainage plan and follow the methodology 
adopted with support of the APL1.  
 
Component 4: Technical Engineering Feasibility, Design, and Benchmarking (Estimated 
Cost US$ 4.1 million of which U$ 3.98 million to be Bank financed): The component 
would finance services to strengthen the execution of the program and to improve the 
pipeline of eligible investments ready for implementation. Specifically, the component 
would finance services to (i) further define a strategic framework to orient provincial 
infrastructure development, including the development of master plans, infrastructure 
feasibility studies and final engineering designs; (ii) identify infrastructure needs and set 
strategic priorities in order to avoid investment financing bottlenecks; (iii) implement a 
program of analytical work to monitor budget formulation and execution and undertake 
regular and periodic monitoring of program implementation and impact; and (iv) design 
the investments needed to respond to the challenges and recommendations of the Strategy 
for Coastal Erosion Control study being carried out as part of the APL1.  
 
Component 5: Pre-investment for Competitiveness and Job Creation (Estimated Cost 
US$ 7.5 million of which U$ 7.1 million to be Bank financed). The Project will finance 
consultant services to assist the Province to (i) identify sectors and regions likely to play 
a
key role in provincial development which could then guide policymaking and planning, 
updating the provincial information database; (ii) design sector and territorial 
interventions and policies aimed at improving competitiveness and employment 
opportunities; (iii) implement the recommendations of the Strategic Evaluation of the 
Province, which is under development as part of the APL1, particularly with regards to 
public information of water related risks and environmental health monitoring in high 
risk areas; and (iv) support the dissemination, capacity- building, and pre-investment 
studies and designs.  
 
Component 6: Institutional Capacity Building for Provincial Infrastructure Service 
Provision and Oversight (Estimated Cost US$ 7.7 million of which U$ 7.3 million to be 
Bank financed). The Project would include technical assistance activities to continue the 
work done under the APL1 to support the Province in its overall supervision of 
infrastructure efforts including (i) auditing the financial status of the overall Program; (ii) 
supervision and certification of works; and (iii) overall institutional strengthening through 
purchase of needed equipment.   
 
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Throughout the Province of Buenos Aires, particularly in the Conurbano Bonaerense, 
which is urban and peri-urban converted land.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (LCSUW) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen from this project. In 
any case, the key safeguard issues and impacts associated with this project are:  
 
a) Noise, dust, proper disposal of construction waste, erosion control, protection of 
spring catchments, etc., produced during construction and installation of pipes, road 
widening and rehabilitation, will be addressed by appropriate guidelines that will be 
incorporated into the technical specifications governing the work of construction 
contractors.  
 
b) Based on existing knowledge and experience under APL 1, there is no expectation 
that cultural property would be found in the Project area. Nevertheless, because of the 
nature of the works envisioned under APL 2, the Environmental Assessment sets forth 
"chance find" or equivalent procedures in case such property is encountered.  
 
c) Because the drainage and sewer projects will discharge to the Rio de la Plata shared 
between Argentina and Uruguay, the International Waterways Safeguard is triggered. 
However, because the APL 2 works, like APL 1 works, will i) not negatively affect the 
quantity or quality of the waterway and ii) the projects works will not be affected 
negatively by the current or potential usage of these waters by Uruguay, the project will 
get an exception to the notification requirement (paragraph 7 of OP 7.50). The APL 2 
Page  5
water and sewer works follow the same criteria and are similar to those of APL 1 and so 
they are also not expected to impact the navigability and/or the course (regime) of the Rio 
de la Plata; therefore, it is not necessary to request a non objection to proceed with works 
from the Comision Administradora del Rio de la Plata (to comply with the Rio de la Plata 
Treaty). This has been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP is 
currently being prepared.  
 
d) As was the case with APL 1, APL 2 will not finance any subprojects involving 
resettlement and so this safeguard is not triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen.  However the 
following impacts are possible:  
 
The rehabilitated and widened roads may encourage increased traffic bringing increased 
air pollution, and run-off tainted with oil and debris from the roads. Wider paved over 
roads may reduce the size of water recharge zones, but this may not be significant based 
on the total amount of surface area that will be paved over.  
 
Expansion of water supply and sewerage connections may encourage increased 
population growth in areas served. Digging, construction and installation may result in 
the usual noise and waste which are normally managed according to established 
guidelines for contractors. Wastewater from expanded sewers will be treated in plants 
that either have enough capacity or will be expanded to accommodate increased 
wastewater flows.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given that subprojects are from different sectors and locations, consideration of 
alternatives were considered on a subproject by subproject basis.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has conducted an assessment of how well APL1 complied with safeguards. 
Recommendations from this report will be used to make any necessary changes to the 
second phase of the project, especially with respect to its tools for environmental 
assessment, monitoring of results or activities.  The overall conclusion of this assessment 
is that the works reviewed under APL1 have been executed with the consideration of the 
environmental variable from the beginning of the Project, and through all of the phases-
planning, definition, selection, bidding and execution.  This has resulted in a system of 
environmental management that allows for not only the proper execution of works that 
consider the socio-environmental component in all stages of the project, but also the 
strengthening and hierarchical organization of those state institutions responsible for 
these actions.  Recommendations follow for improvements under APL2 and this 
assessment has been disclosed in-country and through the Infoshop.   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the citizens of the Province of Buenos Aires in the areas that 
will be affected or benefited by the works. The assessment of APL1 compliance with 
safeguards as well as the individual environmental assessments of subprojects for the first 
year-which have been prepared following the guidelines established under APL1, 
reviewed and approved by the Regional Environmental Unit-have been disclosed through 
InfoShop and in-country. The ISDSs will be disclosed on InfoShop's website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/19/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
Page  7
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel G. Marino 
04/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah 
04/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
04/20/2007 
Comments:   
