Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2337
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P099585 
Project Name:  AR Cordoba Road Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Graftieaux 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 6, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (90%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Judicial and other 
dispute resolution mechanisms (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
21.27
21.27 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
(i) Strengthen the Province's institutional capacity to optimize the design andexecution of 
key public investment programs within a sound and sustainable fiscal framework, 
through the introduction of performance-based management practices, increased 
coordination of information systems, and an integrated financial management; and (ii) 
increase road management efficiency in order to improve the condition of the provincial 
network to facilitate goods and passenger transport along productive corridors and tourist 
areas   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1  Institutional Strengthening (Estimated cost US$2.1 million, all Bank-
financed). This component will consist of the following subcomponents: institutional 
strengthening of ACIF, Institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Finance, and Road 
network management and road safety.  
 
Component 2 Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance, CREMA (Estimated basic cost 
US$39.5 million of which US$33.5 million would be financed by the Bank Loan). This 
component will focus on overcoming a backlog of deferred maintenance on prioritized 
Page  2
sections of the provincial primary network, especially in the South-East part of the 
Province.  
 
Component 3 Road Paving (Estimated basic cost US$42.2 million of which 
US$36million would be financed by the Bank Loan). Through this component, the Bank 
would support paving investments on selected segments of the Province's road 
networkthat are crucial for provincial productivity.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Province favorable location in the Central Region (comprised by Cordoba, Entre 
Rios and Santa Fe) puts it in the heart of a land corridor that connects the south of Brazil 
with ports in the north of Chile. Most of the road links to be rehabilitated or paved under 
this project are located on prioritized sections of the provincial primary network, 
especially in the South-East part of the Province, and connect with the most important 
road corridors of the bi-oceanic corridors: Ruta 7 (Buenos Aires, border with Chile), Ruta 
8
(Buenos Aires-Cordoba), Ruta 9 (Rosario-Cordoba), Ruta 158.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Fernando J. Brunstein (LCSFT) 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Project involves road improvements, rehabilitation and maintenance works along existing 
provincial road alignments. The detailed screening using standard screening forms of the 
different project sites has confirmed that none will resultin irreversible long-term impact 
or displacement of people. Most environmental impacts will be temporary during the 
construction phase and will cause mostly minor and localized negative environmental 
impacts.  
Page  3
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
Most impacts will consist essentially of noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disruption 
during construction phase. Additional negative impacts during construction will occur 
due to haulage and final disposal of materials from the construction sites  
 
The design of the roads is taking into consideration some drainage issues identified 
during environmental screening. Furthermore, it was agreed that the widening of the 
roads will be minimized where possible to reduce impacts on surrounding environments 
and properties. The project will include reforestation measures and measures to protect 
some wetlands along the roads.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
 
None of the existing road sections crosses critical habitats, parks or areas with endemic 
species. However, long-term impact due to increased tourism and traffic in some areas is 
possible. The project will design an institutional strengthening program for local 
authorities to develop urban and regional development plans and land-use policies to 
protect critical environments and cope with unplanned and induced growth in the area of 
influence of the roads.  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)  
 
The project site is not crossing any known archeologically or culturally relevant sites, 
but specific procedures for finding archaeological or paleontological artifacts during 
project works will be included in contracts.  
 
The main indirect impact will be on the historic village of ???La Cumbrecita??? through 
expected increase in tourism and traffic volumes. Discussions have already been started 
with representatives of the village to assist city in manage potential impacts.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
The project will respect existing alignments and widths of roads within villages and 
communities to avoid any physical displacement and minimize land acquisition. During 
project preparation, the Borrower adopted alternatives to avoid displacement. A social 
screening of the proposed rural roads was conducted and showed that most properties 
(agricultural or pastoral land) will be affected by less than 2 percent, and never more than 
6% of the total plot size. This will not result in any physical or economic displacement of 
people nor affecting owner???s livelihoods. Owners have been willing to donate their 
land since they will have improved access, tax reductions and increased land value.  
 
Therefore, the Bank's Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 was triggered and a land 
acquisition plan is included in the Environmental and Social Management Plan, was 
prepared to ensure compliance with the Bank???s policy.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is expected to have positive impacts on living standards of the population as 
it is aimed to promote economic growth, productivity and competitiveness. Road paving, 
Page  4
rehabilitation and maintenance works are to be carried out within the existing right of 
way of well established inter-urban roads and for this reason impacts on the local 
population are expected to be mostly temporary during the construction phase and are 
expected to cause minor and localized negative social impacts consisting mainly of traffic 
disruption due to construction and related traffic.  
 
Potential long-term negative impacts are related to increased traffic and related negative 
impacts on road safety, especially in urban areas. Another potential indirect impact might 
be the result of unplanned growth along some of the routes and around some 
communities, especially in tourist areas in the eastern part of the province. Technical 
assistance and training will be provided to local communities to enhance local capacity 
and provide tools to better address some of these potential impacts. Partnerships are being 
established with other agencies and stakeholders to cooperate in these activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Few alternatives were identified since the use of the existing right-of-way will actually 
minimize potential impacts. The Department of Roads will not carry out any road 
widening in urbanized areas to avoid greater impacts on surrounding environments and 
population. During project preparation, an alternative alignment was adopted to avoid the 
resettlement of a vendor with a house on the existing right-of-way of the project. With the 
donation of adjacent land by a local municipality, an alternative route was designed to 
avoid the necessity to resettle this family. The project team will continuously monitor for 
potential resettlement aspects and ensure proper mitigation of potential impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As agreed with the Bank's Safeguards Advisory Team (SAT) and the Road Department 
of Cordoba Province, an Environmental and Social Management Plan was prepared 
(replacing the Framework) that includes: (i) institutional and regulatory framework of the 
Province and the Bank's safeguard policies; (ii) explanation of the screening process 
during project preparation and main impacts identified; (iii) responsibilities of 
stakeholders; (iv) Manual with measures and procedures to mitigate, prevent and manage 
environmental and social impacts associated with road projects that have moderate or low 
impacts; (v) an institutional strengthening plan for social and environmental management 
(building on PCP2's plan); and (vii)a and a public participation framework. A Land 
Acquisition Plan was also prepared.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
number of meetings were organized with affected municipalities and stakeholders to 
assess local concerns and develop mitigation plans. Other provincial departments 
responsible for road safety, environmental management and social issues were consulted 
as well. A public participation and information disclosure plan is included in the ESMP.  
 
Page  5
The Land Acquisition Plan will be disclosed on the Provincial Government's website 
before appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/05/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/15/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/08/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/15/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  6
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Graftieaux 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
