Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3171 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/25/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P101421 
Project Name: AR Infrastructure Pto Rosario 
Task Team Leader: Andres G. Pizarro 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (40%);Railways (20%);Roads and highways 
(20%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (P);Export development and competitiveness (P);Other urban development 
(P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
200.00
200.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching development objectives for the proposed program are: (i) to reduce logistics 
costs for cargo shipped to and from the Port of Rosario by improving accesses to port facilities 
and increasing the railway?s modal share in freight transport; and (ii) to improve the quality of 
life in the Metropolitan Area of Rosario by reducing traffic congestion and assigning the urban 
land released by the project (i.e. railway tracks, warehousing and maneuver facilities) to improve 
the quality of the urban environment.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to achieve the objectives outlined above, the Project would have the following 
components:  
 
Component 1 ? Reorganization of Railway Accesses. This component?s objective would be to 
significantly improve efficiency of railway transportation to and from Rosario?s port facilities; 
and would consist of two subcomponents:  (i) Sub-component 1? Railway Infrastructure Ring : 
Page  2
would finance the construction of a railway ring, approximately 85 kilometres long, which would 
intercept the tracks that currently reach (and cross) the city in a radial structure. This would 
minimize the interference of the railway in the urban area and would divert railway traffic to port 
facilities in the north and south of the Rosario port system. The required investments would be 
made in phases.(ii) Sub-component 2?Institutional Design: this subcomponent would finance 
studies and technical assistance to define and support the design of the institution that destined to 
manage the new railway infrastructure.  
 
Component 2 ? Reorganization of Road Accesses. This component would aim to organize land 
transport accesses to port facilities located in the urban area of Rosario, reduce traffic congestion 
and decrease the rate of accidents in the city. It would consist of three subcomponents: (i) Sub-
component 1 ? Rosario City Beltway: would consist of works to double the capacity of the 
existing roadway formed by Ruta Nacional (RN) 16 and RN A-012 on the section comprised 
between Ruta Provincial (RP) 21 in the south and RN 11 in the north, except for the section that 
already has two-lanes and the stretch along Ricardone, which will require a special bypass. The 
works comprise approximately 64 km for additional lanes and 2 km for new alignments, with 
multiple road and railway crossings at different grades. (ii) Sub Component 2 ? Road Accesses to 
Port Facilities: would consist of works to widen: RP 21 (from Arroyo Seco to Villa Gobernador 
G?lvez), RP 10 (from Rosario/Santa Fe Highway to RN 11), and RN 11 (from San Lorenzo to 
RP 91) for a total of approximately 28 km. This would also include various road and railway 
crossings, bridges, and pavement or re-pavement of many public roads for access to port 
facilities, for a total of approximately 90 km. (iii) Sub Component 3 ? Bypass Roads to improve 
traffic flows and to help decongest urban centers and access roads to port facilities.  
 
Component 3 ? Strengthening of Project?s Impacts. This component?s objective would be to 
support the urban aspects of the Project, with a focus in the achievement of a wide consensus 
around it to ensure a smooth implementation and maximize positive impacts. This component 
would consist of the following subcomponents: (i) Sub-component 1 ? Strategic Planning for 
Rosario?s Metropolitan Area; which would support the establishment of a Strategic Plan 
outlining the guiding principles for long term urban management, in line with infrastructure 
development, (ii) Sub-component 2 ? Urban works, which will consist of a package of small 
urban works agreed upon with Municipalities in the Metropolitan Area; (iii) Sub-component 3 ? 
Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project, which would consist of studies for establishing 
baselines and monitoring tools to assess the Project?s progress and impact.  
 
Component 4 ? Transport Efficiency and Logistics. This component?s objective would be to 
develop and implement measures to improve efficiency in the logistics chain?starting from the 
producer and ending in the port?in order to strengthen the new infrastructure?s impact. It would 
include the following subcomponents: (i) Sub-component 1 ?  Cost Measurement and 
Monitoring: would develop measurement and monitoring tools for the area?s logistics chain in 
order to inform decision making; (ii) Sub-component 2 ? Support for Development of Policy, 
Regulation and Initiatives to Improve Efficiency: would comprise studies and technical 
assistance for the design of policies, regulation and initiatives oriented to improve the 
functioning of markets and of processes related to the logistics chain. (iii) Sub-component 3 ? 
Investment in Logistics Platforms: would include the required studies and works to establish a 
logistics platform.   
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rosario Metropolitan Region is an important urban center for regional development within the 
Argentine Republic. With over a million inhabitants, it is an industrial, commercial and business 
hub situated in an important agricultural and livestock producing region of the country. The city 
is strategically located at the margins of Paran? River, which provides direct access to the 
Atlantic Ocean. The infrastructure offers a great deal of potential to absorb the foreign trade 
traffic served by both Argentina and the Mercosur and this project will help improve quality and 
efficient use of the infrastructure and different modes of transport.  
 
The project is located in a densily populated and developed urban area with little or nonexistent 
natural habitats or native vegetation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has recently been involved in a Highway Project in the Province of Santa Fe and 
knows the World Bank's procedures and requirements. During project preparation, a detailed 
assesment of the Borrower's institutional capacity will be done, including human resources and 
budget requirements to properly supervise the implementation of the program.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSEN) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental impact assessment will be done for all works and include assessment of 
potential impacts on Natural Habitats, Physical Cultural Property and surrounding communities.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Assess   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Assess   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
An assessment of need for involuntary economic or physical resettlement will be carried out 
during project preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/22/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/22/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
(1) separate Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) for different sections of the works on 
the road and railways, which will include assessment of direct construction impacts of each 
sub-project - November 2007  
 
(2) an assessment of the cumulative impacts of individual sub-projects within the 
Metropolitan Region of Rosario - January 2008  
 
(3) an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will outline 
management procedures and required resources to prevent, mitigate or compensate for direct 
social and environmental impacts of the project - February 2008  
 
(3) Resettlement Action Plan (RP) to provide a strategy for the resettlement of affected 
population during project implementation - February 2008  
 
(4) a capacity enhancement plan for state and local level agencies involved in the project - 
February 2008  
 
(5) Terms of References for a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) to be carried out 
during project implementation (Component 3) - January 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andres G. Pizarro 
10/23/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
10/19/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
