Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2807 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P095569 
Project Name: AR APL2 National Highway Asset Mgt 
Task Team Leader: Maria Marcela Silva 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
936.20
936.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The overall purpose of the Program is to further develop and implement an efficient road 
management strategy, bringing about the necessary capabilities to preserve the national road 
network in the long term. This would be a key condition towards increasing the competitiveness 
of the economy and supporting a sustainable path of economic growth and poverty reduction. 
The proposed Project builds on the achievements of previous Bank-assisted projects and 
constitutes the second phase of a two-phased Adaptable Program Loan (APL), which first phase, 
Loan 7242-AR, is under implementation. The project specific objectives remain the same as 
those defined under the first phase:  
 
a. 
Preserve the condition of vital road assets, through the gradual expansion of 
performance-based contracts for the rehabilitation and maintenance of the non-concessioned 
primary paved network;  
 
b.
Strengthen road sector management through carrying out a renewal program of DNV to 
revitalize its role in the sector by: (i) reinforcing its human resource base; (ii) strengthening its 
planning capacities; and (iii) consolidating its transformation into a results-oriented organization 
accountable for specific outputs (e.g. preserving transitability and adequate road conditions, 
enhancing road safety, promoting integration, etc.).  
Page  2
2. 
The overall and specific objectives of this project are consistent with the IBRD-IFC 2006 
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), under which improvement of infrastructure assets is a 
fundamental pillar of sustained economic growth, particularly with respect to establishing growth 
that is more equitable and pro-poor. More than one-third of lending operations proposed in the 
indicative lending program in the CAS are in infrastructure, with the bulk of these in the 
transport sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
3. 
The GoA has confirmed its intention to continue with the implementation of the proposed 
Program through the main four components defined under APL1. In addition, the GoA has 
expressed its intention to request an increase in the second phase loan amount up to US$400 
million (from the original US$200 million) in order to reduce the impact of inflation on the total 
physical targets achievable under the Program.  
 
4. 
Assuming a second Loan amount for US$400 million, the APL 2 builds on the 
developments of APL 1 to continue implementing the originally envisaged program. The GoA 
has initially indicated that the additional US$200 million are going to be fully allocated to the 
CREMA component. The project components are:  
 
Component 1 - Rehabilitation and Maintenance (Estimated cost US$1,285 million of which 
US$362 million would be financed by the Bank Loan) for the completion of CREMA contracts 
initiated  under APL1,  launching additional CREMAs to be financed with Bank funds as well as 
CREMAs to be financed with local funds.  
 
Component 2 - Bridge Restoration (Estimated cost US$21.9 million of which US$15.3 million 
would be financed by the Bank Loan) for the execution of rehabilitation works on bridges that 
have been prioritized by DNV  
 
Component 3 - Road Safety (Estimated cost US$22.4 million of which US$15.7 million would 
be financed by the Bank Loan) for the implementation and measurement of results of the pilot 
road safety initiative, as well as the execution of additional road safety improvements in critical 
spots of the network  
 
Component 4 - Institutional Renewal and Governance (Estimated cost US$6.9 million of which 
US$ 6.4 million would be financed by the Bank Loan) for the completion of DNV's institutional 
renewal action plan.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Argentina primary road network.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Argentina's federal and provincial legislation provide for environmental screening procedures to 
determine the need for Environmental Impact Assessment depending on the potential 
environmental impact of the projects. DNV has an adequate capacity for complying with the 
Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies, and has incorporated procedures to include 
environmental and social dimension in the project development. CREMA bidding documents 
require the development of Environmental Management Plans, following the guidelines set in the 
Manual for Environmental Assessment and Management (MEGA). MEGA includes procedures 
Page  3
referred to 4 topics: (a) Cultural and physical resources heritage; (b) Environmental Management 
Plans (EMP); (c) Environmental Management of Right-Of-Way (ROW); and (d) Control of 
invasive species and/or plagues in ROWs.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSEN) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will support maintenance and rehabilitation works in consolidated right-of-ways 
(ROW) within the primary road network, and no significant or irreversible environmental or 
social impacts are expected. There might arise minimal and temporary environmental impacts 
associated to the construction period, related to (i) an increase in air pollution and noise levels; 
(ii) the disposal of construction waste; (iii) potential limitation in the access to housing and 
establishments during works; (iv) the location and management of camp sites; (v) the 
management of disposal of liquid waste; (vi) the interference with traffic flows; (vii) the storage 
and transport of materials, fuel, and equipment; and (viii) the risk of accidents within the 
construction sites. All bidding documents will include obligations to comply with all 
environmental licenses and permits required by Law, and to follow the Manual for 
Environmental Assessment and Management of Road Works (MEGA), which requires the 
development and implementation of Environmental Management Plans.  For the type of 
expected environmental and social impacts of the project, a category B has been recommended. 
An Environmental Assessment is being developed by DNV to evaluate environmental and social 
performance of the first National Highways Rehabilitation and Maintenance operation, and to 
recommend measures for updating or enhancing institutional capacity and current environmental 
and social management.  
 
Stand-alone Environmental Impact Assessments will not be required as the project?s works 
will take place in existing right of ways, leaving aside roads where involuntary resettlement are 
needed, or when natural habitats are involved. The preparation of on an Environmental 
Management Plan to mitigate environmental risks and nuisance during construction is consistent 
with the Bank?s Handbook on Roads and Environment. In case during preparation new road 
sections are included, these would be screened for potential negative impacts and only roads with 
similar characteristics would be contemplated.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/09/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Assessment report produced by DNV, evaluating the 
performance of the first phase should be received before appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Marcela Silva 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
