Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3044 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/23/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P100806 
Project Name: AR Sustainable Natural Resources Management (formerly Sustainable 
Forestry Development) 
Task Team Leader: Robert Ragland Davis 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P094425 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Forestry (20%);Central 
government administration (20%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Other rural 
development (P);Participation and civic engagement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
52.48 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
21.40 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
25.00
46.40 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective of the proposed Sustainable Natural Resources Management 
Project is to improve the management and conservation of natural resources, fostering rural 
development and enhancing the environmental values of management practices that are 
dependent upon Argentina's natural resources. It would do this by improving the policy 
framework and information base, strengthening institutional capacity at federal and provincial 
levels, and facilitating the involvement of small and medium-scale farmers, land owners and 
producers in sustainable activities that maintain the natural environment.  The project will seek 
to institutionalize environmental safeguards, strategic environmental assessments and best 
practices into natural resource management and encourage more private-sector involvement in 
service provision.  
 
Page  2
The main project beneficiaries will be: (i) rural poor and indigenous communities whose 
livelihoods depend on the natural resource base; (ii) medium- and small-scale producers in the 
forest sector, with limited access to technology needed for improving productivity; and (iv) the 
total supply-chain involved in Argentina's nature-based tourism. In addition, the project would 
aim to bolster the technical capacity and outreach of federal and provincial organizations 
working in natural resource issues to provide technical, policy and regulatory leadership within 
the field of natural resource management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will focus on several important ecosystems, including the Monte, Dry and Humid 
Chaco, Patagonian Steppe and Sub-polar Forests, and Upper Parana Atlantic Forest, among 
others, to carryout the multiple objectives of conservation, sustainable use of natural resources, 
and rural development.  
 
The project will achieve its stated development objective through the following three 
components:  
 
Native Forests and Biodiversity (Executing agency:  SAyDS and provincial cooperators) (IBRD 
US $2.88 million) The native forest focal area implemented by SAyDS would include a 
Technical Assistance Component for preparation of a future sector loan with an emphasis on 
native forest issues. The structure and mandate of the Native Forests Directorate of SAyDS will 
be reviewed collaboratively with stakeholders, the aim being to identify an appropriate role and 
structure for the institution. Lines of cooperation and collaboration would also be worked out 
with the provinces for native forest management, in order to ensure a cohesive and effective 
working relationship between SAyDS (as a regulatory agency) and those of the provinces (as 
implementers and enforcers). The policy and regulatory environment of the provincial offices 
responsible for forestry would also be critically analyzed and, where necessary, adjustments 
recommended. The preparation studies will establish the groundwork for developing a "national 
forestry program", including economic incentive systems, governance issues, and other tools 
needed to reduce deforestation and bring focus and coherency to the country's native forestry 
program.  
 
Sustainable Productive Forestry (Executing agency:  SAGPyA and provincial cooperators.) 
(IBRD US $24.66 million) The aim of this component would be to (i) establish institutional and 
policy frameworks conducive to sustainable and shared growth in the sector; (ii) raise forestry 
sector productivity through efficient gains in the generation, analysis and transfer of strategically 
important information; and (iii) support the integration of smallholders and small producers into 
the plantation production cycle. The component will work with the Secretariat of Agriculture, 
with primary responsibility for plantation forests.  In particular, it mainstream environmental 
considerations into plantation policy and promotion, improve overall policy framework at federal 
and provincial levels; foster closer links between the federal and provincial forestry 
administrations, and between them, the private sector and civil society; provide support to 
demand-driven and competitive research programs; support the expansion of accredited, private 
sector forestry extension services; facilitate the entry of small producers into the supply chain; 
and promote best practices among all producers.  
 
Page  3
Protected Areas and Conservation Corridors (Executing agency: APN and provincial 
cooperators.) (IBRD US $24.94 million). This component would have the twin objectives of 
strengthening APN's capacity to manage existing national protected areas and to set the stage for 
expanding protection to the insufficiently protected and highly-threatened Chaco ecosystem. 
Specifically, it aims to strengthen management capacity of eleven priority protected areas and to 
upgrade APN's capacity in Buenos Aires. Infrastructure, training, equipment and incremental 
costs would be financed in the existing parks, along with the renovation and modernization of 
APN's historic building in Buenos Aires.  
 
The specific Chaco regional focus would bring APN together with national, regional, and local 
stakeholders in a process to establish the basis for a biological-sustainable use corridor in the 
Argentine Chaco with potential to link with core areas in the Paraguayan and Bolivian Chaco. 
Through a process that involves participation by regional stakeholders, support would include 
developing the legal and policy basis for land use planning within the corridor (at the local and 
sub-provincial levels) to secure the integrity, viability, and long-term conservation of core areas.  
 
The Associated GEF Project  
 
The Sustainable Productive Forestry component is to be closely coordinated with a recently 
approved GEF project, Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes, which 
would focus on mainstreaming biodiversity conservation concepts and strategic environmental 
planning in the main plantation areas of Argentina.  The GEF project would aim to 
mainstream/integrate environmental work into every day management practice and cover 
incremental costs of measures to achieve agreed global environmental benefits in the areas of 
land degradation and biological diversity. It would include an awareness campaign, the 
preparation of manuals of best practice, training, and incentives for the adoption of best practice. 
These might include biodiversity corridors, rehabilitation planting of degraded forest with native 
species, biodiversity mosaics, adjusted forest management practice to encourage biodiversity, 
habitat creation and tree planting for conservation swaps.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The primary target areas for the Sustainable Productive Forestry component would include the 
key forestry provinces of Misiones, Corrientes, Entre Rios, Buenos Aires and Santa Fe, as well 
as the provinces of Neuquen, Rio Negro and Chubut.Other provinces may be included based on 
the project experience during implementation and contingent upon the necessary social and 
environmental analyses and applicable frameworks. The Native Forests preparation, although 
national in its overall scope, will focus on the Chaco ecosystem given its priority among forest 
ecosystems presently.  The Protected Areas component will focus on the provinces where the 
eleven protected areas are located including; Jujuy, Salta, Formosa, Buenos Aires, Tucuman, La 
Rioja, San Luis, Chubut, and Tierra del Fuego.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There are no significant issues related to institutional capacity within SAGPyA and APN, which 
have both qualified environmental and social specialists with Bank project experience. Both 
these institutions also have environmental and social assessment/mitigation procedures 
mainstreamed into their programs and activities. SAyDS is the main Federal environmental 
Page  4
agency of the GoA and its DB has capacity in environmental issues, particularly monitoring 
natural resources.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSAR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
No large-scale impacts are expected given the focus of all components on sustainable 
management of natural resources and conservation. Impacts are expected to be overwhelmingly 
positive or neutral.  EA's are in preparation for the National Parks and Productive Forestry 
components, while an environmental review has been prepared for the Native Forests 
Preparation component given that the component involves technical studies and preparation 
work.  Although the project is focused on environmental sustainability and impacts are designed 
to be positive, environmental management plans are being prepared particularly focused on 
small-holder and community-based actions envisioned at for the forestry component and national 
parks component in addition to the physical works within the national parks strengthening 
component.  
 
The EA will also serve to develop appropriate mitigation measures for any negative 
impacts, and to recommend enhancement measures for positive impacts, as needed or required. 
These mitigation and enhancement measures will be summarized in Environmental Management 
Plans (EMP) specific to each component that will include screening criteria and environmental 
procedures. The EA will also evaluate whether other environmental safeguards are triggered, and 
develop appropriate procedures, if necessary.  Capacity building at national and provincial levels 
will also be part of the Native Forests and Biodiversity and the Sustainable Plantation Forestry 
components as well as sustainable forestry policy and regulatory activities to strengthen 
environmental assessment capacities and increase enforcement.  Participation by local 
communities in the Protected Areas and Conservation Corridors component is also included in 
the project design to enhance the component conservation objectives and the overall project 
development objective, sustainability, and economic impact.  
 
The native forests component is not subject to a specific EA given that it is a preparatory 
component which will advance the participatory mechanisms and technical basis for establishing 
more sustainable forestry policies for the sector.  Activities also focus on information 
dissemination, studies on potential for environmental services and capacity building, all tending 
towards sustainability and reducing impact from forestry activities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The protection of natural habitats is the primary focus of the Protected Areas and 
Conservation Corridors.  All activities under this component seek to increase the conservation 
capacities of the government level institution while enhancing the local community involvement 
and benefit-sharing from park improvements, infrastructure and increased tourism.  Increased 
tourism however, if not properly designed and complemented by capacity
-
building of 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
institutional and community stakeholders could impact natural habitats negatively from 
uncontrolled use and intrusion, as well as greater use of resources from within the park or 
surroundings for tourism based activities (lodges, handicrafts, hunting, fishing, etc).  Potential 
impacts on natural habitats from increased tourism and community-based activities are part of 
the EA analysis and much analysis has been performed previously by the National Parks 
Administration for the preparation of park management plans.  The National Strategic Plan for 
Sustainable Tourism recently implemented also sets forth guidelines for the management of this 
aspect in regard to the SNAP.  Infrastructure works in national parks will incorporate Bank 
standards for EA and EIA for relevant activities. Based on recent project activities (P039787 and 
P040808/LN 4085 AR) APN has shown excellent compliance with Bank standards, and has a set 
of protocols for works in Parks which are comparable.  
 
The project will also support environmentally sustainable forestry activities designed to 
increase productivity in the sector while integrating sustainable and best-management production 
practices into national development without adverse impacts to natural habitats. Institutional 
strengthening activities will be carried-out by the project at federal and provincial levels of 
government to promote greater governance and enforcement of environmental regulations 
including those that protect and conserve natural habitats.  The EA for the project will ensure 
that proposed actions are consistent with the policy and specifically address the issue of natural 
habitats, and be used to guide the final project design in the use of best practices. Small-holder 
forestry activities supported under the Sustainable Production Forestry component will be 
subject to an Environmental Management Plan in order to ensure compliance with Bank 
safeguards including natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project conforms to this safeguard. Forest plantations will be established only on small-
holder lands under the Sustainable Plantation Forestry component, with an estimated average 
size of 3.5 hectares, with direct beneficiaries being the rural poor. About 4000 ha of land are 
estimated to be forested. No industrial-scale commercial planting or harvesting is planned under 
the project. The EA will specifically address the issue of forests, and ensure that the project is 
consistent with this concept while the project incorporates sub-components that seek increased 
sustainability in policies, planning, and institutional capacities. Buffer-zone and sustainable use 
activities will be subject to the EMP prepared under the Protected Areas and Conservation 
Corridors component to insure no adverse effects on forests and promotion of sustainable uses of 
forest resources within this context.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The EAs for the Sustainable Plantation Forestry and Protected Areas and Conservation 
Corridors components examined the potential use of pesticides in the context of its activities with 
small producers, and has developed concrete guidelines for pest management, with emphasis 
placed on integrated pest management consistent with the pertinent Bank safeguard requirements 
in this regard. These guidelines form a pest management plan, which has been included as part of 
the environmental assessment.  Guidelines and specific budgets for implementation included in 
the plan will be incorporated into the Operational Manual.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Several of the 11 parks including Bosques Petrificados National Monument and Talampaya 
National Park that are consider
ed for strengthening within the Protected Areas and Conservation 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Corridors component of the project have important cultural property protected within and around 
their boundaries.  The Bosques Petrificados site is an important for its protection of fossils while 
Talampaya and others contain archeological sites that are included among UNESCO World 
Heritage sites.  
 
Both the Protected Areas and Conservation Corridors and the Sustainable Plantation 
Forestry components will restore and upgrade historic buildings in downtown Buenos Aires. The 
project is consistent with the safeguard in that it seeks to directly improve protection of these 
cultural properties.  The environmental assessment carried-out by APN for project preparation 
will identify relevant issues and incorporate them into the EMP for the component including the 
relevant local and national laws and regulations in regard to cultural property and restoration.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Four (4) protected areas (Baritu, Calilegua, Sierra de las Quijadas y Pilcomayo) to be 
strengthened under the Protected Areas and Conservation Corridors component have presence of 
indigenous groups within and around them.  In order to comply with the safeguard in regard to 
Indigenous Peoples, the APN is preparing a Social Assessment that incorporates an Indigenous 
Peoples Plan.  This IPP will be integrated into the project design and will be included in the 
operational manual. The Productive Forestry Component proposed project regions (Mesopotamia 
and Patagonia) are inhabited by indigenous groups in specific cases, and the identified project 
activities have been evaluated and determined not to have any direct impact, positive or negative, 
on indigenous people. However, indigenous groups might choose to participate in the demand-
driven aspects of the project. In order to address this possibility an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework was prepared under the guidance of the Bank's indigenous people's specialist for this 
component. This framework will guide work with any indigenous group that may wish to 
participate in the project. The application of an IPPF would not normally be considered 
necessary for communities eligible for training only, but each situation would be handled on a 
case-by-case basis.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although no involuntary resettlement is planned under any of the components, there is 
potential to diminish access to resources for communities from activities under the Protected 
Areas and Conservation Corridors.  In order to avoid adverse impacts in this regard and in 
compliance with the relevant safeguard on Involuntary Resettlement, the social assessment has 
identified that a Resettlement Process Framework should be developed to ensure proper 
consideration before and during execution of protected area strengthening activities and forestry 
management.  APN is currently finalizing this framework in the context of preparation.  All work 
toward establishment of corridors and/or new protected areas will consist only of baseline 
surveys and participatory planning processes with stakeholders - not their actual establishment.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  7
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Target start date for safeguards assessments is April 2007.  Safeguard assessments should be 
completed by October 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Ragland Davis 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
