Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC2904
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P095569 
Project Name:  AR APL2 National Highway Asset Mgt 
Task Team Leader:  Maria Marcela Silva 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 17, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
935.10
935.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall purpose of the Program is to further develop and implement an efficient road 
management strategy, bringing about the necessary capabilities to preserve the national 
road network in the long term. This would be a key condition towards increasing 
competitiveness of the economy and supporting a sustainable path of economic growth 
and poverty reduction. The proposed project builds on the achievements of previous 
Bank assisted projects and constitutes the second phase of a two-phased Adaptable 
Program Loan (APL), which first phase, Loan 7242-AR, is under implementation.  The 
project specific objectives remain the same as those identified under the first phase:  
 
a. 
Preserve the condition of vital road assets, through the gradual expansion of 
performance-based contracts for the rehabilitation and maintenance of the non-
concessioned primary paved network;  
 
b.
Strengthen road sector management through carrying out a renewal program of 
DNV to revitalize its role in the sector by: (i) reinforcing its human resource base; (ii) 
strengthening its planning capacities; and (iii) consolidating its transformation into a 
results-oriented organization accountable for specific outputs (e.g. preserving 
transitability and adequate road conditions, enhancing road safety, promoting integration, 
etc.).   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
*
Component 1 ? Rehabilitation and Maintenance (Estimated cost US$ 1,281.4 
million of which US$ 360 million would be financed by the Bank Loan) for the 
completion of CREMA contracts initiated  under APL1,  launching additional CREMAs 
to be financed with Bank funds as well as CREMAs to be financed with local funds. The 
target is to have an IRI less or equal than 3.8  
 
*
Component 2 ? Bridge Restoration (Estimated cost US$22.8 million of which 
US$16 million would be financed by the Bank Loan) for the execution of rehabilitation 
works on 13 bridges that have been prioritized by DNV.  
 
*
Component 3- Road Safety (Estimated cost US$ 26 million of which US$ 19 
million would be financed by the Bank Loan) for the implementation and measurement 
of results of the pilot road safety initiative, as well as the execution of additional road 
safety improvements in critical spots of the network. The target at the end of the project 
implementation is to have three road safety intervention completed and covering a total 
of 430 km.  
 
*
Component 4- Institutional Renewal and Governance (Estimated cost US$ 5.2 
million of which 5.0 million would be financed by the Bank Loan) for the completion of 
DNV?s institutional renewal action plan. These activities will complement those 
currently under implementation through the first phase of the APL.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Argentina's federal highways network.  
 
All works will take place in existing right-of-ways (ROWs), and will mostly consist of 
some resurfacing (layers of asphalt), and in strengthening and better defining the fender 
bender areas. In some cases works may involve drainage system upgrades and small talus 
stabilization, as well as some geometrical alignment to facilitate routes intersections.  
 
Also, some bridges will be repaired or re-strengthened. All bridges works will take 
place in existing right-of-ways (ROWs). The project will not finance bridge works 
involving expropriations. These works will have a minimal environmental impact as they 
will be over the existing bridges or adjacent to them. As there will not be bridges 
involving international waters, the International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) safeguard 
policy will not be triggered.  
 
The project will not finance works involving involuntary resettlements, impacting 
indigenous people or crossing natural habitats or cultural heritage areas. Therefore the 
Involuntary Resettlement, Natural Habitats, Indigenous Peoples and Physical Cultural 
Resources safeguard policies will not be triggered.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSEN) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will have minor interventions for road maintenance and rehabilitation in the 
existing Right-Of-Way (ROW) and will in all cases help mitigate existing environmental 
risks with positive impact in the long term. Nonetheless, some temporal negative 
environmental impacts may result during the construction phase and need to be mitigated 
through Environmental Management Plans, including mitigation measures for the 
minimal environmental impacts that may arise during the maintenance phase. In 
particular, the potential impacts include: (i) re-routing of traffic during construction, (ii) 
disposal of construction waste; (iii) potential limitation in the access to housing and 
establishments during works; (iv) potential increase of accidents; (v) impact and potential 
interference on networks and adjacent infrastructure (phone lines, electricity wiring, 
water pipes, and sewage systems, etc); and (vi) potential nuisance during construction 
(noise, dust, waste).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term negative impacts are expected. Environmental impacts are expected to be 
positive in the long run, as the project works will help mitigate already existing 
environmental risks, by providing proper drainage systems, by improving talus 
stabilization, by reinforcing bridge structures, and by enhancing road geometrical designs 
at intersections, and to minimize turning angles. All these measures will improve safety 
conditions and environmental management in the national highways network in 
Argentina. The environmental impacts, as described in the point A.1 above, are not 
expected to be significant, or irreversible.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
DNV has a clear set of policies and procedures consistent with the Bank's environmental 
and social safeguards policies. All bidding documents include obligations to comply with 
all environmental licenses and permits required by Law, and to follow the Manual for 
Environmental Assessment and Management of Road Works (MEGA), which requires 
the development and implementation of Environmental Management Plans. MEGA 
includes procedures referred to 4 topics: (a) Cultural and physical resources heritage; (b) 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP); (c) Environmental Management of Right-Of-
Way (ROW); and (d) Control of invasive species and/or plagues in ROWs.  
 
The bidding documents for this first package of works include a set of terms of 
reference indicating to potential bidders the need to prepare an Environmental 
Management Plan for each project, according to the guidelines set by the Environmental 
Management and Evaluation Manual (MEGA). This procedure has already been tested 
during the first phase of the project, demonstrating an important advance in the 
environmental and social management capabilities of DNV.  All EMPs will have to 
comply with all provincial and federal environmental permits and should identify the 
environmental risks attached to all construction and maintenance activities, and set up the 
mitigation measures including the organization and resources allocation required. The 
Environmental Action Plan will need to include components such as:  
 
Contamination control  
 
Water: treatment of residual water and effluents at camps and equipment and machinery 
sites.  
 
Air: (i) Emission control for PM from traffic, soil removal, and movement of 
equipment; (ii) Emission control for mobile sources; (iii) Noise control.  
 
Soil: Solid and liquid waste management and disposal.  
 
Environmental Protection  
 
Fauna: Control for use and hunting of regional species. Inventory of speciments killed 
on the road.  
 
Flora: Management of forests and trees been affected. Prevention and control of fires.  
 
Soil: Erosion control measures. Soil movement management. Management of mining 
sources of construction materials  
 
Water: Sediments control. Prevention of discharge and effluents into river and adjacent 
water bodies.  
 
Contingency Plans  
 
To attend unexpected events including spillage of chemicals, fuels, lubricants.  
 
Exit and restoration  
 
Measures to retire equipment, dismantle camps, construction demolishing, and cleaning 
areas previously occupied by the works.  
 
Page  5
Also, the contractor will need to devise a Monitoring Plan to follow compliance of 
EMPs. MEGA includes a complete set of guidelines to develop EMPs so that contractors 
may easily comply with their requirement.  
 
DNV has an Environmental Division, in charge of assessing the potential environmental 
sensitivity of the CREMA works for all candidate road works (see box below).  
 
Environmental Sensitivity  
 
High: When one of the elements mentioned in the list will be put under risk during the 
construction of works, and measures of prevention or mitigation are not clearly 
identifiable.  
 
Medium: When although the execution of works affects one of the components in the 
list, the impacts are low or the mitigation measures easily identifiable.  
 
Low: None of the elements included in the list are activated.  
 
Level of Socio-Environmental risk  
 
Level 1: Projects with high environmental risk due to the fact that the area of influence 
presents high environmental sensitivity and the civic works under development are of 
high magnitude, posing a relevant risk on the natural surroundings, its biodiversity, its 
population and its cultural diversity.  
 
Level 2: Projects with medium environmental risk due to the fact that the area of 
influence presents certain risks due to the environmental sensitivity, due to the civic 
works that will be developed and the hierarchy of the roads, they do not pose a threat to 
the natural surroundings, its biodiversity, its population and its cultural diversity.  
 
Level 3: Projects with low environmental risk due to the traits of the civic works to be 
developed and the fact that the area of influence does not present characteristics 
threatening the natural environment, its biodiversity, its population and its cultural 
diversity.  
 
This division has already built in procedures to screen and assess environmental 
sensitivity of works, so that particular recommendations can be made to improve or to 
mitigate environmental impact of existing ROWs. This is the case of destabilized taluses, 
or areas with no or deficient drainage systems. Capacity has been acquired over the years 
of experience since 1993 when the first version of MEGA was issued. The Bank helped 
update the guidelines according to the Bank Environmental and Social Safeguards in 
2004 through 2006, as part of the preparation and implementation process of the project's 
first phase.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders include the general public as potential users of the national highway system, 
transport companies, and the neighboring communities. To respect the federal law, which 
mandates that all information about the roadways should be public and available, 
contractors need to establish mechanisms to facilitate such information, when requested.  
 
Page  6
Also, MEGA in its last updated form available  (2005), as well as the Environmental 
Evaluation, have been disclosed at DNV's website and at INFOSHOP prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/28/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Marcela Silva 
04/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva 
04/28/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
05/09/2007 
Comments:   
