Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2409 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/18/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P095514 
Project Name: AR Lifelong Learning Project 
Task Team Leader: Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Social analysis and monitoring (P);Education for all (P);Education for the 
knowledge economy (P);Law reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
25.00
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed projects aims at supporting the Government of Argentina to consolidate, 
strengthen, and increase the coverage of a lifelong learning and competency-based training 
system for adults 18 years or older with the objectives for those who participate of: (i) enhancing 
the employability (for the unemployed); and (ii) strengthening the career ladder opportunities 
(for the employed).  A career ladder approach creates "maps" of job opportunities that are linked 
to increasingly higher levels of education and training within particular occupational fields.  
 
What is Employability?  
 
To improve the knowledge, skills and behavior that will serve individuals as they transition to 
the labor market.  The employability skills which employers need in entry-level positions include 
basic (e.g. reading, communications, writing) and higher order skills (e.g. decision-making, 
problem-solving).  The behavior and traits that employers need are those associated with 
dependability, positive attitude, self-confidence, motivation, adaptability and punctuality.,  
Rather than preparing an individual for a specific job, these competencies cut horizontally across 
industries in both the formal and informal sector and vertically for many types of positions ? 
Page  2
Sherer 1987.  They are lifelong skills that will serve individuals at the different stages of their 
employment trajectories.  
 
Project activities are intended to enable these individuals to get jobs and/or open up better 
career paths, thereby enabling them to improve their welfare.  Key performance indicators would 
include secondary education certificates awarded to out-of-school adult population, number of 
persons taking competency based training courses, the number of workers certified in labor 
competencies, job placements for individuals taking training courses, as well as measures of job 
quality (salary levels, inclusion of benefits, etc.).  At the end of the project, it is expected that 
about 4 percent of the active economic population (about 736,000 adults) would benefit annually 
from lifelong learning and training opportunities.  During project preparation agreement would 
be reached with the Ministry of Labor on the design and arrangements for carrying out impact 
evaluations on several project interventions, including innovative mechanisms for delivering 
secondary education, competency-based training courses, and the youth education/work 
experience scheme.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The lending instrument proposed is a specific sector investment loan for an estimated amount of 
US$100 million. The project would improve the quality of training services (including adult 
education) and increase their coverage, while in the process making progress towards the goal of 
installing in Argentina a lifelong learning system linked to employment.  The project would 
support the following activities:  
 
A. 
Expansion and Strengthening of a Labor Competency-based Certification System  
 
The Ministry of Labor, supported by a grant from the Inter American Development Bank, has 
piloted a labor competency-based certification system in about 20 occupations in the sectors of 
graphic arts, metal-mechanics, auto-mechanics and pastry making. The pilot included the 
definition and validation of competency-based standards, the alignment of accredited 
competency-based training, the setting of a third-party qualified competency-based assessment 
arrangement and the issuing of competency-based certificates. The pilot was driven by the 
employers and unions representing these sectors with the participation of their workers. The 
main results are the certification of more than 1250 workers of the above mentioned sectors, 
2000 workers trained by competencies, and also the development and the normalization of 76 
occupational profiles with 300 units of competitions.  
 
This experience, which is consistent with international best practice, is now being expanded to 
10 additional sectors, including construction, forestry, fruit growing, packaging and exporting, 
gastronomy, tourism, shoes and leather, software and wine growing. So far, 96 labor 
competency-based standards have been validated and are being used for certification purposes.  
 
The proposed project aims at financing the expansion and strengthening of the above-
mentioned pilot to new sectors of the economy (those relevant to GDP growth and generating 
formal job opportunities), to new occupations within the sectors already participating and to new 
locations in the country.  The selection of the new sectors to be covered to extend and 
Page  3
consolidate the system of normalization and certification, is based on an agreement with the 
Undersecretary of Industry of the Ministry of Economy.  
 
The project would finance the required technical assistance as well as training, assessment and 
certification of workers, and promotional materials.  
 
The target at the end of project implementation is to reach a certification level of 15,000 
individuals per year, providing them with the opportunity to advance through a career ladder if 
employed in any of the participating sectors or to increase their employability if unemployed.  In 
addition, this component aims at establishing a self-financed and self-sustained competency-
based human resource policy culture within the firms of participating sectors.  
 
B. 
Improvements in the Training Quality and Pertinence  
 
The Ministry of Labor has developed a methodology to assess the quality and pertinence for 
professional training institutes (Institutos de Formaci?n Profesional- IFP)  and has applied it to 
about 150 organizations selected by the economic sectors participating in the labor competency-
based pilot.  Out of this group, only 13 percent received a ranking of A or B (the highest) about 
half were in category C and 40 percent in category D.  The institutions were assessed on 4 
dimensions: links with local economic and social context, professional orientation of the training, 
teaching strategy for the development of labor competencies, and capacity to prepare a program 
of improvements.  The Ministry has contracted some tertiary level institutions, mostly 
universities, to help 50 of these training institutes address their quality and pertinence gaps.  
These remedial activities are now being implemented.  At the end of 2006, the Ministry of Labor 
would review each institution in to assess any quality changes.  
 
Based on the findings of this pilot experience, the proposed Project aims to finance the 
technical assistance required to fine tune the methodology used to assess quality and pertinence, 
as well as the instruments to address weaknesses in about 600 IFPs selected by participating 
sectors over the next five years.  
 
C. 
Expansion of Coverage among Adults of Education and Training Services  
 
This project component aims at offering the opportunity to out-of-school adults and youth 
(unemployed and workers seeking to move in a career ladder), particularly the vulnerable and 
disadvantaged to complete their basic and/or secondary education and to receive labor 
competency-based training.  
 
Under the on-going Bank projects supporting the Heads of Household Project, the Ministry 
attempted to expand the provision of education services to the beneficiaries of the Heads of 
Household Program.  They had limited success, in part because the provision of these services is 
still quite traditional - classroom-based, available only during the school year, scarcely adapted 
for adults, minimal attention to outreach, etc, with only isolated cases of innovation in a few 
provinces.  The proposed Project will finance technical assistance to interested Provinces willing 
to launch and evaluate innovative adult outreach programs offering the possibility to complete 
basic and/or lower secondary education to the interested out-of-school adult population.  In 
Page  4
addition, the project will support activities to make the current traditional supply of outreach 
adult education offered by the Provinces more flexible, modular, relevant and responsive to the 
needs of interested adults.  
 
Currently, the Ministry of Labor organizes their cooperation and financing with the provinces 
through specific agreements, covering the details of the activities being supported, the 
procedures and requirements to be followed by both parties and other participating agencies, as 
well as the expected results and targets.  Another option, discussed with the Ministry of Labor is 
the possibility of trying to promote more innovation and supply of adult education by seeking 
proposals from actors other than the provincial offices of education, such as voluntary 
organizations, unions, municipalities, etc., through a competitive fund.  
 
With respect to the training of unemployed and employed persons, the proposed project will 
partially finance the targeted expansion of training access currently benefiting about 81,000 
persons per year (20 percent employed in 23 productive sectors of the economy and 80 percent 
unemployed) and increase their likelihood for job placement and/or job mobility through a career 
ladder.  The project will only finance labor-competency-based training.  The target is to reach 4 
percent of the economic active population per year by 2011 (estimated at 736,000 individuals). 
All training financed under the project would have performance targets, generally job placements 
or school certificates and, financing would be linked to performance.  Impact evaluations would 
be done for some training and education activities.  
 
The Ministry is interested in using the proposed project to support a program directed in 
particular to disadvantaged youth. Through this activity, the Ministry of Labor would develop 
and promote activities incorporating completion of basic education, professional training and the 
acquisition by participants of work experience, followed by help in job search.  Entry into the 
program would be organized through municipal employment offices and the expected duration of 
the combined intervention for youth would be 10 months. The project would finance the 
technical assistance and scholarships (amounts based on the specific activity ? labor orientation, 
education, work experience) required in the outreach education and/or labor competency-based 
training of youth between 18 and 24 years old as well as the impact evaluation of the scheme.  
Employers would be expected to make a contribution while youth are getting work experience.  
 
D. 
Institutional Strengthening of Employment and Training Services.  
 
Institutional strengthening would cover three major areas.  First, the ability of the Public 
Employment Service to improve the employability results of referrals to training and educational 
activities would be strengthened.  The ongoing projects supporting the Heads of Household 
Program include assistance to the Ministry of Labor and municipalities to establish a network of 
local offices to deliver public employment services.  The proposed Project would build on and 
complement that activity by supporting capacity building in the municipal employment offices to 
enable the staff to refer their clients properly to the appropriate educational and training services 
needed to improve their employability and help them to promote the needed partnerships with 
the groups offering these services.  
 
Page  5
Second, the project would support the installation of an integrated management information 
system.  The Ministry of Labor currently operates many management information systems 
supporting the gathering of information, the planning and the monitoring of the embryonic 
Lifelong Learning System.  The Regice (Registro de Instituciones de capacitaci?n y empleo), 
was designed many years ago and in urgent need to be updated, registers information about 
training provided.  The Emplear, recently developed, registers information about individuals 
seeking a job placement and/or employed workers seeking career ladder advancements being 
trained under publicly financed schemes, designed to be the platform for the delivery of public 
employment services.  In addition, the Ministry manages the substantial beneficiary registry for 
the Heads of Household program, as well as information related to its various components.  
 
This project will support the integration of the above-mentioned systems and the development 
of new ones required for the planning and monitoring of the envisaged Lifelong Learning and 
Training System, including by financing software development and equipment, technical 
assistance and rehabilitation of physical spaces.  
 
Third, the project would support the gradual development of the institutional, technical and 
financial bases to sustain a system of lifelong learning.  The proposed project would assist in the 
development over the medium term of a sustainable lifelong learning and training system in 
Argentina including by financing the needed analytical work to identify and understand the 
implications of different options.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Argentina   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Based on similar projects, Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies is adequate.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The proposed project will target for training beneficiaries currently in the  Heads of 
Household Program.  The areas that would be supported for the expansion of adult education and 
other training has not been finalized.    As of now there is not sufficient information to know the 
extent to which indigenous communities participating in the Heads of Household would be 
present in these areas.  The Bank has requested information on which provinces have indigenous 
communities participating in the Heads of Household Program.  That data, together with an 
identification of which provinces will participate in the training activities 
supported by the 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
project, should provide the information necessary to determine whether the Bank's Indigenous 
Peoples Policy would be triggered or  not.  That information would be available during the 
project preparation visit scheduled for late July/early August and the issue discussed with staff of 
LCSES and LEGLA no later than September.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be determined later.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
08/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/31/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
08/02/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
