                                                                                                                                                                                                     43439


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 01/30/2006                                    Report No.: AC1945
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Argentina                             Project ID: P089926
                                                                                                            Project Name: National Urban Solid Waste Management Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Horacio Cristian Terraza
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5,          Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2006
                                                                                                            2005
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: LCSEN                           Lending Instrument: Sector Investment
                                                                                                                                                           and Maintenance Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Solid waste management (100%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and
                                                                                                            institutions (P);Climate change (S)

                                              Public                                                        IBRD Amount (US$m.):            40.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER                                                         14.38
                                                    Authorized                                                                                                                       14.38
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)         Yes [ ]      No [X]
                                                              Disclosure

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                        Public                              The objective of the proposed project is to improve public health and quality of life by
                                                                                                            developing environmentally and financially sustainable systems for solid waste
                                                                                                            management in Argentina. The specific objective is to increase the percentage of
                                                                                                            population served by sanitary landfills within the timeframe of this project. Specific
                                                                                                            goals of the National Urban Solid Waste Management Project are:

                                                                                                             (i)    Develop new environmentally safe and socially acceptable regional landfills as
                                                                              Authorized                    the backbone of final disposal operations, and closure of existing open dumps;

                                                                                                             (ii)   Develop legal and regulatory frameworks at the sub-national level;

                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                             (iii)   Improve municipal financial management and cost recovery systems so as to
                                                                                                            guarantee the sustainability of urban SWM;
                                                                                                  Public

                                                                                                             (iv)   Ensure the positive social impact of the new SWM system on the waste pickers
                                                                                                            and informal sectors;

 (v)    Establish provincial and municipal policies related to minimization and recycling;
and

 (vi)   Apply Carbon Finance mechanisms under the CDM of the Kyoto Protocol to
reduce O&M costs for the municipality and encourage good operating practices.

 Key performance indicators to measure the results of the project's five-years
intervention can be seen in the table below:

 Key Performance Indicators for Monitoring Process
 -------------------------------------------------
 Indicator type:
 Proper solid waste disposal.
 Outcome indicator:
 Amount of waste sent to environmentally sustainable and sanitary final disposal
facilities.
 Number of open dumps closed.
 -------------------------------------
 Indicator Type:
 Institutional strengthening.
 Outcome indicator:
 Strategic planning for SWM (development of provincial and municipal plans).
 Enactment of provincial regulatory frameworks.
 ----------------------------------------------
 Indicator Type:
 Environmental sustainability.
 Outcome Indicator:
 Average percentage increment of formally recycled or composted waste over a 5-year
period.
 -----------------------------------------
 Indicator Type:
 Social sustainability.
 Outcome Indicator:
 Improved well-being of waste pickers participating in the project.
 ---------------------------
 Indicator Type:
 Financial sustainability.
 Outcome Indicator:
 Municipal financial management and cost recovery system in place and agreed program
for its gradual improvements.
 ------------------------------------------------------
 Indicator Type:
 Global environment and financial sustainability.
 Outcome Indicator:
 GHG emission reductions and Carbon Finance mechanisms applied to implemented
sub-projects.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Policy and Institutional Strengthening (US$4.9 Million).
 Component 1 will finance TA for the agencies involved in the development and control
of sector policies and regulations. This component will also strengthen the national
institutional capacity of SAyDS to implement the project. At the local level, it will
support the capacity of local authorities to make informed decisions and develop
sustainable SWM services. The component will also support the government s long-term
planning for SWM incorporated in the National SWM Strategy. All provinces are eligible
for this component, which includes the following five sub-components:

 i)     Strategic Planning and Regionalization. This sub-component will finance the
preparation of integrated SWM plans at municipal and provincial levels. The project
supports regionalization, this is, the establishment of legal multi-municipal final disposal
districts in which a single landfill receives the waste generated by several municipalities.
The Provincial SWM Plans should include this regionalization concept in their design.
The number of sites per province should be consolidated to minimize investments and
operating expenses. This regionalization concept will result in significant economies of
scale for participating municipalities.

 ii)    Training Program on SWM and Urban Finances Fundamentals. This sub-
component will finance a National Training Program (NTP) on SWM fundamentals to
increase the technical capacity of provincial and local governments. The training will
focus on national, provincial, and municipal staff involved in SWM. The sub-component
will also finance a specific training program on improving urban finances for SWM
through the development and adoption of effective and sustainable financial
management. Moreover, this urban finance program will concentrate on cost recovery
mechanisms for SWM at municipal level, including training on topics such as calculation
of SWM fees, tariff structures, and user charge collection systems.

 iii)   Technical Studies. This sub-component will finance the following activities:
 - Preparation of a national recycling strategy through market analysis and incentives for
recycling;
 - Sub-projects' recycling market assessments;
 - National and provincial waste minimization programs in line with the NSWMS
objectives; and
 - Technical studies for closure or remediation of selected dumpsites.

 iv)    Public Communication and Outreach Programs: This sub-component will finance
TA for the development of Public Communications Programs for the SAyDS and
participating provinces and municipalities. The objective of the sub-component is to
increase education and public awareness related to issues such as health and
environmental problems linked to open dumping, the role and responsibilities of
households in the new SWM system, final disposal technical options and related costs,
recycling, and minimization. The expected outcome is consensus and effective use of the
new SWM system financed by the project, decreasing the amount of waste sent for final

disposal, limiting the NIMBY effect, and promoting fee collection. Model national and
provincial communication strategies adapted to the two pilot provinces will be designed
before project effectiveness.

 v)     Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation. The main objective of this sub-
component is to support appropriate fiduciary capacity and specialized technical
consulting to ensure effective project implementation. The Waste Management Unit in
the SAyDS will implement the project. This sub-component will finance relevant
personnel (i.e., procurement, environmental, social, and financial management
specialists) to ensure the Bank's fiduciary responsibilities.

 Component 2: Construction of new landfills and closure of open dumps (US$31.5
Million).
 This component will finance the construction of environmentally and economically
sustainable final disposal facilities and closure of existing open dumps. It will also cover
infrastructure and equipment for separation and recycling activities as part of the social
inclusion plans (component 3). The project will finance composting activities only if a
technical and economic study provided by the municipality demonstrates the
sustainability of the enterprise. A set of eligibility criteria (section 37) was developed to
identify provinces and municipalities that can participate in this component. While all the
provinces will be eligible for TA, a limited number will receive funding for investment in
final disposal sites in this first phase. This component includes the following two sub-
components:

 (i)    Construction of New Regional Sanitary Landfills in Eligible Provinces. The
construction of new sanitary landfills covers the following activities:

 -      Construction of only the first cell, general civil works, access roads, auxiliary and
maintenance buildings, fencing, etc. Containment cells for industrial non-hazardous
waste will also be eligible. Sanitary landfills will need to have a minimum lifespan of 12
years and adopt minimum technical standards related to strict environmental pollution
control measures (impermeable clay or synthetic liners, leachate drainage and treatment,
gas control and flaring systems, monitoring wells, etc.). The SAyDS will be responsible
for determining these minimum standards in agreement with the Bank team; and
 -      Setting up of transfer stations where deemed necessary based on the results of the
Provincial SWM Plans and construction and equipping of waste separation plants in all
sub-projects to support recycling programs as part of the social inclusion plans described
under component 3. The new separation plants may be installed either at the transfer
station, if any exists, or at a location near the new landfills. Eligible sub-projects will
need to demonstrate the financial sustainability of the plant based on market assessment
studies or social plans to provide a sanitary, safe environment for waste pickers to
continue their separation activities.

 (ii)   Closure or Remediation of Open Dumpsites. This sub-component will finance the
closure (and remediation where necessary) of dumpsites in participating municipalities.

To access these funds, municipalities will need an operating sanitary landfill in place, a
social program for waste pickers, and a technical study for the dumpsite closure.

 Component 3: Social Inclusion (US$1.5 Million).
 This component will finance the implementation of social inclusion plans for the waste
pickers working only at the dumpsites being closed or rehabilitated by the activities under
component 2 and in the cases where needed. At the same time, this component will help
strengthen national and local capacity to assess and manage complex social issues around
the implementation of SWM interventions. During project preparation, a number of
successful initiatives were identified both in Argentina and overseas. Waste picker
cooperatives have been operating for almost 20 years in Sao Paulo, Brazil, where NGOs
provide technical support and private sector companies provide the necessary equipment
and training. This component will finance the following specific 3 sub-components:

 (1)    Capacity Building in Social Inclusion and Management. This sub-component will
finance the participation of Social Inclusion experts as part of the NUSW Unit, training
of provincial and municipal public officers on social issues, and the implementation of
tailored social assessments and social inclusion plans at sub-project level. Specific
methodologies, including social assessment guidelines for the use of the municipalities,
were designed for these activities during project preparation.

 (2)    Technical Assistance for Micro-enterprises and Cooperatives. This sub-
component will finance training and technical assistance to establish micro-enterprises
and cooperatives of waste pickers. This task will be led by social specialists in the
municipalities in collaboration with organizations that have extensive experience in
informal garbage collection.

 (3)    Private-Public Partnerships. The project will support the establishment of a
partnership between the SAyDS and a network of private companies for example
(CEMPRE) interested in promoting more recycling in Argentina. This model was tested
with great success in Brazil, where private companies, informal waste pickers
cooperatives, technical NGOs, and the government came together to provide integral
solutions to this issue.

 Design and preparation of the social inclusion plans started as part of the project
preparation activities. More case specific details of the social inclusion plans will be
defined after the project becomes effective but long before the new final disposal systems
begin operation. Also at the same time, the provincial SWM units will carry out the
necessary market studies for recyclables. Actual implementation of each sub-project s
social inclusion plan (recycling activities)will occur once the new final disposal system
has begun operations and separation facilities have been built. Meanwhile, the
wastepickers will be able to still carry out their activities in the original dumpsite during
the time of the construction of the new landfill facility.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
This is a National Project. A set of eligibility criteria are intended to identify provinces
and municipalities that can participate in this project. All provinces will be eligible for
TA (component 1), but only selected provinces will receive funding for investment in
final disposal infrastructure (component 2). Eligibility for component 2 will be based on
demonstrated local needs and priorities, readiness to work with other municipalities and
assume ownership of the project, willingness to attain financial sustainability, and
selection of environmentally safe and cost-effective solutions. Participating provinces and
municipalities seeking financing will be able to meet the eligibility criteria gradually
through different stages of project preparation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN)
   Mr Roberto Adrian Senderowitsch (LCSPS)
   Mr Roberto Gabriel Aiello (ENVCF)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                  Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Project interventions would trigger the Bank s Environmental Assessment Safeguard
Policy OP 4.01. To comply with this policy, the borrower has prepared a Sectoral
Environmental Assessment (SEA) for Solid Waste Management and a Sectoral
Environmental Management Plan (SEMP), including specific environmental guidelines
for siting and construction of landfills that have been reviewed by the environmental
safeguard specialist in the team and who has found them acceptable to the Bank. The
SEA and the SEMP will be used for identifying the typology of each subproject proposal,
while the environmental guidelines would serve for the preparation of specific
environmental management plans to be considered during construction and operation
phases of each subproject.

 The SEMP includes specific provisions mandated for the design and construction of a
new landfill, and requires the adoption of certain standards and measures for the design,
bid tendering, construction, operation, and maintenance of the landfill and associated
works.

 It is worth noting that following discussions with the task team, QAT concurred with the
view that OP 4.12 -Involuntary Resettlement- is not triggered by the project. This is
because (a) potential impacts are indirect, (b) there is no direct taking of land or
restriction of access that would be covered under the policy, and (c) the team has
followed good practice in addressing indirect impacts through environmental and social
assessment, with a community oriented action program.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project s environmental impacts are expected to be minimal and manageable. All of
the new landfill sites to be chosen will meet the legally binding technical and siting
criteria to avoid significant adverse impacts on (i) wetlands or waterways of any kind, (ii)
aquifers, (iii) existing or proposed protected areas or other critical natural habitats, (iv)
involuntary resettlement, (v) lands inhabited or claimed by indigenous communities, and
(vi) sites of cultural (archaeological, historical, religious, or paleontological) interest. In
fact, the project will yield important environmental benefits because it will not only
strengthen the institutional capacity of the environmental authorities and assist the
government in reviewing environmental policies and regulations, but also construct
environmentally adequate and socially acceptable final solid waste disposal facilities in
selected municipalities that currently practice open dumping. The project design lays out
provisions to ensure that potential impacts from the siting of such facilities are assessed
and mitigated in accordance with the Bank s safeguard policies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower in collaboration with the project preparation team (including consultants)
has prepared the appropriate Action plan/safeguard framework documents, which were
revised and finalized during the project appraisal period. The recommended and agreed
follow-up activities as stated in the Project Operational Manual would be implemented
during the project life. At each supervision mission stage and mid-term review stage the
process would be reevaluated and necessary adjustments will also be made as appropriate
to the prevalent conditions.

 The safeguard documents include a Sectoral Environmental Assessment and a Sectoral
Environmental Management Framework and Social Guidelines.

 The project management unit will prepare the Operational Manual that describes in
detail the approach to implementation of the above mentioned frameworks. The project
implementation team and the Expert Panel is expected to have the capacity to screen
subprojects at the calls for proposal stage, mid-term, and post implementation stage in
line with the safeguard policies of the Bank. In addition, the safeguards budget make
provisions to use the services of safeguard specialists/thematic specialists as consultants
to the project. When needed, the project would draw on additional local and international
expertise for each of the technical components.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders were consulted as part of the preparation of the Environmental
Assessment. First, the project team took advantage of existing consultation processes
that had been set up by the government during the development the National SWM
Strategy. The SAyDS had put together a multidisciplinary Consultative Group of over 15
environmental civil society organizations with whom a number of elements of the project
were discussed. In addition, the province Tucuman established a consultation group of
NGOs with whom project team members met in a number of occasions during project
preparation. Second, the project team held a number of consultations with environmental
NGOs, community associations, private sector representatives, academicians, the media,
and national, provincial and local authorities. Third, in a number of occasions, project
team members interviewed informal waste-pickers working in existing dumpsites in a
number of localities. Finally, an extensive Social Assessment (SA) was conducted in two
of the participating provinces, Tucuman and Chubut, covering 6 localities. The study
included a survey with over 1,000 observations, 23 focus groups, and over 50 in-depth
interviews with relevant stakeholders. Specific social guidelines were developed as part
of the SA to be used during project implementation. Additional consultations with local
communities are planned before the incorporation of additional localities along the
lifetime of the project, and during the preparation of the EMPs. The EA will be available
at the offices of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and in World Bank's Infoshop
before Board approval. Future EAs and EMPs will similarly be made available to the
public.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10/21/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  11/28/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11/28/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                              Name             Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Horacio Cristian Terraza
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Juan D. Quintero
Social Development Specialist       Mr Roberto Adrian Senderowitsch
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Roberto Gabriel Aiello
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Reidar Kvam
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Abel Mejia
 Comments: Only Sector Manager Signature
 is required for ISDS Appraisal Stage.

