Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2802 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P105288 
Project Name: AR  Infrastructure Project for the Province of Buenos Aires (APL2) 
Task Team Leader: Manuel G. Marino 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (40%);Roads and highways (36%);Flood protection (16%);Sub-
national government administration (8%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (P);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (S);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
270.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
90.00
90.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall purpose of the program is to improve the provision of infrastructure services in the 
Province within a framework of fiscal responsibility. Through improved services the Project 
aims to support the return to a sustainable path of economic growth, to alleviate poverty and to 
increase social equity. To this end, the Province prioritized a set of interventions through the 
sector wide Infrastructure Program for the period 2005-2010 specifically aimed to:  
 
i. 
Develop a multi-year public expenditure program, in line with the priorities of the 
Province, to implement the Infrastructure Program following sound fiscal policies to ensure 
convergence towards a long-term sustainable fiscal framework.  
 
ii. 
Improve and maintain high priority segments of the non-concessioned paved road 
network to support the reactivation of the provincial economy and strengthen regional 
competitiveness.  
Page  2
iii. 
Enhance access to water, sewerage and urban drainage services, especially for the low-
income segments of the population living in highly vulnerable areas of the Conurbano 
Bonaerense.  
 
The proposed Project would benefit over 5 million low-income people in the Province of 
Buenos Aires, through the provision of water and sewerage services, adequate drainage, 
reduction of operating and travel time cost, increased production prospects, and the creation of 
significant employment opportunities.  The injection of federal and provincial investments in 
water and wastewater infrastructure will have a positive social and environmental impact, but 
also is considered by the Government to be the only option to return service provision to an 
economic-financial equilibrium, since the necessary financial improvement of the utilities would 
not be feasible without a clear improvement in the coverage and quality of the services provided.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Infrastructure investments for about US$ 270 million are currently being financed with support 
from the APL1 loan for US$ 200 million. The initial estimate for the size of APL2 at the time of 
the Board presentation of the APL1 was US$ 150 million.  The Province has since requested an 
increase in the second phase loan amount up to US$ 270 million to reduce the impact of the cost 
increases and accelerate the achievement of the physical targets of the Program. It is proposed 
that the second APL remains structured in general terms with the same components as those 
included in the first APL.  The total Project cost for this APL2 is estimated at US$ 360 million.  
The Project components and the estimated amounts, as initially proposed by the Provincial 
Government, are:  
 
Component 1. Provincial Roads (Estimated Cost US$ 130 million of which US$ 95 million to 
be Bank financed in APL2): This component seeks to:  
 
(a) 
Rehabilitate  high priority segments of the interurban provincial non-concessioned road 
network, both through traditional ad-measurement type contracts and the introduction of 
performance-based CREMA contracts;  
 
(b) 
Remove critical bottlenecks through: (i) widening provincial routes of the primary non-
concessioned paved network within the Conurbano Bonaerense that connect important industrial 
zones and ports with production and consumption centers, and (ii) carrying out critical road 
safety improvements at selected crossings and intersections;  
 
(c) 
Rehabilitate non-concessioned access roads to communities located near the primary road 
network; and  
 
(d) 
Implement a well-designed maintenance program for the entire provincial non-
concessioned road network.  
 
Component 2. Water and Sewerage (Total Estimated Cost: US$ 145 million, of which U$ 110 
million to be Bank financed in APL2): The objective of this component is to increase coverage in 
the provision of basic sanitation services in the Province to benefit over 3 million low-income 
people. Most of the interventions will be in areas of high sanitary vulnerability under the 
responsibility of ABSA and AySA, particularly in the Conurbano Bonaerense.  The Government 
proposes to give priority attention under the proposed APL2 to investments for the expansion of 
access to water, sewerage and drainage services in areas where (i) there is a high concentration 
Page  3
of low-income families;  (ii) there is high environmental health vulnerability; and (iii) there are 
already or are planned for construction main supply lines, collectors and treatment plants.  
 
Component 3. Drainage (Estimated Cost US$ 60 million, of which U$ 45 million to be Bank 
financed in APL2): This component will finance the expansion and optimization of macro-
drainage infrastructure in urban and periurban areas of the Conurbano Bonaerense . The 
proposed investments are part of an integrated drainage plan and follow the methodology 
adopted with support of the APL1.  The objective of these investments is to mitigate flooding 
caused by rainfalls of high intensity and relatively short duration, which cause severe losses to 
households, especially of low income people, and to industries and commercial activities, both 
directly and indirectly due to the interruption of transport and other services.Planned investments 
will benefit about 500,000 people and an area which suffers losses estimated in the order of US$ 
50 million annually.  
 
Component 4. Technical Engineering Feasibility, Design, and Benchmarking (Estimated Cost 
US$ 22 million of which U$ 18 million to be Bank financed in APL2): The component would 
finance services to strengthen the execution of the program and to improve the pipeline of 
eligible investments ready for implementation. Specifically, the component would finance 
services to (i) further define a strategic framework to orient provincial infrastructure 
development, including the development of master plans, infrastructure feasibility studies and 
final engineering designs; (ii) identify infrastructure needs and set strategic priorities in order to 
avoid investment financing bottlenecks; (iii) implement a program of analytical work to monitor 
budget formulation and execution and undertake regular and periodic monitoring of program 
implementation and impact; and (iv) design the investments needed to respond to the challenges 
and recommendations of the Strategy for Coastal Erosion Control study being carried out as part 
of the APL1.  
 
Component 5. Institutional Capacity Building for Provincial Infrastructure Service Provision 
and Oversight (Estimated Cost US$ 3 million of which U$ 2 million to be Bank financed in 
APL2): The Project would include some relatively modest technical assistance activities to 
continue the work done under the APL1 to support the Province in its overall strategic 
infrastructure planning efforts.  The Project will finance consultant services to assist the Province 
to (i) identify sectors and regions likely to play a key role in provincial development which could 
then guide policymaking and planning, updating the provincial information database; (ii) design 
sector and territorial interventions and policies aimed at improving competitiveness and 
employment opportunities; and (iii) implement the recommendations of the Strategic Evaluation 
of the Province, which is under development as part of the APL1, particularly with regards to 
public information of water related risks and environmental health monitoring in high risk areas. 
The proponed studies and technical assistance would aim to both enhance regulatory capacity in 
the provision of public services and generate better information systems to guide decision 
making through the creation of a provincial geo-referenced information system and supporting 
the digitalization of cadastral information.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Province of Buenos Aires   
 
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The results achieved under the first APL, the implementation experience gained by the 
implementing agency, as well as the continuous and strong commitment of the Provincial 
Government to the program?s objectives seem to confirm the assessment that the Borrower's 
institutional capacity for safeguard policies is adept. Given that under the first phase of the APL, 
institutional capacity of the institutions involved was assessed by the Provincial Government and 
the project team in order to establish the project implementation arrangements and sustainability 
issues, no changes in those arrangements are forseen for the second phase of this APL.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The use of the agreed safeguard framework has been proven to be effective during 
implementation of APL1.  Safeguard policies for the proposed APL2 will thus be handled on the 
basis of the safeguard framework established during the preparation of the first APL. The Project 
team is currently conducting an analysis of lessons learnt during implementation of APL1 on this 
matter and to document whether the agreed framework would need any modification.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
According to the new guidelines, all infrastructure projects should trigger the cultural 
property policy.  Given this, even though there is no expectation that cultural property is in the 
Project area, the Environmental Assessment sets forth "chance find" procedures in the case that 
such property is encountered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Similar to the APL1, the team believes that the proposed Project falls under the exception to 
the notification requirements mentioned in paragraph 7 of OP 7.50.  Similarly, the given the 
Project?s nature the team considers that it is not necessary to request the no objection of the 
Comisi?n Administradora del R?o de la Plata to proceed with the proposed works.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/11/2007 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental study-Week of April 23, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel G. Marino 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
