Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/25/2006 
Report No.:  AC2419
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P095515 
Project Name:  AR Provincial Maternal-Child Health Investment APL 2 
Task Team Leader:  Cristian C. Baeza 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 27, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 24, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Population and reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are: (i) increasing access to essential health services 
to the poor population, contributing to reducing the infant mortality rate (IMR) and 
maternal mortality rate; and ii)ii strengthening the incentive framework for efficiency 
among provinces and service providers through significant financing reforms  
 
The Plan Nacer (APL I as well as the proposed APL II) has a strong poverty focus.  
First, the program specifically aims to reach uninsured households, which are often 
unemployed or work in the informal sector.  These groups have a much higher likelihood 
of being poor than the insured households.  Second, the program is directed specifically 
to mothers and children, which (among the uninsured) are the most vulnerable groups. 
Finally, in this second stage, the MCHIP would be implemented in the remaining fifteen 
provinces of the center and south of Argentina that are the most populated in the country.  
These provinces include 25 percent of Argentina?s indigenous population--traditionally a 
poor and excluded group (75 percent are already included in APL I).  The Plan Nacer 
would include special outreach activities to target these groups.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed ALP II would closely follow the design of the APL I.  In particular it 
would maintain the same general definition of eligible population, the same set and 
Page  2
definition of basic services package of basic health services, the same design on output-
based and performance-based disbursements, and the same set of trazadoras or 
performance tracers.  The project would continue to focus on the maternal-child 
population without formal health insurance coverage, which are the poorest among this 
population and the ones with the worst health outcome indicators.  
 
The project would include, exactly as APL I is currently doing, a conditional per capita 
transfer from the MSN to each participating province to finance up to 50 percent of the 
cost of the basic health service package offered in Plan Nacer. Disbursements would 
continue to be against, as in APL I, submission of audited enrollment lists (60 percent of 
the per capita transfer) and achievement of 10 output goals (trazadoras) (40 percent of the 
per capita transfer).  
 
The second phase project would have a total expected cost of about US$654.1 million, 
of which the Bank would finance about US$300 million (including unallocated and front 
end fee), and it would cover an estimated 1.7 million beneficiaries.  The project would 
include the following components:  
 
Component 1: Implementation of the Maternal-Child Health Insurance Program 
(MCHIP) (US$ 247.8 million of Bank financing)  
 
This component would include financing to support:  
 
(i) 
Capitation payments for Plan Nacer services by theMSN to participating 
provinces covering a declining share of a package of basic service costs, calculated on a 
per capita basis (US$215.4 million);  
 
(ii) 
Equipment (medical, transportation and communications) for basic health care 
facilities that supply the Plan Nacer package; excluding civil works or complex medical 
equipment (US$14.4 million);  
 
(iii) 
Technical assistance and training programs to the  MSPs to develop systems, 
instruments and skills necessary for implementing and running the Plan Nacer including, 
inter alia: development of annual performance agreements with the MSN and authorized 
providers; development and implementation of contracting and payments to providers; 
development and implementation of outreach and service delivery strategies and 
mechanisms to rural and indigenous people and other excluded populations (US$7 
million);  
 
(iv) 
Training for health care providers in delivering the Plan Nacer basic services 
(US$1.4 million);  
 
(v) 
Information technology equipment and consultant services for upgrading and 
expanding information systems for monitoring the implementation of the Plan Nacer 
(US$5.1 million), including trazadoras systems and provider production data; and  
 
(vi) 
Technical assistance and training for the management of participating health 
service providers to strengthen areas including their billing capacity, development and 
implementation of provider data systems enabling (US$ 4.5 million)  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Strengthening National and Provincial Ministries of Health Stewardship 
Capacity (US$ 8.3 million of Bank financing)  
 
The focus of this component would be to adapt the provincial ministries of health to the 
demands of implementation of Plan Nacer (information, managerial), including the start-
up of the national and provincial health service ?purchasing? departments (PHSPD) in the 
respective Ministries of Health . The installation and functioning of these departments 
would imply major structural change to the way provinces are currently managing the 
financing of health service providers, and these are essential to introducing a separation 
of purchasing and provision of services. These departments would act, for the duration of 
the project, as the implementation agency (unit) for the project but, they would continue 
as ?purchasing agents? for the health sector after program completion. In practice, these 
departments are the initial structure of what most provinces expect to be the future 
provincial public health insurance organizations. The proposed loan would finance 
consultant services, investments in office equipment, and training services to improve the 
performance of these ministries in exercising the sector stewardship functions of the 
MSN and participating MSPs including:  
 
(i) 
Reorganizing participating MSP?s , staffing and relationships;  
 
(ii) 
Improving epidemiological information, financial and human resource 
management systems;  
 
(iii) 
Completing studies essential for MSN policy formulation  
 
Annually, the MSN and each participating province would agree on a technical 
assistance program for the province and the specific resources needed for its 
implementation. Those agreements would be included in annual performance agreements.  
 
Component 3: Communications and Community Outreach (US$17 million)  
 
To ensure the effectiveness of Plan Nacer, the Government would need to ensure that 
the target populations, particularly those who have historically been marginalized, have 
adequate knowledge about, and motivation to use, the services being offered. The 
proposed Loan would finance consultant services, incremental ministry operating costs, 
event organization and media communication services to support two main lines of 
communications including:  
 
(i) 
Dissemination of detailed information about the program among major 
stakeholders groups (provincial governments and their populations, Federal Health 
Council (COFESA), medical profession, insurance agency managers and staff) including 
providing opportunities for feedback and dialogue. This would be, primarily, the 
responsibility of the MSN and the participating provinces; and  
 
(ii) 
Community outreach to increase participation of the eligible population by 
providing practical information on (i) beneficiaries? rights to services, (ii) the package of 
basic services included in Plan Nacer, (iii) methods of enrollment, (iv) location, times and 
names of participating providers, (v) media communication campaignes, and  (vi) support 
to community contact groups responsible for disseminating information, as well as 
Page  4
receiving and reacting to feedback to strengthen citizen control.  It would also support the 
production and implementation of the communication campaign elements specially 
adapted to language and cultural needs of indigenous populations. This would be mainly 
the responsibility of participating provinces. Provinces would provide details of their 
community outreach activities as part of their annual work programs, covered by annual 
performance agreements with the MSN.  
 
Component 4: Program Monitoring, Evaluation and Concurrent Auditing Systems 
(US$12 million)  
 
The program would be expected to change the incentive structure for health services 
staff and facility managers and raise their accountability for achieving results.  To support 
this, the ministries? (national and provincial) ability to monitor, evaluate and audit 
performance would be strengthened. The proposed loan would finance information 
technology design services, software and equipment, training for staff at the MSN and 
MSPs to upgrade the monitoring of health provider performance, aggregation and 
reporting of information. It would also finance the costs of external concurrent auditing 
of key elements that underlie transfers of capitation payments as discussed below in the 
section on implementation arrangements. Lastly, this component would finance the 
project evaluation activities, including the completion of the baseline for impact 
indicators, and project impact evaluation at mid-term and closing. APL II would follow 
the same impact evaluation design under implementation in APL I.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The following provinces of Argentina: Entre Rios, Santa Fe, Cordoba, La Rioja, San 
Juan, Mendoza, La Pampa, San Luis, Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires, 
Neuquen, Rio Negro, Chubut, Santa Cruz y Tierra del Fuego, and  Antartida e Islas del 
Atlantico Sur.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
To be completed during Appraisal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
To be completed during Appraisal.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
To be completed during Appraisal.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project triggers OP 4.10. The government has completed the preparation of 
the Indigenous Peoples Implementation Framework and submitted it for Bank review. 
Provincial screening has determined that the provinces of Chubut, La Pampa, Mendoza, 
Neuqu?n, R?o Negro, San Juan y Tierra del Fuego will require the completion of the 
Indigenous People Implementation Plan to become participating provinces, in accordance 
to the Indigenous People Framework.  
 
Argentina?s population is characterized by ethnic and cultural diversity.  In 2001, 3 
percent of total population was considered to be part of the indigenous population of the 
country, mostly from Kollas, (Quechua, Aymara), Wichi-Matacos, Tobas, Chiriguanos, 
Diaguitas and other native groups. While there is no specific information about the 
coverage of health services to indigenous groups, they are known to be mostly uninsured 
and, often, without access to basic health care.   These populations are concentrated 
mostly in the Northern provinces included in APL1 and not to be included in any activity 
or financing under APL 2.  
 
The government is committed to benefit in particular and encourage the participation of 
indigenous people as beneficiaries of the project through a number of specific actions 
aiming at integrating and reaching out to the indigenous populations. This second phase 
of the program would build on the experience and preliminary success of the first phase 
of Plan Nacer in the nine APL I provinces. The individual strategies for addressing the 
needs of the indigenous population in a given province would be included as a specific 
part in the annual agreements between MOH and the APL II provinces, formalizing 
agreements to implement the Plan Nacer specially adapted for the indigenous 
communities.  In fact, one of the tracers determining financial transfers to the provinces is 
directly related to the adaptation of Plan Nacer services to the needs of indigenous people 
in areas of high prevalence. Annual performance agreements continue to focus attention 
on the specific needs of the indigenous people through:  
 
Page  6
(i) 
Incorporating the results of studies underway financed by APL I for improving 
health services delivery for this populations;  
 
(ii) 
Lessons learned from prior WB projects such as PROMIN and VIGIA and APL I 
are considered to better target the needs of indigenous people.  
 
(iii) 
Plan Nacer would utilize the surveys results on indigenous people?s health and 
social conditions and social indicators by INDEC and APL I to address the key constrains 
influencing health seeking behavior and quality of received care.  
 
(iv) 
Financing training of health workers on special needs of the indigenous 
population so they are  capable to deliver Plan Nacer services in areas of high 
concentration of this population.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The communication and community outreach component of the project at the national 
and provincial level would include the development and implementation of a 
communication and outreach strategy specially adapted to the indigenous population. To 
ensure effectiveness, the communications strategy would include specific consideration 
for cultural sensitivity to align the public campaign messages with locally accepted norms 
for indigenous communities. Additionally, communication material would be made 
available in the main indigenous languages such as Aymara, Quechua, Guarani and 
others as necessary.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/16/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/15/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
Yes 
Page  7
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Cristian C. Baeza 
08/22/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Isabel Tomadin 
07/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Isabel Tomadin 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Luis Orlando Perez 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Suzana Nagele de Campos Abbott 
08/25/2006 
Comments:   
