Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC2882
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P095514 
Project Name:  AR Lifelong Learning Project 
Task Team Leader:  Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (80%);Secondary education (15%);Primary education (5%) 
Theme:  Social analysis and monitoring (P);Education for all (P);Education for the 
knowledge economy (P);Law reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
25.00
25.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed projects aims at supporting the Government of Argentina to consolidate, 
strengthen, and increase the coverage of a lifelong learning and competency-based 
training system for adults 18 years or older with the objectives for those who participate 
of: (i) enhancing employability; and (ii) strengthening career ladder opportunities.  A 
career ladder approach creates ?maps? of job opportunities that are linked to increasingly 
higher levels of education and training within particular occupational fields. Project 
activities are intended to enable these individuals to get jobs and/or open up better career 
paths, thereby enabling them to improve their welfare.  
 
(1) 
300 competency-based norms registered by sector groups  
 
(2) 
150 training institutions certified  
 
(3) 
Participation of 250,000 workers in competency based training courses  
 
(4) 
Certification of 70,000 workers according to labor-based competency norms.  
 
(5) 
Within a year, no less than 25 percent of certified adults obtaining registered 
employment or higher salary  
 
(6) 
Award of 100,000 secondary or primary education certificates to out-of-school 
adults.  
Page  2
(7) 
Within a year, no less than 50 percent of adults receiving basic education 
certificates continuing their training or education, obtaining registered employment or 
higher salary  
 
(8) 
Participation of 145,600 youth in activities combining work experience and 
training; and  
 
(9) 
Within a year, no less than 50 percent of youth participating in activities 
combining work experience and training, either employed, seeking employment, or in 
learning activities  
 
Preliminary designs for impact evaluations of specific interventions (competency-based 
training courses, innovative mechanisms for delivering secondary education, and youth 
education/work experience opportunities) have been developed.   
 
3. Project Description 
The lending instrument proposed is a specific sector investment loan for an estimated 
amount of US$200 million.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
For the second Project component (Expand Coverage and Certification of Basic 
Education Services for Adults), 5 Provinces have been identified as participants (Buenos 
Aires, Cordoba, Mendoza, Tucuman and Santa Fe).  For the third Project component 
(Promote Youth Employment through Employment Services, Education/Training, and 
Work Experience) municipal employment offices exist in 150 locations with a targeted 
expansion to 250.  Work opportunity subprojects might be located in additional 
municipalities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Reidar Kvam (LCSSA) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed Project triggers the World Bank?s Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) 
because some communities of indigenous peoples meeting the criteria in OP.4.10 are 
present in two of the Provinces (Tucuman and Mendoza) that would participate in the 
second Project component (Expand Coverage and Certification of Basic Education 
Services for Adults).  In the case of the third Project component (Promotion of Youth 
Employment through Work Experience and Training) the location of project activities  
will depend on the location of municipal employment offices and of work opportunity 
subprojects.  Some specific municipalities would trigger OP 4.10.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the nature of the Project, no negative impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
After a screening carried out in coordination with the Bank, the Government prepared an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and submitted it for Bank review and 
approval.  This IPPF has been submitted to the Bank Infoshop and published by the 
Borrower in compliance with OP 4.10.  For those Provinces or Municipalities which have 
been, or in the future are, identified as triggering OP 4.10, the Framework Agreements 
that would be signed with the Ministry of Labor in regard to the Project, would include a 
requirement to undertake a social evaluation of the communities of Indigenous 
populations, and where required, prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), in 
accordance with the requirements set out in the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF). The IPP would be an integral part of the Protocols (annual agreements) signed 
between the Province or Municipality and the Ministry of Labor for implementation of 
the Project.  Both the Framework Agreement and the Protocol need to be signed before 
loan funds are advanced to a Province or Municipality and would require the prior no 
objection of the Bank.   If during the course of project implementation, additional 
indigenous communities are identified that meet the criteria established in OP 4.10 (para 
4), the same requirements would apply to the corresponding Provinces or Municipalities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Ministry of Labor presented the Project before the members of the Indigenous 
Participation Council of INAI, and before the communities of Amaicha del Valle and 
Quilmes in the province of Tucuman in order to provide information on its activities, 
promote the participation of Indigenous communities in its implementation, and to 
Page  4
receive suggestions.  During Project implementation, the consultations and collaboration 
between the Ministry of Labor and INAI and the Indigenous Participation Council would 
continue with the aim of improving the efficiency and cultural appropriateness of the 
specific activities of the Project in order to increase the levels of schooling and skills 
within Indigenous communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/04/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
N/A 
Page  5
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
04/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Isabel Tomadin 
04/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
04/10/2007 
Comments:   
