Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/29/2006 
Report No.:  AC2498
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P090993 
Project Name:  AR- Essential Public Health Functions 
Task Team Leader:  Fernando Lavadenz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 4, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 21, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Population and reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
220.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
730.00
730.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are to increase the coverage of ten prioritized Public 
Health Programs; reduce population?s exposure to principal risk factors associated with 
collective illness; and improve the stewardship role and appropriate regulatory 
environment of Nation?s public health system. The Project aims to support Argentina?s 
Federal Health Plan and its objectives to reduce mortality and morbidity associated with 
collective illness.   
 
3. Project Description 
Proposed Essential Public Health Functions and Programs Project  
 
The proposed Essential Public Health Functions and Programs (EPHFP) Project would 
support the second pillar of Argentina?s Health Sector Reform Program outlined above: 
specifically, ten prioritized functions and ten prioritized programs (see Table 2 below). 
The Project?s objective would be to increase the coverage of ten prioritized Public Health 
Programs, reduce the population?s exposure to principal risk factors associated with 
collective illness, and improve the stewardship and appropriate regulatory environment of 
Nation?s public health system.  This would contribute to reducing mortality and 
morbidity in Argentina.  
 
Page  2
Table 2. Essential Public Health Functions and Programs  
 
Essential Public Health Functions 
 
Key Public Health Programs  
 
Monitoring and evaluation 
 
Immunizations  
 
Surveillance / disease control 
 
Tuberculosis  
 
Health promotion 
 
AIDS/STDs  
 
Social participation   
Vector-borne diseases  
 
Regulation 
 
Reproductive health  
 
Policy-making 
 
Life-style related diseases  
 
Equity promotion 
 
Safe blood supply  
 
Human resource development 
 
Emerging infections  
 
Quality assurance 
 
Emergencies and disasters  
 
Public health research 
 
Border Public Health Programs  
 
Emergencies and disasters  
 
The proposed Project would aim to support the identified essential functions and 
essential programs through an integrated approach required by Argentina?s federal 
structure. Component 1 would aim to support the essential public health functions both at 
the national and provincial level.  National and provincial activities would span the full 
range of providing technical assistance and equipment to improve monitoring, 
surveillance, policy formulation etc.  
 
Components 2 and 3 would, jointly, support the delivery of essential public health 
programs.  Component 2 would, at the national level, support the management and 
purchasing of inputs (which are then distributed to the provinces) for the essential 
programs, while component 3 would support the actual delivery of programs by financing 
operating costs at the provincial level.  Under the system supported by this Project, core 
inputs for provincial essential program delivery  (such as vaccines) would be purchased 
at the national level for scale economy reasons under component 2.  Bank disbursement 
would be performance-linked with the pace (and, potentially, amount) of input financing 
depending on the Nation effectively monitoring provincial health supply information 
systems.    
 
The design of component 3 emulates the results-based financing mechanism and 
incentive system that has been introduced through Plan Nacer, which is supported 
through the Bank?s Maternal-Child-Health Investment Adaptable Program Loans (and 
highlighted in the pending new HNP strategy of the Bank ).  Under this component the 
Nation would offer provinces the financing of the operating costs of a specified number 
of activities that are necessary for essential program delivery.  Provinces would provide 
lists of executed activities (e.g. the number of immunizations, number of fumigation 
campaigns) to the Nation for reimbursement, with such lists being regularly checked by 
an external concurrent auditor.  The Nation would then reimburse Provinces according to 
pre-established and cost-efficient prices for such activities.  Annually, ceilings for the 
total amount of such reimbursements would be established, depending on the level of 
program coverage in each province.  From the provincial perspective, such financing 
Page  3
would be very attractive since such activities are currently financed entirely from the 
provincial budgets.  
 
To avoid creating perverse incentives for the provinces, the Nation and the Provinces 
would agree in annual performance agreements on threshold values for four indicators 
(e.g. immunization coverage, key diseases picked up by surveillance coverage) that 
would act as triggers for continued national financing of provincial activities.  Such 
indicator values would be set to guarantee that provinces are indeed expanding program 
coverage ? and not merely substituting national for provincial financing.  If a specific 
indicator of program expansion is not met after two years of program implementation, 
that would trigger a 25 percent reduction in the annual total amount of financing available 
from the Nation for that province?s activities.  Hence, a province that failed to meet all of 
the four indicator targets would not be eligible for further financing under this 
component.  
 
From the national perspective, the financing mechanism of component 3 would support 
several strategic goals.  First, monitoring of provincial activities (and not only inputs sent 
to the province financed by component 2) would significantly improve.  Second, given 
that provinces would send lists of executed activities for reimbursement which would be 
continuously monitored by an external auditor, accountability of provincial program 
delivery would be fostered.  Third, given that provinces would establish specific results 
targets in the annual performance agreements and that financing will be linked to such 
targets, all provinces will have a strong incentive to increase overall essential program 
coverage in Argentina.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be carried out in the 24 Argentina provinces. The GOA assessed the 
potential environmental and human health impacts of EPHFP.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (LCSEO) 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
Indigenous Peoples  
 
Argentina?s population is characterized by ethnic and cultural diversity.  In 2001, at 
least 3 percent of total population was considered to be part of the indigenous population 
of the country, mostly from Kollas, (Quechua, Aymara), Wichi-Matacos, Tobas, 
Chiriguanos, Diaguitas and other native groups. While there is no specific information 
about the coverage of health services to indigenous groups, they are known to be mostly 
uninsured and, often, without access to basic health care.  
 
The proposed project triggers the World Bank?s Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 
4.10) because some communities of indigenous peoples are present in some of the 
Provinces that will participate in it. Prior to appraisal and after a screening carried out in 
coordination with the Bank, the government will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) and submit it for Bank review and approval (the original IPPF will be 
included in the List of Project Documents and a summary in Annex 10 of the PAD). This 
IPPF will be submitted to the Bank Infoshop and published by the Borrower in 
compliance with OP 4.10.  Where relevant, Provinces will carry out specific social 
assessments and consultation processes at the level of participating communities and the 
corresponding Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to become participating Provinces, in 
accordance with the IPPF. As part of the Annual Performance Agreements, all IPPs are 
subject to prior Bank no-objection. Indigenous communities in other Provinces could be 
included in the project if future screening demonstrates that they meet the criteria for 
identification established in OP 4.10 (para. 4).  
 
The government is committed to assisting indigenous peoples and encouraging their 
participation as project beneficiaries through a number of specific actions aiming at 
including and reaching out to this sector of the population. The project will build on the 
experience and preliminary success of the first phase of Plan Nacer in the nine APL-I 
Provinces. The IPPs detailing the individual strategies / activities for addressing the needs 
of the indigenous peoples would be carried each year in any relevant province, as 
indicated by the IPPF would be included as a specific part in the annual performance 
agreements between the National Ministry of Health and the Provinces, formalizing 
agreements to implement project activities especially adapted for their indigenous 
communities. Annual performance agreements continue to focus attention on the specific 
needs of the indigenous peoples by:  
 
(i) 
Considering the results of studies underway financed by MCHIP-APL-I for 
improving health services delivery for these peoples.  
 
Page  5
(ii) 
Considering lessons learned from earlier World Bank projects such as PROMIN, 
VIGIA, and MCHIP-APL-I to effectively target the needs of indigenous peoples.  
 
(iii) 
Utilizing the survey results on indigenous peoples? health and social conditions 
and social indicators by INDEC and MCHIP-APL-I to address the key constraints 
influencing health-seeking behavior and quality of received care.  
 
(iv) 
Financing training of health workers on the special needs of the indigenous 
peoples so they can deliver project services in areas where many of them live.  
 
The government is committed to encouraging the participation of indigenous people as 
beneficiaries of the project through a number of specific actions aiming at integrating and 
reaching out to the indigenous populations, particularly those related to the cultural 
adequacy of public health practices (Chagas disease, Vaccination, ect).  
 
The communication and health promotion community outreach sub component of the 
project at the national and provincial level would include the development and 
implementation of a communication and outreach strategy specially adapted to the 
indigenous population for public health programs. To ensure effectiveness, the 
communications strategy would include specific consideration for cultural sensitivity to 
align the public campaign messages with locally accepted norms for indigenous 
communities. Additionally, communication material would be made available in the main 
indigenous languages such as Aymara, Quechua, Guarani and others as necessary, 
particularly for those programs with clear practices diagnosed.  
 
Environment  
 
The EPHFP project is classified as a Category B (activity where more limited 
environmental analysis is considered appropriate to address specific environmental 
issues)  for two reasons:  
 
First, the project would involve the provision of medical supplies, which triggers 
concerns about healthcare waste management (HCWM).  Second, an Indigenous People's 
Policy Plan would be required under the new policy guidelines effective from July 2005. 
Additionally, the team identified that minor constructions and renovations of health care 
facilities would need an environmental plan. The EPHFP project will not finance 
pesticides.  
 
With regard to incremental HCWM, the project will finance supplies and use of 
commodities that are already being used in the health sector and thus no additional 
categories of health care waste will be generated by the project. The minor construction 
refers to four laboratories and minor renovations that will take place on the same sites as 
existing laboratories as most new facilities are considered to be extensions of current 
facilities. For these civil works appropriate environmental management and monitoring 
plans shall be prepared as depicted in the National Environmental Policy . This will 
ensure that any potential construction and operational phase environmental issues are 
Page  6
identified and appropriate mitigation measures are adopted to minimize or avoid adverse 
impacts.  
 
Health Care Waste Management (HCWM): Argentina has comprehensive National 
legislation in place to guide HCWN practices. Law no. 19. 587 regulates the allowed 
concentrations of contaminants in a laboratory environment. As per the resolution of 
SRNyAH No.413/93 a special unit for Hazardous Waste was established under the 
Ministry of Health and Environment, which was a result of a merger of the National 
Registry for Hazardous Waste and the unit for Management of Hazardous Waste. Several 
assessments have been carried out to evaluate HCWM in Argentina in past years. The last 
one (2004-2005) a full assessment on hospitals on HCWM was made, with the purpose of 
elevating the HCWM management of health facilities in Argentina, to a superior level. 
Twenty representative hospitals from all over the country were selected to participate in a 
specific environmental assessment of HCWM, and to develop and implement HCWM 
plans. The study was conducted by the Environmental Research and Development Unit 
of the Environment and Sustainable Development Secretariat of the MSN (recently this 
Unit has been incorporated in the Environmental National Secretariat under the Chief of 
Cabinet of the GOA). The study succeeded in delivering its specific goals, and as per its 
recommendations, the MSN has further developed an Action Plan to proceed with the 
diagnosis of the HCWM in other health facilities along the country, as well as with the 
accreditation of the identified well performing hospitals, supporting them in becoming 
teaching hospitals of HCWM.  
 
The EPHFP project would support the implementation of this Action Plan with an 
allocated budget of $150,000. The objective is to have a minimum of 10 hospitals 
accredited as reference hospitals and teaching hospitals for HCWM by the end of the 
project, and 50 health facilities certified in all aspects related to HCWM. With the 
purpose of guaranteeing compliance with the Environmental safeguard, the GOA has 
enacted a specific Ministerial Resolution 580/06 (Annex x), through which the ?Research 
and development environmental Unit? was nominated as the guardian of compliance for 
the Action and Implementation plan. Following procedures, the documents to be signed 
between the Sector Manager and the TTL of this operation that certifies the adequate 
surveillance of the Environmental safeguard have been prepared and could be signed 
before QER.  
 
The Operative Manual would contain all process needed to be accomplished regarding 
environmental issues by the Provinces and by the term of references for contracting the 
minor construction of laboratories and minor renovations that will take place over 
existing laboratories, to assure appropriate environmental management and monitoring 
plans.  
 
Potential environmental and human health impacts of the project correspond to: (a) 
Health Care Waste Management (HCWM) and (b) construction and renovations of health 
care facilities and laboratories. EPHF project will not finance pesticides. With regard to 
Page  7
incremental HCWM, the project will finance supply and use of commodities that are 
already being used in the health sector and thus no additional categories of health care 
waste will be generated by the project. The minor construction refers to four laboratories 
and minor renovations. All construction works will take place on the same sites as 
existing laboratories as most new facilities are considered to be extensions. For these civil 
works appropriate environmental management and monitoring plans shall be prepared as 
depicted in the National Environmental Policy. This will ensure that any potential 
construction and operational phase environmental issues are identified and appropriate 
mitigation measures are adopted to minimize or avoid adverse impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long term impacts are not expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The GOA and the Bank have agreed not to finance additional quantities of pesticides 
under the project, in order to minimize the risk in the areas covered by the project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Proposed Actions: (to mitigate environmental issues described above)  
 
Health Care Waste Management: Argentina has comprehensive National legislation in 
place to guide health care waste management practices. National ruling No 24.051 
(17/12/91) categorizes all waste generated in health facilities hazardous with few 
exceptions with regard to waste akin to household garbage and radioactive material 
which are governed under different rulings. This law specifies that all health facilities 
should institutionalize a system for appropriate handling of such waste. Law no. 19.587 
regulates the allowed concentrations of contaminants in a laboratory environment. As per 
the resolution of SRNyAH No.413/93 a special unit for Hazardous waste was established 
under the Ministry of Health and Environment, which was a result of a merger of the 
National Registry for Hazardous Waste and the unit for Management of Hazardous Waste 
under the MOH.  
 
Several assessments have been carried out to evaluate HCWM in Argentina. In 2004, 
the WB initiated a Thematic Review on Environmental Effects of Medical Waste in 
Argentina. The study is yet to be officially published but the analysis classifies Argentina 
as a low risk country for medical waste malpractice. The development and 
implementation of the Argentinean national policy on HCWM has been supported by 
preceding WB projects such as VIGIA and PROMIN II. Furthermore, under PROMIN II, 
following recommendations of the QAG to improve waste management (QAG evaluate 
PROMIN II as highly satisfactory, however that was a minor suggestion of the 
evaluation), PROMIN?s supervision team considered the possibility to take that 
recommendation as a window of opportunity, and realize a full assessment on hospitals 
on HCWM. In that sense, a number of 20 representative hospitals from all the country 
Page  8
were selected to participate in a specific environmental assessment of HCWM, and to 
develop and implement HCWM plans. The study was conducted by the Environmental 
Research and Development Unit of the Environment and Sustainable Development 
Secretariat of the MoH. The study succeeded in delivering its specific goals, which 
included the following assignments (i) assess the current HCWM practices in Argentina 
through the sample of those 20 hospitals, and evaluating the current legal framework and 
its application in health facilities; (ii) develop a diagnostic tool for self-evaluation; (iii) 
define criteria to develop an accreditation system for HCWM reference hospitals; (iv) 
identify the best performing hospitals in order to establish reference centers with some 
additional assistance and (v) analyze the value of the HCWM self diagnostic tool kit as 
an evaluation tool. As per the recommendations of this study, the MoH has further 
developed an Action Plan to proceed with the accreditation of the identified well 
performing hospitals.  
 
The EPHF project will support the implementation of this Action Plan. The objective is 
to have the minimum of 10 hospitals accredited as reference hospitals for HCWM by the 
end of the project, and 50 health facilities certified in all aspects related to HCWM. The 
EPHF project is similar to PROMIN II, and to VIGIA on its area of action. EPHF project 
will continue to support the same hospitals identified by PROMIN II and laboratories 
under VIGIA, and further enhance their capacity to demonstrate high level performance 
in HCWM. A complete detail about the concept of accreditation will be developed in the 
operations manual, and the action plan will be initiated after project effectiveness.  
 
Justification/Rationale for Environmental Category: (presents reasons for environmental 
category selected and explanation of any changes from initial classification, including 
whether any changes relate to alternatives)  
 
The EPHF project is classified as a Category B activity where more limited 
environmental analysis is considered appropriate to address specific environmental 
issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In order to address social issues in an appropriate form, the project is using the results of 
a
broad social assessment carried out at the national level, as well as those of special 
surveys on the health conditions of indigenous peoples in participating Provinces.  
 
In compliance with OP 4.10, an indigenous people screening has been carried out. The 
government prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) prior to 
appraisal   A draft IPPF has been presented to the Indigenous Participation Council (IPC) 
of INAI. The feedback provided by the IPC has been taken into account for a revised 
IPPF which will be submitted for review and no objection by the Bank.  Finally, specific 
social assessments and free, prior and informed consultations will be carried out in the 
relevant screened  Provinces leading to obtain community support, as well as the 
preparation and implementation of the corresponding IPPs.   
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/29/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/29/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  10
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fernando Lavadenz 
09/29/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Isabel Tomadin 
09/28/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas 
09/28/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
09/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
09/29/2006 
Comments:   
