Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/01/2007 
Report No.:  AC2740
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P104984 
Project Name:  Buenos Aires Urban Transport -PTUBA - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Andres G. Pizarro 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 7, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
32.80
32.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The current project?s development objectives are to: (a) support the private-public 
partnership in improving the service quality and coverage of mass transit; (b) support 
infrastructure improvements defined in the concession agreements between the 
Government and the private sector; (c) assist in improving the conditions of traffic safety 
and environmental quality; and (d) help in developing an integrated urban transport (road 
and rail) system in the AMBA.   
 
3. Project Description 
In particular, the PTUBA?s project description in the PAD includes a package of actions 
and investments aimed at the following:  
 
(a) 
finance the rail equipment and infrastructure which are critical for the upgrading 
of public transport services;  
 
(b) 
promote the integration of the transport system by upgrading transfer stations 
among rail lines, building better transfer facilities between rail and road-based transport, 
and generally improving road access to rail stations;  
 
(c) 
improve traffic safety and environmental conditions through the construction of 
grade separations at high-volume crossings, the enhancement of controls at road/rail 
Page  2
grade crossings, the development of a complementary program of road safety actions, and 
the introduction of systematic air pollution monitoring, and  
 
(d) 
strengthen the institutional framework which would ensure the continued 
operation of an economically and environmentally sustainable transport system in the 
metropolitan area.  
 
The works and technical assistance activities under the PTUBA were grouped under five 
components:  
 
(e) 
support of the basic investment program of the Metrovias concession (36% of 
total project costs net of project administration)  
 
(f) 
rehabilitation of subway Line A (31%)  
 
(g) 
integration of the transport system (including transfer centers; improvements of 
rail stations to ease access to buses, pedestrians, bicycles, etc.)   (9%)  
 
(h) 
environmental monitoring and traffic safety program, including road/rail grade 
separations (16%); and  
 
(i) 
strengthening of the institutional framework (8%).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
With the exception of a part of the technical assistance component, the project will be 
implemented in the Greater Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA). Therefore, all 
project related works will take place in consolidated urban areas and no effects are 
expected on natural habitats, resources or fragile zones. Special attention will be given to 
the potential impacts of construction in highly urbanized areas and the potential impacts 
of the project, especially on surrounding communities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSSO) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
During project preparation, an independent consultant was hired to review the rail-road 
crossing financed under the first phase of PTUBA and assess the positive and negative 
environmental and social impacts of the works, the effectiveness of the methodology 
applied to identify and evaluate these impacts, the adequacy of the measures applied to 
mitigate and prevent these impacts, the institutional capacity to monitor environmental 
and social impacts, and the concrete results of public consultation process. The consultant 
visited project sites, interviewed employees of affected municipalities, representatives of 
the project implementation unit, NGOs, local community organizations and inhabitants.  
 
In order to characterized the social and environmental impacts of the additional 
financing project, two additional consultants carried out the assessment of a sample of the 
proposed works of Components A, B and C.  Based on the list of works, two criteria were 
defined to rank the projects according to the potential environmental and social impacts:  
(i) nature of the works (such as painting, urban furniture, elevators, fences, sidewalks, 
road/rail crossings, etc.), and (ii) socioeconomic characteristics of the areas where the 
works will take place (such as number of transport customers, population density and 
percent of poor population). For each component  
 
&#61607; 
Component A: Transport Integration :  Improvement of accessibility to 
suburban railway stations  
 
An assessment of the accessibility improvements to train stations proposed under 
Component A, showed that the specific works can be characterized, in term of social and 
environmental impacts, as follow: (i) 88 sub-projects with minimal or no impacts: low: 
painting, parking, signalization, illumination, urban furniture, bus stops, ramps for 
disabled people, fences, bike parking; (ii) 30 sub-projects minor impacts: sidewalks, 
pathways, drainage improvements; bike paths, road crossings near stations; and, (iii) 16 
88 sub-projects with medium impacts: pedestrian tunnels or bridges, paving.  
 
Based on the ranking above, 10 sub-projects were selected for screening. The final 
review of the screening process confirmed that these works will have no significant 
impacts that cannot be addressed through the measures of the ESMM, will not cause 
involuntary displacement and, more specifically, the Environmental and Social Contract 
Clauses.  
 
&#61607; 
Component B: Traffic Safety: Road/rail crossings  
 
This component is comprised of seven road/rail crossings. The detailed designs are in 
preparation, to date only one project has a full detail design. Two independent consultants 
did the screening of the two priority projects that will be implemented in the first year: (i) 
Ruta Nacional N? 202 in the Municipality of Malvinas Argentinas; and, (ii) Av. San 
Mart?n (Ruta 53) in the Municipality of Florencio Varela  
Page  4
In addition, two other road/rail crossings were selected for screening: (i) Av. 14 de Julio 
-
Avellaneda in the Municipality of Lomas de Zamora; and, (ii) Av. Lisandro de la Torre 
in the Municipality of Tres de Febrero  
 
The consultant visited project sites, interviewed employees of the involved 
municipalities, representatives of the project implementation unit, NGOs and local 
community organizations. The methodology and results were discussed in workshops 
involving municipal staff.  
 
In addition, the Municipality of Florencio Varela prepared a full Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) for the tunnel at the Ruta Nacional N? 202 that was reviewed by the 
consultants and recommendations were compiled with the outcomes of the screening 
form. The EIA also provides specific mitigation and monitoring measures for both 
construction and operation phases and a communication plan.  
 
The assessment included consultations with local population and confirmed that the 
proposed road/rail crossing will not have any irreversible impacts that cannot be 
mitigated through an improved environmental and social management plan and improved 
public consultation process.  
 
&#61607; 
Component C: Metro Line A  
 
This component is comprised of the equipment and installation of eleven elevators in 
Metro Line A stations. The component completes the rehabilitation works initiated under 
the original project. These improvements are likely to have no or minor environmental 
and social impacts. However, due to the historic character of the Metro Line A, specific 
measures will be implemented to ensure that the cultural property is not adversely 
affected by the works under this component.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to have positive environmental impact in the long-run, since it 
aims at improving access and quality of public transport and reducing conflicts between 
rail and motorized traffic, which will reduce congestion and emissions, and improve 
traffic safety.  However, a number of short-term and long-term induced impacts trigger 
OP 4.01.  
 
In general, the civil works under the project will follow the alignments of existing roads 
and right-of-ways in urbanized areas and alternatives will be sought to prevent potential 
impacts, especially to avoid resettlements. The project will incorporate strategies to 
increase safety and incentives to reduce air pollution.  
 
The main direct impacts are expected to occur during construction and cause localized 
negative environmental impacts. Such impacts are expected to consist essentially of 
noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disruption. Additional negative impacts during 
Page  5
construction will occur due to haulage and final disposal of materials. Most of these 
impacts can be mitigated by proper designs and environmental and social manuals that 
have to be followed.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The civil works in the Greater Buenos Aires Metropolitan Region include building grade-
separated road/rail crossings in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area (AMBA). Said 
railroad crossings were selected from a short list of 25 crossings, based on an economic 
and social-environmental assessment. Therefore, the seven crossings selected are 
expected to have the largest benefits and low potential impacts.  
 
The minor accessibility improvements to suburban railway stations and the introduction 
of elevators are not expected to have minimal impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The UEP PTUBA will strengthen its capacity and hire staff to supervise the 
environmental and social aspects of the project. Besides, UEPTUBA will work closely 
with the municipalities to address environmental and social issues during sub-project 
preparation and implementation, and will help strengthen the implementation o 
information programs and provide grievance procedures by these municipalities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the UEP PTUBA, the Municipalities, local NGOs and 
affected population. During project preparation, a number of meetings were organized 
with these stakeholders and a Public Consultation Guide has been prepared to ensure 
close involvement of relevant stakeholders during all sub-project phases (design, 
construction and operation).  It is expected that the guide will allow a more accurate 
identification of possible, negative and positive, effects of the sub-projects, related to the 
population and their activities. It will also allow for improvements in the ESMM for 
prevention, mitigation and compensation of negative impacts and promote community 
participation and ownership.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/06/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/06/2007 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andres G. Pizarro 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
