Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3034 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P101242 
Project Name: Argentina Integrated Water Resources Management 
Task Team Leader: Rita E. Cestti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);Irrigation and 
drainage (40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Biodiversity (P);Other rural development 
(S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist Argentina in strengthening the 
capacity of its federal-level and provincial-level institutions and inter-jurisdictional organizations 
to move forward towards integrated water resources management, in line with the guiding 
principles for water policy, through: (i) formulating participatory basin water resources 
management plans in selected basins, (ii) establishing a national water resources monitoring 
system, (iii) improving water resources management information systems for strategic planning 
and policy making, and (iv) initiating demonstration projects (or leading models with potential 
for replication in other parts of the country) to promote integrated water resources management 
in selected basins.  
 
Key outcome indicators would include:  
 
-
Basin-level, distributed hydrological models (coupled climate, land surface, land cover, 
water) assembled and running to support intra-basin and inter-basin planning.  
Page  2
-
Provincial and inter-provincial water resource management strategies and river basin-level 
management plans in selected provinces and basins developed with wide stakeholder 
participation underpinning investment decisions in the water sector for a planning period of 10 
years.  
 
-
Human and physical capabilities of federal, provincial and inter-jurisdictional water 
institutions to plan, monitor and manage water resources improved.  
 
-
A
financial framework of incentives to promote integrated water resources management 
objectives operational.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
It is proposed the Project is financed by a specific investment loan of about US$100 million 
equivalent, to be disbursed over 5-6 years, and would consist of the following three components:  
 
Component A: Water Resources Monitoring and Information Systems  
 
This component will support the following sub-components:  
 
-
Establishing a comprehensive water resources monitoring system, by developing guidelines 
to harmonize water monitoring across provinces/basins; setting up a national regulatory 
framework for water quality based on the ongoing work on guidelines on water quality (niveles 
guía de calidad de agua ambient); strengthening and upgrading data gathering capabilities of the 
base resource (all sources, surface water, groundwater resources, coastal waters and atmospheric 
interface; and all facets, quantity and quality), data transmission, and transformation of data into 
information to support water resources management decisions; upgrading capabilities of regional 
laboratory for water quality analysis; and strengthening flood forecasting and strengthening 
reporting capabilities. This sub-component will also assist in setting up a management approach 
so as to ensure the long-term sustainability of the monitoring networks, paying special attention 
to their operation, maintenance, budget requirements, and availability of human resources.  
 
-
Improving water resources information systems, by assisting in establishing uniform 
protocols for data gathering, data transmission, data storage, data retrieval and reporting 
capabilities of all the monitoring systems mentioned above. Protocols will include provisions to 
provide quality assurance and quality guaranties across the national territory. This component 
will also assist in setting up an integrated water resources dynamic information framework (DIF) 
that manages climate, land use, water, and related socio-economic data and to provide 
technicians and decision-makers with reliable data and information for water resources 
monitoring and planning and management.  
 
Component B: IWRM Institutional Capacity Building  
 
-
Strengthening planning capacity of federal and provincial level water administrations and 
river basin commissions with delegated planning responsibilities by assisting them in the 
formulation of harmonized provincial water resources management strategies and river basin 
Page  3
management plans aimed achieving sustainable development and use of the resource base.  
Preparation of basic socio-economic/environmental studies and prospective modeling studies 
will also be supported under this sub-component. The planning process would follow a 
participatory approach in dealing with cross-cutting issues and in taking into account the 
ecosystems and socio-economic structures of each basin. The Project will provide financial 
resources to support the mobilization of different actors.  
 
-
Strengthening the institutional framework of participating provinces by supporting the whole 
array of institutional aspects governing water resources management including consolidation of 
legal and regulatory frameworks, building logistical requirements of the water authorities, and 
setting up of basic management instruments (e.g., groundwater register, water use register, and 
water discharge register).  
 
Component C: Demonstration of IWRM Practices  
 
This component will provide financial resources and incentives to Provincial governments in 
priority river basin to address through targeted investments key issues such as soil erosion, low 
efficiency of drinking water supply and irrigation, water pollution, poor control systems, flood 
control/prevention, among others.  While the modalities and procedures will be defined in the 
course of preparation, possible incentives include start-up investment support and co-financing 
grants for the investment costs.  Eligible river basins will be those that are representative of 
major water problems in the country and that have inter-provincial agreements and river basin 
committees/inter-jurisdictional authorities in place. Possible candidates include the five-province 
Sali Dulce Basin, the three-province Desaguadero Basin, and the three-
province Limay, Neuquén 
and Negro Basin.The objective is to support selective investments under the river basin water 
resources management plans (developed under Component B) that demonstrate IWRM good 
practice and allow the development of leading models with potential with replication to other 
parts of the country.  
 
This component may also support the piloting of market-based systems for resulting ecosystem 
services within the context of river basin management (e.g. watershed protection, improved 
water quantity and quality, biodiversity habitat, and carbon storage).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Components A and B activities will be country-wide, while Component C activiites will be 
targeted to key specific basins with inter-provincial agreements and river basin management 
committees (to be selected in the course of Project preparation). Possibe candidates include: the 
basin of the Sali Dulce River, the basin of the Desaguadero River and the basin of the Limay, 
Neuquén and Negro Rivers.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The capacity of the implementing agency(ies) will be assessed during the course of project 
preparation as part of the Environmental and Social Assessment process for the project, and 
capacity-building measures will be built into the project design as necessary in order to ensure 
safeguards compliance.   
 
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jose Maria Ghio (LCSSO) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While the Project is aimed to have an overall highly positive environmental impact by 
enhancing capacity for integrated water resources management and environmentally sound 
investment planning at the basin-wide level, OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the physical 
interventions resulting from implementation of Components A and C (rehabilitation of buildings 
and rehabilitation/refurbishing of water quality laboratory facilities under Component A as well 
as construction/rehabilitation of environmental and water infrastructure under Component C) 
could have negative impacts on the environment.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
A
pre-screening will be undertaken at a later stage to determine whether this OP is triggered 
by the physical investments for demonstration of IWRM under Component C -- e.g., if they will 
bring changes in the protection natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
A
pre-screening will be undertaken at a later stage to determine whether this OP is triggered 
by the physical investments for demonstration of IWRM under Component C -- e.g., if they will 
affect the rights and welfare of people dependent on forests and will bring changes in the 
management, protection and utilization of natural forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
A
pre-screening will be undertaken at a later stage to determine whether this OP is triggered 
by the physical investments for demonstration of IWRM under Component C -- e.g., if they will 
lead to intensification or expansion of agricultural production that uses pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
A
pre-screening will be undertaken at a later stage to determine whether this OP is triggered 
by the physical investments for demonstration of IWRM under Component C -- e.g., if they will 
affect the physical cultural heritage or result in chance finds.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
A
pre-screening will be undertaken at a later stage to determine whether this OP is triggered 
by the physical investments for demonstration of IWRM under Component C -- e.g., if they will 
be sited in areas where indigenous population are present.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
OP/BP 4.12 is triggered because of the possibility of land acquisition for some of the 
physical investments for demonstration of IWRM under Component B.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
OP/BP 4.37 will be triggered because of the possibility that some of the physical investments 
under Component B may rely on existing dams for water supply.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
A
review will be undertaken at a later stage as part of the ESPF to determine whether this OP 
is triggered by the physical invesments for demostration of IWRM under Component B.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  5
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
For the time being, the Project is rated as environmental category B. This rating will be 
confirmed when additional information is available about the type and scope of activities to 
be financed under the IWRM pilot demonstration investments Component, no later than the 
QER meeting.  
 
Since physical investments under Component C will be processed on a rolling basis, it is 
proposed to prepare a tailored Environmental Management (and Social) Process Framework. 
It will include the Resettlement Policy Framework and Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework if they are deemed necessary.  
 
Prior to the start of the appraisal the ESPF will be available in the INFOSHOP and copies 
will be available by the Borrower in appropriate form and language for local public review at 
one or more convenient locations.  
 
It is tentatively planned to require the conduction of strategic environmental assessment 
during the formulation of the river basin management plans in order to further examine 
alternatives and potential impacts of the proposed interventions.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rita E. Cestti 
07/05/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
