Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/14/2006 
Report No.:  AC2462
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P099051 
Project Name:  AR Santa Fe Road Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader:  Tomas S. Serebrisky 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S);Debt management and fiscal sustainability (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
126.70 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
48.51
48.51 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall purpose of the project is to improve transport conditions along a strategic 
road corridor that links the Province of Santa Fe with regional and international markets. 
Adding capacity to National Road 19, a key component of a major bi-oceanic corridor 
that links the PSF and the Center Region with Chile and Brazil will reduce logistics costs, 
facilitate access to major regional consumption and export markets and foster the 
effective economic integration of the Center Region provinces.  
 
The project also aims at providing institutional support to the Province of Santa Fe to 
achieve the following specific objectives: (a) improve road safety by implementing pilot 
interventions capable of providing valuable qualitative and quantitative information to the 
comprehensive road safety action plan elaborated by the Province of Santa Fe in 2005; 
(b) identify transport infrastructure and trade facilitation constraints by setting up a 
system to measure logistics costs in the Province of Santa Fe; (c) reinforce the Province?s 
planning capacity to foster economic growth; (d) strengthen the provincial capacity to 
assess and manage of environmental and social impacts of large civil works; and (e) 
create provincial capacity to monitor and evaluate large infrastructure projects   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1 ? Upgrading of National Road 19 (Estimated cost, including contingencies, 
US$166.6 million of which US$120.94 million would be financed by the Bank Loan). 
This component entails the widening of National Road 19 in the Province of Santa Fe, 
converting it into a four lane road, with two lanes in each direction. A total of 135 km 
will be constructed, linking the towns of Santo Tom? in Santa Fe with National Road 158 
in the Province of C?rdoba. This project will only finance the construction of National 
Road 19 in the Province of Santa Fe (130 km) while the remaining 5 km in the Province 
of Cordoba will be financed by the DNV. The existing carriage way will be used for 
West-East traffic flow while the new lanes will carry East-West traffic. A by-pass to the 
city of San Francisco will be constructed to provide a fast and adequate link between 
National Road 19 and National Road 158, two segments of the bi-oceanic corridor that in 
Argentina connect the gateways of Paso de los Libres in the frontier with Brazil and Paso 
Cristo Redentor in the frontier with Chile.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (Estimated cost US$5.2 million, all Bank-
financed). This component will consist of four subcomponents:  
 
Sub Component 2.1- Road Safety  
 
Sub Component 2.2: Systemic measurement of logistics costs in the PSF  
 
Sub Component 2.3: Strengthening the planning capacity of the PSF to elaborate a new 
strategic development  
 
Sub Component 2.4: Strengthening DPV?s capacity to enhance environmental and 
social management  
 
Sub Component 2.5:Design a capacity building program to incorporate monitoring and 
evaluation analysis in infrastructure projects   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The new road infrastructure will be located alongside the existing alignment requiring 
only the expansion of the right of way and acquisition of additional land. Most of the 
impacts identified will be easily managed through sound engineering design and 
construction practices. The area of the project is heavily developed with extensive and 
intensive cattle ranching and high- value crops such as soy and corn. There are no natural 
habitats or critical natural habitats along the existing or future right of way. However, 
there still remain some patches of native vegetation, especially in river and creek 
crossings that still harbor some native species albeit without any significant biodiversity 
value.  There is no evidence of paleontological or archeological resources along the 
corridor. However, two distinct historic sites are located in the future corridor. There are 
no indigenous peoples in the area of influence of the project.  
 
The project will include three major by-passes, two around rural communities and a 
major one in the city of San Francisco/Frontera. These by-passes will intersect an 
important network of rural and local roads which an important traffic of local goods and 
machinery, especially during harvest time. The restoration of such networks and the 
construction of safe crossing points will be part of the project design. Duplicating the 
right of way could exacerbate road safety hot-spots along the corridor.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASEN) 
Mr Fernando J. Brunstein (LCSFE) 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been assigned a Category B according to OP 4.01.  Most impacts will be 
circumscribed to the right of way and no significant, region-wide or precedent-setting 
impacts are envisioned. Most of the current and future traffic consists of long-distance, 
international trucks and very little incremental local traffic is expected. No major land use 
changes are expected in the region. The existing two-lane road was built over 7 decades 
ago.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No major changes in land use are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Right-of-Way alignment was subject to localized analysis to minimize resettlement.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on in-situ screening exercises, a comprehensive and detailed Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared in accordance with Bank policy.. 
The ESMP evaluates the existing conditions, identifies the potential environmental and 
social issues of concern and proposes adequate mitigation measures for each negative 
impact identified; as well measures for enhancing each identified positive impact. The 
ESMP includes a comprehensive set of programs that will address all major 
Page  4
environmental and social issues identified along the right of way (ROW). Most of the 
programs will be included as part of the engineering design and construction documents.  
 
-
Land acquisition and Resettlement Plan: This plan was prepare for acquisition of 
633.36 hectares required for the expansion of the road. These hectares are located in 210 
properties along of the road, which will be partial affected. Only 20 houses (6 with 
business), 6 businesses and one school will be physically displaced.  Given that most of 
these properties will be affected partially, 18 of the 26 houses and business will be 
relocated into the same property.  This situation is also likely in 5 additional cases.  The 
Plan is comprised by the following programs: (i) Information and communication, (ii) 
land acquisition and compensation, (iii) effectiveness of former expropriations, (iv) 
assistance for socioeconomic restoration, (v) assistance for partial affected properties, (vi) 
relocation of school General San Martin, and (vii) grievance mechanisms.  
 
-
Landscaping and Re-vegetation Program: this major environmental enhancement 
program will include reforestation and re-vegetation of ROWs including separators, with 
native species, restoration and augmentation of existing native-forest patches, and the 
construction of rest and recreation areas along the ROW.  
 
-
Community Road Safety: complementing the engineering road safety design (bus 
stops, special crossings), this program will implement road safety education in 
communities along the ROW.  
 
-
Restoration of Rural Road Network: includes the construction of special 
crossings, returns, and  feeder roads to allow connectivity of the existing rural road 
network  
 
-
Improvement in Urban Segment of Santo Tome: potentially perhaps the most 
challenging segment of the project, this heavily urbanized segment will be subject to a 
special urban restoration program including specific designs for boulevards, bicycle 
paths, parking spaces and traffic management measures.  
 
-
Urban Restoration in By-passed Towns: road segments that will be abandoned 
because of the construction of by-passes will be reconstructed as urban boulevards, with 
special archways at the entrance points, reforestation, illumination, and special signs that 
will direct traffic to use businesses and facilities in those towns.  
 
-
Environmental Management of Construction : In order to adequately control 
impacts during construction, a rigorous environmental set of good environmental 
practices will be applied in the project. These specifications are based on the existing 
Environmental Specifications for Road Construction designed by the Federal Road 
Agency (DNV) under road programs financed by the Bank. In addition to these 
specifications site specific guidelines and restrictions have also been incorporated such as 
prohibitions for construction camp and asphalt location in or near sensitive watercourses, 
demarcation of trees and patches of vegetation that need to be protected during 
construction, special traffic restrictions during harvest time, etc. Chance finding 
procedures for archaeological and paleontological artifacts are part of these 
specifications. All critical points along the ROW (either environmentally or socially) 
have been identified and applicable preventive and corrective actions were produced. 
Compliance of environmental specifications during construction will be part of the 
engineering supervision and will be monitored by the Environmental unit of the 
Provincial Road Agency.  
Page  5
The above programs will be complemented by"  
 
Institutional Strengthening in Provincial Road Agency: the environmental management 
capacity of the existing Environmental unit if the Provincial Road Agency will be 
improved in order to increase monitoring and supervision of this project.  
 
Social Communication Program: a social communication and public participation 
program will be implemented during project construction, and  Project Information 
Centers will be installed in key locations.  
 
All programs included in the RESMP have been designed to great detail, including 
associated costs, responsibilities and schedule. Project bidding documents will include all 
specifications regarding these programs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  6
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tomas S. Serebrisky 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
