Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2452 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/23/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P094207 
Project Name: Geothermal Energy Preparation Project (GeoFund 2) 
Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access 
to urban services and housing (P);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.20 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.32
0.32 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to confirm the geothermal resource size and 
production capacity of the Jermakhpyur area, and to determine its attractiveness for further 
development by private investors. The purpose of the GeoFund is to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by promoting the use of geothermal energy in the ECA region. In the case of the 
Armenia project, this global objective will be achieved through mitigating investment risk by 
facilitating upstream technical and economic evaluation of geothermal resources in the 
Jermakhpyur area.  
 
The major barrier to the exploitation of geothermal energy is the high financial risk in 
comparison to the use of not only natural gas but also to most other forms of renewable energy. 
Accurate assessment of the quantity and quality of the geothermal resource requires considerable 
up-front capital investment in exploratory drilling and well tests. The risks involved tend to 
dampen investors' enthusiasm for geothermal projects.  
 
Page  2
The project will achieve its objective by financially supporting initial drilling and TA to 
confirm the geothermal resource size and production capacity thus lowering the project risks and 
reducing project development costs, and therefore facilitating subsequent private sector 
involvement. The benefits from the Geothermal Energy Preparation Project will be a better 
understanding of the technical and economic potential and likely use of the geothermal resource. 
If findings about the resource base are positive, an additional benefit would be an increased 
willingness on the part of the private sector to invest in geothermal power generation in Armenia. 
Even though beyond the scope of this project, if development of the Jermakhpyur site does take 
place, Armenia would achieve greater diversification of electricity generation and improved 
energy security, and the global community would achieve a reduction in greenhouse gas 
emissions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Geothermal Energy Preparation Project will provide financial assistance to assess the 
availability of geothermal resources in the Jermakhpyur area using the following financing 
instruments of the GeoFund:  
 
A. Investment funding window (indicative amount: US$3.5 million, of which US$3.0 million 
from GeoFund and US$0.5 million from the Government)  
 
The GeoFund will fund in the form of a contingent grant the investments for one to two 
exploratory wells with the estimated length of 3 km. The outcome of this component would be a 
decision on the likelihood and scope of a further development of the geothermal field based on 
the achieved testing results. If the testing results confirm positive geothermal data (high enough 
temperature for geothermal energy production, flow rate, salinity, etc.) the technical assistance 
component will provide support for the further development of the potential geothermal power 
plant.  
 
B. Technical assistance window to remove barriers (indicative amount US$240,000, of which 
US$200,000 from the GeoFund and US$40,000 from the Government).  
 
This component will support (a) the packaging of the project; provide (b) TA to the Public 
Services Regulatory Commission (PSRC) to assist in establishing of licensing procedures and 
tariff setting for geothermal energy and to (c) potential investors for project preparation 
activities, such as feasibility studies, preliminary designs, and business plans.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project site is in the Jermakhpyur region in SE Armenia, located in the South-Eastern 
regions of the Syunik plateau of the Qarabagyaylasi Mountain range about 15 km ESE of the 
township of Jermuk, which is characterized by quaternary volcanism with multiple warm and hot 
sources. The topography is characterized by gentle, rolling hills with moderate slope angles (up 
to 20 degrees) and frequent, wide plateaus. The coordinates of the proposed drilling site are N 
39o46'30.5'' and E 045o55'40.6'' and it is located about 2-3 km from the Azerbaijani border.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The project will be implemented by the Renewable Energy Fund (R2E2 Fund) which is the 
implementing agency of the World Bank/GEF-Armenian Renewable Energy Project and the WB 
Urban Heating Project as well for another renewable energy project. It has a staff consisting of 
administrative, legal, procurement, financial, economic and technical specialists. To address 
environmental and social safeguards in project design and implementation the R2E2 Fund is 
hiring an environmental specialist.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
Ms Heike Lingertat (ECSIE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has an overall (global) positive environmental impact (Reduction of GHG). The 
investment of the project (drilling) and the investment beyond this project (geothermal power 
plant) will have limited environmental impact that will be mitigated by an EA/EMP.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
According to informal information during the site visit the land is community owned and 
only used for grazing and hey making. Final decision on categorization can only be made after 
conclusive information on land ownership and land use is provided by the Armenian authorities.  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
A
transboundaty impact of the project may be negligible since the geothermal reservoir is 
limited in size, shifting away from the border with Azerbaijan, with increasing depth, and seems 
to terminate before the border by a complex of high resistivity. A final decision on this issue will 
be made after additional information has been received and reviewed.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The establishment of a general EA of the project side and an EMP as well as local public 
disclosure of these documents is expected by the end of 2006. The EA/EMP will focus on the 
phase of the exploratory drilling works and give some generic outlook towards the potential 
geothermal power plant.  The EA/EMP for the exploratory drilling phase is expected to take 
about 8 weeks an will be carried out by the R2E2 Fund.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Helmut Schreiber 
09/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
10/12/2006 
Comments:  Cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
10/16/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
