Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2655 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P104467 
Project Name: Health Systems Modernization Supplement 
Task Team Leader: Enis Baris 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (90%);Tertiary education (10%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Education for the knowledge economy 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
22.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.75 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
3.75 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective remains the same as in the existing Health System Modernization Project 
(HSMP): to improve the organization of the healthcare system to provide more accessible, 
quality and sustainable health care services to the population, in particular to the most vulnerable 
groups; and to better manage public health threats". HSMP Phase I objective was "to expand 
access to quality primary health care; improve the quality and efficiency of selected hospital 
networks; and lay ground work for effective health sector policy making and monitoring." The 
project supports: (i) scaling up of family medicine based primary health care reform; (ii) 
optimization and modernization of selected hospital networks; and (iii) strengthening of the 
Government capacity to develop and monitor effective health sector policies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional financing would scale up the Bank's ongoing assistance to: (i) family 
medicine-based primary health care reform by increasing the number of formally trained family 
practitioners and nurses and upgrading rural PHC facilities; (ii) implementing the optimization 
Page  2
plan through the establishment of health facilities network in the remaining eight marzes and 
investing in their infrastructure and modernizing medical equipment platform subsequent to the 
mapping exercise; and (iii) continuing to build capacity in human resources development through 
investment in formal medical education, taking stock of the investment made in training in 
family medicine at the State Medical University and through strengthening State Health 
Agency's institutional capacity for price setting and quality control as a purchaser of services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
PHC centers and hospitals in all ten marzes.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
All measures outlined in the EMP are being implemented under existing project and their 
implementation will be continued with due diligence under the additional financing project. One 
staff member in the HPIU combines responsibilities of civil works engineer and environmental 
specialist.  He received training in environmental issues from international experts ("Conseil 
Sante" and "Euro Health Group") and is responsible for coordination and supervision of the 
environmental work undertaken in the project.  He coordinates environmental training for staff, 
designers and local contractors; coordinates environmental reviews of micro-projects; and  
conducts periodic site visits to review progress. The HPIU staff and local contractors received 
short-term environmental training conducted by the environmental management specialist and 
international expert from the "Euro Health Group".  The training was organized through several 
two-day seminars on environmental awareness, specific environmental aspects related to design 
and implementation of small-scale projects for the upgrading of health infrastructure, case 
studies of environmental issues experienced in similar projects, use of environmental guidelines, 
implementation of mitigation measures and the use of specific procedures in the event 
unrecorded archaeological sites are uncovered during the construction activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An updated EMP has been prepared and disclosed. There will not be any change in the 
environmental category, rated "B". As such, the existing Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) in Annex 10 of the PAD remains valid, albeit subject to amendment to new sites. To date, 
compliance with the EMP has been satisfactory. Therefore, site-specific environmental screening 
for all project-supported rehabilitation of PHC centers and hospitals will be carried out as per the 
EMP.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/22/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since this is an additional financing operation as per OP 13.20, there will not be a full PAD, 
but rather a Project Paper in which reference to the currently applicable safaguard issues such 
as the updating of the existing EMP to cover the new sites will be made.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Enis Baris 
12/19/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/20/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
