Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2007 
Report No.:  AC2819
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P105171 
Project Name:  Irrigation Development Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Giuseppe Fantozzi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
0.85
0.85 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary objective of the project is to help complete the task initiated under IDP: to 
enhance the profitability of irrigated agriculture through a set of institutional reforms and 
incentives tailored to motivate water users to participate in the management of the 
irrigation system. The PDO for the additional financing is the same but the project will 
focus on rehabilitation of the tertiary level irrigation schemes as a means to: (i) reduce 
water losses; (ii) save energy costs; (iii) involve water users in the management of the 
irrigation system through direct participation - co-financing of rehabilitation works 
(15%).   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will include a two-year program for improving the state of tertiary level 
irrigation systems transferred for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) to Water Users 
Associations (WUAs). The project consists of two components:  
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation of tertiary canals. The need for rehabilitation works of 
tertiary canals remains high, highlighted by the fact that the demand for financing these 
types of interventions exceeds the amounts available under the IDP project. The State 
Committee for Water Management (SCWM) currently has received an additional sixty 
Page  2
two proposals for rehabilitation works of tertiaries from WUAs that can not be satisfied 
due to lack of funds under the original project. The total estimated amount needed for 
funding these proposals is about US$ 10.0 million. Nevertheless, the additional $5 
million would enable the IDP project to complete proposals with the highest priority 
selected on the basis of the following criteria:  (i) the extent of projected water savings; 
(ii) providing priority to canals receiving water from pumping stations and/or tubewells, 
(energy saving); (iii) availability of WUAs counterpart funds indicating local 
commitment; and (iv) results of the economic analysis of the proposed investment.  
 
Component 2: Project Management. This component will provide funds for: (i) 
technical assistance for PIU to co-ordinate all project interventions, and to provide the 
support services necessary for timely and effective project implementation (procurement 
of goods and services, financial control, monitoring of project activities, preparation of 
annual work plans, and reporting on the status of project implementation and audit), and 
(ii) incremental operating costs of PIU activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The tertiaries to be rehabilitated under the project are located in different parts of the 
country. None of them is located within an environmentally sensitive areas or within the 
territories of protected areas. The proposed works are of rehabilitation nature only and 
will cover 125 km of existing tertiary level canals that can provide irrigation water for 
more than 11,000 hectares of irrigated lands.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Considering the rehabilitation nature of the project and the type of works to be carried, 
the negative impacts on the environment are expected to be minor.  The impact will be 
limited to:  
 
(i)  
The transport and disposal of inert materials and construction concrete rubbles 
and debris; and  
 
(ii) 
The use and transport of materials (stone, gravel, soil, etc) from old and/or new 
quarries.  
 
The positive impacts are, on the other hand, expected to be significant.  After 
completion of the project, about 125 km of tertiary canals will be rehabilitated providing 
irrigation water to more than 11,000 hecatres. The water losses in rehabilitated tertiaries 
will be reduced substantially, the energy usage will decrease by about 2 mln KWt, which 
in its turn would lead to reliable delivery of demanded water and reduction of its prime 
cost. O&M costs on rehabilitated tertiaries will also go down and they would be be better 
managed and sustained.  
 
The additional financing project has been proposed as environmental assessment 
category "B" and triggers the Bank policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment.  
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for IDP was prepared, disclosed and 
consultations took place. Environmental Assessment of the original Project has been 
closely monitored throughout the Project life, implementation EMP was reflected in the 
progress reports and the safeguard has always been rated satisfactory. The proposed 
activities will rehabilitate and improve existing irrigation infrastructure, thus they will not 
have significant environmental impact typically associated with large systems 
reconstruction and construction, such as dams, major installations, etc. All civil works 
contracts envisaged under the project will conform to the requirements under this plan. 
Necessary permits from the Ministry of Nature Protection (MNP) and as needed from the 
local/regional authorities for all transport, disposal, and dumping operations will be part 
of the contracts. Restoration to quasi-original conditions of landscape after completion of 
construction and rehabilitation works and minimization of air pollution emissions during 
the works will be also part of the contracts. The Water Supply Agency and the PIU will 
be responsible for supervising that the EMP is properly and timely implemented. Thus it 
is expected to have minor, short-term and mostly localized environmental impacts.  
 
The existing EMP will continue to be applied. EMP describes the potential negative and 
positive impacts, relevant mitigation measures as well as key responsible organizations. 
Subject to EMP full implementation the positive socio-economic impacts of the proposed 
project are anticipated to outweigh environmental risks associated with its 
implementation. The proposed additional financing will not raise the environmental 
category of the project nor trigger any new safeguards. All civil works contracts 
envisaged under the project will conform to the requirements under this plan. Necessary 
Page  4
permits from the Ministry of Nature Protection (MNP) and as needed from the 
local/regional authorities for all transport, disposal, and dumping operations will be part 
of the contracts. Restoration to quasi-original conditions of landscape after completion of 
construction and rehabilitation works and minimization of air pollution emissions during 
the works will be also part of the contracts. The PIU and respective WUA will be 
responsible for supervising that the EMP is properly and timely implemented.  
 
The project is not a category A (as the predecessor IDP) and will maintain the same 
arrangements agreed for IDP (which was a category B) namely: (i) the rehabilitated part 
of the tertiary system would not require an increase of intake from any water source; (ii) 
the rehabilitated part of the tertiary system will continue using the same water intake as 
before rehabilitation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant indirect or long-term environmental impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Plan was developed for the original Project and 
disclosed. It specifies roles and responsibilities for implementation and enforcement. 
Mitigation measures are related mostly to safe transportation and disposal of construction 
materials and waste and debris, landscaping (restoring to original conditions) of 
construction site. The EMP also mentions obtaining in time from Ministry of Nature 
Protection and other responsible agencies permits for opening and use of quarries, and for 
disposal of excavated materials and constructions wastes.  
 
The same institutions and agencies implementing IDP will be responsible for IDSP II as 
well.  The Borrower's institutional capacity is demonstrated by the satisfactory 
implementation of the ongoing operations (IDP, as well as Dam Safety Project and 
Irrigation Dam Safety Project 2).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Communities, Water User Associations representing water using farmers, as well as 
Water Supply Agency under the State Water Committee are the major stakeholders of the 
project. Each of them has a specific role and responsibility in the project. Under IDP a 
training program has being  implemented for WSA staff which also incorporates elements 
of safeguard issues. Before starting construction works at project sites public awareness 
meetings will be conducted with population of communities. In addition, the EMP was 
advertised in national newspapers and made available to beneficiaries and NGOs.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/02/1999 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/02/1999 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2000 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giuseppe Fantozzi 
03/09/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
03/09/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/09/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustacius N. Betubiza 
05/04/2007 
Comments:  (Acting Sector Manager -- Acting for Juergen Voegele). 
Cleared for Juergen Voegele 
