                                                                                                                                                                                                     43726


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 02/12/2007                                     Report No.: AC2717
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Armenia                               Project ID: P099630
                                                                                                            Project Name: Judicial Reform Project 2
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: David S. Bernstein
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30,          Estimated Board Date: March 8, 2007
                                                                                                            2007
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: ECSPE                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                           Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Law and justice (100%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (P);Legal institutions for a
                                                                                                            market economy (P);Law reform (S);Personal and property rights (S)

                                              Public                                                        IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):             22.50
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 7.19
                                                    Authorized                                                      JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants                           3.00
                                                                                                                                                                                      10.19
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                          Simple []            Repeater [X]
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)          Yes [ ]     No [X]

                                                                        Public                              2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The primary development objectives of Second Judicial Reform Project are to: (1)
                                                                                                            provide Armenia's judiciary with the administration, facilities and expanded capacity
                                                                                                            necessary to improve the efficiency, reliability and transparency of judicial operations
                                                                                                            and services; and (2) continue to improve awareness of judicial services and access to
                                                                                                            legal and judicial information. This project will support the Armenian judiciary in
                                                                                                            implementing a second stage of judicial reforms launched by passage of Constitutional
                                                                              Authorized                    amendments and the introduction of a new Judicial Code. Achievement of the Project
                                                                                                            Development Objectives will be measured by performance indicators, including
                                                                                                            Government and judicial operational statistics supplemented by: (i) measures of court
                                                                                                            performance and user perceptions (BEEPS); (ii) expert assessments of judicial
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            qualifications and training (American Bar Association's CEELI Judicial Reform Index);
                                                                                                            and (iii) project funded monitoring and evaluation efforts (court users survey and NGO
                                                                                                  Public    court monitoring).

3. Project Description
The Project has six components aimed at strengthening judicial governance and court
administration, modernization of judicial technical and physical infrastucture, building
capacity in judicial staff, improving enforcement of judicial decisions, and deepening
public awareness and understanding of the court system and their legal rights.

 This first component aims to strengthen judicial governance and administration by
building the capacity of new or reformed institutions under the amended Constitution and
the proposed Judicial Code. This will be accomplished by providing technical assistance
and equipment to the new Council of Justice and Judicial Department, rolling out the new
case management system and audio recording systems to all rehabilitated courts, and
creating a new judicial database and portal to help implement the new system of legal
precedence in Armenia.

 Under the amended Constitution, judicial independence will be strengthened through the
reorganization of the Council of Justice which will be responsible for developing a list of
judicial candidates (for Presidential appointment), evaluating judges for career
advancement, nominating court chairmen, and disciplining judges. Following the
adoption of the Judicial Code and the formation of the new Council of Justice, the JRP2
will provide the CoJ and its Judicial Department staff with

 (a) technical assistance and training in order to:
 - design operating procedures and prepare rules and process for CoJ operations;
 - design and implement transparent procedures for the development of judicial
candidate and promotion lists;
 - develop standard judicial evaluation criteria and processes; and
 - implement standard, transparent rules and process that provide due process for the
disciplining of judges; and
 (b) goods and furniture necessary for the operation of the CoJ.

 On July 7, 2006, the Law on the Judicial Service was adopted, collecting all the staff of
Armenia's court into a formal "judicial service" to parallel the executive branch civil
service. The judicial service is led by a centrally organized administrative staff that
forms a Judicial Department located in Yerevan. As a new institution with new staff and
broad responsibilities, the Judicial Department will need to build capacity as quickly as
possible. Therefore, under this subcomponent JRP2 will provide:
 (a) consulting services and training to allow the Judicial Department to effectively carry
out the following functions:
 - Budget, financial management and auditing;
 - Collection and analysis of statistical data and development of performance indicators;
 - Human resource management;
 - Management of judicial facilities and infrastructure;
 - Maintenance and strategic use of IT systems; and
 - Other general administrative matters agreed with the Chief Justice and Head of the
Judicial Department.

 (b) consulting services technical assistance and training to support the establishment of
new judicial security service;
 (c) a review of Armenia's judicial archive policy and procedures, development of a list
of recommendations for modernizing the archival process, and equipment and software
for implementing these recommendations.

 Under JRP1, case management software, the Court Automation and Skills Transfer
(CAST) system, has been developed and piloted in seven of the rehabilitated courthouses.
JRP2 funding will be used to roll out the CAST system to as many of the courthouses that
are rehabilitated or constructed under JRP2 as possible, including those courthouses
reconstructed using judicial budget funds (see Component 2 below). JRP2 funding will
allow for the scaling up of the benefits of increased transparency in courtroom
proceedings and accuracy in court records that were found by the introduction of digital
court recording systems under JRP1. With the passage of the Constitutional amendments
and the proposed Judicial Code, other judicial institutions such as the Judicial
Department and the Constitutional Court will have need for new or upgraded IT systems
and equipment in order to fulfill their new and expanded roles. Specifically this
subcomponent will provide financing to:

 - Purchase hardware necessary to run the CAST system, including workstations,
servers, monitors, printers and LANs in for all new or rehabilitated courthouses;
 - Provide technical assistance and training necessary to support the roll out and train
judges and judicial servants on the use of the CAST system;
 - Purchase court recording systems for each renovated or newly constructed courtroom;
 - Provide IT hardware and equipment for the effective functioning of the Judicial
Department;
 - Upgrade and expand the Constitutional Court's IT systems;
 - Provide upgraded IT systems to parts of the Ministry of Justice.

 In addition to expanding the judicial automation begun under JRP1, JRP2 will provide
support for the implementation of system of precedent provided for in the Constitutional
amendments and the proposed Judicial Code. Precedent is the legal principle of using a
decision in a prior case decided by a higher court to help determine the outcome in a
present case. To work effectively in Armenia, judges must have access to prior decisions
handed down from the Appeals Courts, Cassation Court and First Instance Courts
through the creation of a judicial database and a system to access this database through
the development of a judicial portal. The Judicial Department has begun the initial
development of the judicial database and portal (separate from the CAST system) through
its own budget and possible funding from UNDP to develop the portal interface. JRP2
will build on this initial work by providing funding for:

 - Technical assistance and consulting services to further develop and implement a
database of judicial decisions, orders and rules;
 - Technical assistance for the integration of the judicial database and portal with CAST,
including the provision of public access to parts of the database;
 - Training for the use and maintenance of the judicial database and portal;

 - IT systems needed to create a network (WAN) that connects courts to the judicial
database and the Judicial Department.

 JRP2 funding could also be used to cover initial Internet access costs should this be
necessary to connect courts to the judicial database and portal. However, this JRP2
assistance would be limited to the early years of the Project based on an agreed phase-in
of judicial budget to cover Internet access costs.

 The second component focuses on rehabilitation of court houses aimed at expanding this
ongoing program to the regions as well as creating a new complex for the Cassation
Court in Yerevan which will also house the new Judicial Department. The authorities
began a process of rebuilding, rehabilitating and upgrading Armenia's court
infrastructure, with support from the World Bank and others, in 2000. Focusing on the
largest Armenian courts, they successfully completed 11 courthouse buildings housing 14
courts in 2006. However, many of the remaining regional first instance court buildings
are in poor condition, lack sufficient space and security and sometimes share space
unfavorably with police, prosecutorial and other functions. While improvements have
been made in the Cassation Court building to address the most egregious problems
(leaking roof, no security system), the existing building and location are not sufficient to
meet the needs of a modern cassation court and the new administrative staff of the
Judicial Department. This program will allow the judiciary to implement its plan of
expanding its capacity to respond to a rapidly rising demand for judicial services. The
judiciary and Ministry of Justice have agreed on a revised "judicial map" and a priority
list of courts based on analysis of caseloads, number of judges and projected growth in
caseload across the country. Based on this prioritization, JRP2 funding under this
component will support:
 - Construction of a new building or buildings in central Yerevan to house the Cassation
Court and new Judicial Department.
 - Construction or reconstruction of regional first instance courthouses to accommodate
expected growth in judges and caseload based on the priority list above.
 - Updating and elaboration of space planning and design standards in accordance with
best international practice.
 - Technical assistance for the design and supervision of all construction works.
 - Furniture, equipment and other goods (excluding IT systems) for courts, courtrooms,
judges, judicial servants and public areas.

 The third component will provide technical assistance to upgrade the existing Judical
Training Centre into the new Judicial Training School proposed under the Judicial Code.
The JTS will provide mandatory training for judicial candidates and continuing education
for judges and judicial servants. Project support will be used to renovate and furnish the
new premises and develop training curricula and materials for judges and judicial staff.

 The fourth component aims to strengthen enforcement of judicial decisions by providing
assistance to the Enforcement Service Department of the Ministry of Justice to (i)
complete the rollout of enforcement management system software started under a the first
Judicial Reform Project; (ii) enhance the software and integrate with an existing

electronic auction system; (iii) train staff on the system and other enforcement issues.
The project will also support a feasibility study on the introduction of private
enforcement agents or private bailiffs into Armenia. Pending the outcome and review of
the study by the Government and judiciary, JRP2 funds could also be used to develop a
limited pilot program for private bailiffs for selected cases and/or in selected parts of
Armenia.

 The fifth component aims at strengthening Armenia's system for arbitration and
mediation. Under existing law, a few "mediation courts" (actually providing arbitral
services) are operating, sponsored by individual organizations such as the Young
Lawyers Association. However, commercial enterprises and individuals do not have an
effective formal alternative to the court system to resolve disputes. A new Arbitration
Law was recently enacted and USAID's commercial law reform project is providing
some assistance with training local arbitrators. However, the Armenian Government
believes that the establishment of an internationally recognized arbitration system
requires arbitrators with international standing. JRP2 funding, in coordination with these
ongoing efforts, will provide technical assistance to support (i) drafting assistance to
develop a comprehensive legislative and regulatory framework supporting arbitration
based on implementation of new and existing legislation; and (ii) international arbitration
training and accreditation for competitively selected candidates conditioned on agreement
to provide arbitral services and training in Armenia.

 The sixth component aims to expand access to legal information and public awareness
in Armenia by (i) further developing the Armenian Legal Information System (ARLIS);
(ii) building on the success of raising public awareness of legal rights and the role of the
judicial system through the "My Rights" television program funded by JRP1; and (iii)
supporting the involvement of NGOs and civil society in monitoring and evaluating the
implementation and outcomes of judicial reform in Armenia.

 Through ARLIS, Armenians have free Internet-based access to a database of Armenian
legislation and Government decisions. The project will provide support for: (i) the
enhancement of ARLIS software based on a review of present functionality and "back-
office" processing in the Official Bulletin; (ii) additional IT hardware needed to maintain
ARLIS's expanding content and increased usage; and (iii) dedicated ARLIS terminals or
kiosks for public access, placed in courts, other state agencies with high public access
and/or regional or community centers.

 Toward strengthen public interface and outreach of the judiciary, JRP2 will provide (i)
technical assistance and training to improve the service orientation of chancellery staff;
(ii) support for the production of public information bulletins and pamphlets on specific
legal issues (i.e., gender rights, criminal rights) and the impact of ongoing judicial
reforms; (iv) public relations training for staff in the Judicial Department and courts,
judges and journalists; and (v) support for the drafting of expert commentary on key
Armenian laws, court decisions and other important legal issues for use by judges,
lawyers and the public.

 Toward building public awareness;, the project support an expansion and broadening of
the use of television to provide information on the progress and effects of judicial reforms
and real-life examples of judicial enforcement of legal rights, including future
productions of "My Rights" television program moving beyond the civil case examples to
include family, gender rights and criminal law issues; and periodic media and donor
briefings, information campaigns and targeted training seminars (for lawyers and law
students) designed to raise public awareness of reforms and improvements in Armenia's
judicial and court performance and improve reform implementation.

 To strengthen monitoring and evaluation of Armenia's judicial reform progress, the
project will support (i) periodic public and court user surveys to monitor perceptions of
the judicial reform efforts and JRP2 implementation; and not least (ii) court monitoring
activities by non-governmental organizations such as Yerevan State University Law
Faculty, the Armenia Young Lawyers Association or others to assess the impact of
automation, training, technical assistance on judicial services, judicial performance and
court efficiency.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented at the national level. Courthouse rehabilitation and
renovation component is going to include rehabilitation within courthouses and some
reconstruction of court buildings. The Chief Justice and Ministry of Justice have agreed
on the priorities for the reconstruction and new construction of courthouses under JRP2
and the judicial budget based on court location, condition of existing building, and ease
of administration and implementation. Based on this prioritization, courthouse
rehabilitation is to include construction of 14 new courthouses in several urban centers all
over Armenia (Spitak, Stepanavan, Meghry, Goris, Sisisan, Yeghegnadzor, Masis,
Tashir, Maralik, Dilijan, Berd, Ijevan, Sevan, Charencavan) and rehabilitation and
expansion of existing courthouses at 8 existing facilities on state-owned land in the
following urban centers: (Kapan, Vayk, Vedy, Aparan, Gavar, Martuny and Armavir) as
well as rehabilitation of Erebuni and Nubarashen First Instance Courthouse located in
Yerevan. In addition, a combined building complex will be developed in downtown of
Yerevan to host the Cassation Court and Judicial Department. In addition, under
Component 3, the former vocational school building provided to host Training School for
Judges and Ministry of Justice's Training Center in Yerevan will be renovated. The
remaining activities will be mostly undertaken in Yerevan.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Eric N. Peterson (ECSIE)
   Ms Martha Jarosewich-Holder (ECSSD)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Courthouse Rehabilitation (Components 2) and Judicial Training School (Component 3)
are expected to have minor environmental impacts during renovation or construction of
judicial facilities (courthouses, Judicial Department building and building designated for
Training School for Judges). There are no environmental issues associated with the
remaining components.

 All sites that will be provided for new construction or expansion of existing courts will
be owned by the government and no resettlement or change in use of land will occur as a
result of the project.

 The design of constructions and renovations for new constructions and existing court
facilities will include consideration of cultural heritage value of the buildings selected for
rehabilitation or reconstruction, and will take social, cultural and historical value into
account in the design of construction or rehabilitation works.

 The short-term negative environmental impacts, which inevitably occur during
construction or rehabilitation works, will be minimized by proper planning and
application of preventive measures, and will be mitigated by restorative actions after the
civil works are completed. The main environmental risks include:
 - Dust raised from the roads in the construction sites and from material carrying trucks
 - Waste water from construction/renovation sites
 - Disposal of solid wastes
 - Use or removal of materials that may damage health (i.e. heavy-metal (lead)
containing paints, asbestos-cement tiles, pipes, copper pipes, inflammable and toxic
materials etc.)
 - Disposal of construction debris
 - Quarries
 - Construction site protection activities
 - Protection of habitats

 - Restoration of lands damaged by excavation
 - Noise generated by the construction machinery
 - Traffic Disruption
 - Minor air pollution due to heating
 - Solid wastes disposal
 - Waste water disposal

 Use of construction materials, which are hazardous to human health (e.g., asbestos), will
not be permitted, consistent with Armenian regulations.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project are
expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared by the Borrower which
includes: (i) descriptions of potential environmental impacts; mitigation and monitoring
plans to ensure appropriate attention to environmental and social safeguards issues. The
potential environmental issues that trigger the Environmental Assessment safeguard
policy relate to common risks identified with construction works and are summarized in
paragraph 1 above. The environmental impacts will be localized in nature and will be
addressed through an EMP. No land acquisition or resettlement is currently envisaged in
project locations

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A consultation will be held in Yerevan with about a dozen NGOs on January 30, 2007, to
discuss the draft Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and inform them of the other
project activities. Drafts of the EMP, both English and Armenian languages, are
accessible online and provided to the participants two working days prior to the meeting.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01/16/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  01/26/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01/26/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                           Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr David S. Bernstein
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Ronald N. Hoffer
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Ronald E. Myers       01/26/2007
 Comments: Cleared.

