Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2231 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/24/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P094225 
Project Name: Social Investment Fund III 
Task Team Leader: Caroline Mascarell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
2.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
2.30
6.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the proposed ASIF III Project is to support the Government’s strengthened 
policy to raise the living standards of the poor and vulnerablegroups through improved 
infrastructure and access to social services, complemented by building the needed institutional 
capacity at the local level.  An integrated development framework would be established 
consisting of local interventions for achieving sustainable reduction in poverty through service 
delivery, local economic development and capacity building.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project, estimated at US$26.3 million (IDA: $20 million), would be an investment operation 
to be implemented over a five-year period with the following components.  
 
Component 1: Community Investments (US$19.5 million).  This component will focus on the 
continued work of the ASIF II Project, consisting of targeting project funds for microprojects for 
the provision of social and economic infrastructure in the poorest communities, on a demand 
Page  2
driven basis.  These projects would include the construction or rehabilitation of schools, health 
clinics, community-based centers, small-scale water supply, sewerage and irrigation schemes, 
and access roads.  Microprojects would also cover school heating, school furniture and school 
teaching materials, science laboratories and libraries.  The poverty targeting strategy will be 
improved through the inclusion of indicators for mountainous and border zones in the targeting 
formula in addition to other poverty indicators.  With funding from the ASIF III PHRD Grant, 
outreach and promotion mechanisms will be improved through community mapping and 
profiling to provide a priority ranking of needy communities, and specific programs will be 
implemented to strengthen community participation.  Based on recent studies financed under the 
ASIF III PHRD Grant, procedures will also be introduced to improve the design, quality and 
supervision of community investments.  
 
Component 2: Support for Local Economic Development, Self-Government and Institutional 
Capacity Building (US$2.1 million). This component will complement the Community 
Investment component and provide continued support to the Govern
ment’s decentralization 
reform program, focusing on local economic development, self-government interventions, and 
capacity building at the local level. Building upon the recent Institutional Assessment carried out 
under the PHRD, this component will provide an institutional strengthening framework 
consisting of: (i) systematic and ongoing training related to the Microproject cycle focusing on 
project formulation, implementation, monitoring and maintenance; (ii) continued and enhanced 
training targeting municipal officials and village council members in the fields of financial 
management, budgeting, accounting and asset management; (iii) formulation of a regional 
development plan in a selected Region to provide a demonstration of a long-term development 
strategy, a short-term action plan, and transfer of relevant skills; and (iv) two enterprise 
employment surveys at the municipal level as inputs to local development plans to provide 
information for improving the local business climate; and (v) piloting of a decentralized 
participatory framework involving selected municipalities and communities in microproject 
outreach and promotion.  
 
Component 3: Improvement of Social Service Delivery at the Local Level (US$2.2 million).  
This component would provide support for a pioneering initiative which would bolster capacity 
building within an integrated management framework for service delivery at the local level.  
Based on the Social Services Assessment carried out under the PHRD, this component will pilot 
a
coordinated institutional approach to service delivery supporting a focused number of 
interrelated activities in a few selected municipalities. This framework would consist of: (i) 
Integrated Social Service Centers (ISSCs) in marzes which do not yet have ISSCs, with the 
participation of the marzpeteran, the municipality, NGOs, and other stakeholders; (ii) Support 
Services covering needs and capacity assessments, outreach and promotion, and monitoring and 
evaluation; (iii) Capacity Building; (iv) Priority Social Services identified by participating 
communities; and (v) Assessments and Workshops to disseminate the lessons learned. Examples 
of activities which could be financed include: Inclusive Children’s Centers targeting children at 
risk and with disabilities, counseling for parents, and basic health services; Centers for the 
Elderly and the Disabled; and Social Service Community Centers, with playgroups for pre-
school children (half-day) and after-school activities.  
 
Page  3
Component 4: Institutional Support to the ASIF (US$2.5 million).  This component will support 
the Project Management Unit through the provision of office equipment, operating costs, 
training, technical assistance, monitoring and evaluation.  Financial Audits will also be financed 
under this component.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in several regions of Armenia.  As microprojects are demand 
driven, it is not known ex-ante the exact location of the community works and social services. 
However, according to the envisaged poverty targeting, it is expected that community 
invetsments would be located in areas with poor vulnerable groups. No expropriation of land or 
loss of access to income is expected.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU)of the proposed ASIF III Project has been operating 
under the ASIF I and II operations as an effective management unit with close to 10 years of 
experience.  The PIU effectively monitored sub-project implementation including ensuring that 
the sub-projects meet the environmental requirements of the country and are consistent with 
Bank guidelines and procedures incorporated in the environmental section of the ASIF II 
Operations Manual (OM). The OM lays out procedures and implementation arrangements for 
ensuring full consideration of environmental safeguards, in accordance with Bank environmental 
assessment guidelines.  According to the guidelines, each microproject is individually screened 
and reviewed by the ASIF PIU - by specific type - for any negative impacts, and mitigation 
measures. In addition, the community proposals incorporate an environmental review checklist, 
and the standard microproject appraisal document includes an environmental checklist and 
mitigation measures. Special environmental mitigation measures were included in the OM in the 
case of certain project types such as water supply rehabilitation schemes, sewage, sanitation 
systems and irrigation rehabilitation works sub-projects. As part of the Quality of Works 
Technical Reviews carried out under the ASIF II Project, training was provided by 
environmental specialists, on a regular basis, in the area of evaluation and monitoring of sub-
projects according to agreed environmental standards.  To date, close to 550 Works projects have 
been carried out with no major environmental issues encountered.  No major environmental 
issues are anticipated under the proposed new operation, given the relatively small size and 
rehabilitation nature of most community infrastructure projects. The environmental section of the 
ASIF III Operational Manual will be updated,  strengthened and disclosed as a stand-alone 
document. This document will include several additions and modifications such as: (i)actual 
examples of technical standards that are incorporated in bid documents; (ii) relevant Armenian 
laws and procedures for obtaining environmental clearances for sub-projects; (iii) information on 
monitoring of control measures during construction; and (iv) information on planned training of 
PIU staff and sub-project sponsors of the more environmentally significant sub-projects.  With 
regard to other environmental safeguards such as pest management, cultural property, natural 
habitats, and international waterways, the team will determine whether these safeguards will be 
triggered under the proposed project, and if so, the team will develop the required management 
plans, and appropriate mitigation measures and procedures which will be included in the ASIF 
III OM.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessments will be carried out for each microproject selected and appraised.  
Procedures for the assessment will be included in the Environmental document as part of the 
ASIF III OM.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The team will determine if small access roads, water distribution systems and small storage 
reservoirs are likely to be financed in wetlands, parks, or other natural habitats.  If this is the 
case, the Environment Chapter will include provisions for addressing such matters.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The team will determine  if sub-project financing is sought which directly acquires or relates 
to pest management.  If this is the case, a short management plan should be included.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The team will determine whether any listed buildings or other cultural property assets at 
project locations may be encountered. If this is the case, the Environment Chapter will include 
provisions for the identification and protection of cultural property assets.    
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
New withdrawal of drinking water from surface waters in Armenia might frequently trigger 
the international waterways safeguard, despite the insignificant amounts anticipated and small 
size of any storage reservoirs included. The team will further review the interest in keeping such 
sub-projects in the scope.  The experience of the Armenia renewable energy project will be 
shared with the team and LEGEN will be consulted as required.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/11/2006 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The time frame for launching and completing the safeguard related studies that may be 
needed will be carried out in May/June 2006 during the Appraisal phase of the Project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Caroline Mascarell 
04/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/12/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
04/12/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
