Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/12/2006 
Report No.:  AC2394
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P094225 
Project Name:  Social Investment Fund III 
Task Team Leader:  Caroline Mascarell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 20, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 3, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.63 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
1.01 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)1.00 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  0.75 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
8.39 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to support the Government?s policy to raise the living 
standards of the poor and vulnerable groups through:  
 
(i) 
Improving the quality, access, and coverage of community infrastructure and 
services in poor communities, and for the most vulnerable groups; and  
 
(ii) 
Promoting complementary institutional capacity building at the community and 
municipal level so as to improve the quality and sustainability of service delivery and 
municipal investments, increase accountability, and enhance greater stakeholder 
empowerment at the local level.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1.  Community Investments (US$17.81 million).  This component will focus 
on continuing the work of the ASIF II Project, with improvements of procedures relating 
to quality of works, sustainability, participation, and targeting of project funds for 
microprojects for the provision of social and economic infrastructure in the poorest 
communities under a participatory framework. These projects would include the 
construction or rehabilitation of schools, health clinics, community-based centers, small 
scale-water supply, sewerage, minor irrigation works, and access roads.  Microprojects 
would also cover school heating systems and science laboratory 
construction/rehabilitation.  Financing under the component would include goods for 
microprojects in support of the Government's increasing emphasis on school 
improvement programs covering school furniture, library furniture and equipment, 
science laboratory furniture and equipment, and teaching materials. To ensure proper 
design and supervision of community works projects, the component will finance local 
consultancies for microproject design and supervision.  
 
Component 2. Local Level Institutional Strengthening ($2.90 million).  This component 
would complement the community investment component through the provision of 
technical assistance, training and support services designed to increase the competencies 
and accountability of municipal administration in support of the Government's 
decentralization initiatives. Building upon the recent Institutional and Social Services 
Assessments carried out under the ASIF III PHRD, and in consultation with Government 
officials, key donors, and Bank staff involved in municipal development social service 
delivery, this component was designed to support the piloting of a small-scale municipal 
development institutional framework.  This framework would cover municipal 
investment planning, financial management, and social service delivery. Assessments and 
workshops to disseminate the lessons learned from this component will be financed under 
the Project Management Monitoring and Evaluation component. The selection of the 
pilot municipalities to take part under this sub-component will be determined during 
Appraisal.  
 
Component 3.  Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$3.75 million).This 
component will provide (i) institutional support to the Project Management Unit (PIU) to 
effectively implement local programs and projects at the local level under an integrated 
development framework, in line with the Government's poverty reduction agenda and its 
decentralization reform program. This would be achieved through the financing of 
operating costs, including salaries, utilities, office equipment, training, vehicles, 
equipment, financial audits, and MIS upgrading; and (ii) evaluation and technical support 
related to project activities covering special studies and technical assessments, study tours 
workshops and seminars.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in several regions of Armenia.  As microprojects are 
demand driven, it is not known ex-ante the exact location of the community works and 
social services. However, according to the envisaged poverty targeting, it is expected that 
Page  3
community investments would be located in areas with poor vulnerable groups. No 
expropriation of land or loss of access to income is expected.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Rita E. Cestti (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No major environmental issues are anticipated under the proposed ASIF III project given 
the relatively small size and rehabilitation nature of most microprojects.  However, 
certain microproject types such as water supply rehabilitation/construction schemes to be 
funded under the project may require special environmental mitigation measures to 
protect quality of the water source (in-situ and upstream).  In the case of potable water 
projects which involve the construction of new reservoirs which may have potential risks 
of being linked to international waterways or trans-boundary water sources, special 
studies are being conducted to avoid such risks, find alternatives, or limit activities only 
to rehabilitation of existing reservoirs.  Environmental mitigation measures may also be 
needed in the case of sewage, sanitation systems and irrigation rehabilitation works sub-
projects. Environmental concerns will be mitigated in the selection and implementation 
of sub-projects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In the case of potable water projects which involve the construction of new reservoirs 
which may have potential risks of being linked to international waterways or trans-
boundary water sources, special studies are being conducted to avoid such risks   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) of the proposed ASIF III Project has been 
operating under the ASIF I and II operations as an effective management unit with close 
to 10 years of experience.  To date, close to 550 Works projects have been carried out 
with no major environmental issues encountered.  The PIU effectively monitored sub-
project implementation including ensuring that the sub-projects meet the environmental 
requirements of the country and are consistent with Bank guidelines and procedures 
incorporated in the environmental section of the ASIF III Operations Manual (OM). The 
OM lays out procedures and implementation arrangements for ensuring full consideration 
of environmental safeguards, in accordance with Bank environmental assessment 
guidelines.  The OM also will document the key laws relating to the environment.  
According to the guidelines, each microproject is individually screened and reviewed by 
the ASIF PIU - by specific type - for any negative impacts, and mitigation measures. In 
addition, the community proposals incorporate an environmental review checklist, and 
the standard microproject appraisal document includes an environmental checklist and 
mitigation measures. Special environmental mitigation measures were included in the 
OM in the case of certain project types such as water supply rehabilitation schemes, 
sewage, sanitation systems and irrigation rehabilitation works sub-projects. As part of the 
Quality of Works Technical Reviews carried out under the ASIF II Project, training was 
provided by environmental specialists, on a regular basis, in the area of evaluation and 
monitoring of sub-projects according to agreed environmental standards.    The 
environmental section of the OM will be included and updated in the ASIF III 
Operational Manual.  
 
The ASIF III Environmental Guidelines (part of the Project draft Operations Manual) 
have been published in Armenia on July 10, 2006.    
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The process of consultation will take place at three stages: (i) promotion and outreach 
stage at the beginning of the microproject cycle; (ii) appraisal and follow-up stages of 
microprojects; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation stage to assess outcomes and results.  
Such consultation will be carried out continuously and systematically during project 
implementation and will include the disclosure of safeguard policies and the required 
training.  Monitoring and evaluation of this process will be the joint responsibility of the 
key stakeholders - - the ASIF PIU, the Implementing Agencies (IAs), and Bank 
supervision team.  The Ministry of Finance (MOF), as the responsible ministry for the 
ASIF III Project, with the assistance of the ASIF PIU will monitor and evaluate all three 
stages of consultations.   Impact monitoring and evaluation would also be carried out 
through beneficiary assessments, technical assessments, workshops and round table 
discussions to discuss the results and impact of project activities. The aim of the 
monitoring and evaluation activities would also be to improve communication and 
information flows, develop partnerships between central government and municipal 
officials and local communities, and donors, and thereby enhance local level 
development.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/12/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Caroline Mascarell 
06/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Rita E. Cestti 
06/21/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anush Bezhanyan 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
