Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2703
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P104467 
Project Name:  Second Health System Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Enis Baris 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 8, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (90%);Tertiary education (10%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Education for the knowledge economy 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
22.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.30 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
7.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Health Sector Reform Program remains unchanged:  to improve the 
organization of the health care system in order to provide more accessible, quality and 
sustainable health care services to the population, in particular to the most vulnerable 
groups, and to better manage public health threats.  The objective of the second phase of 
the Program supported by the APL 2 is to strengthen the MOH's capacity for more 
effective system governance, scaling up family medicine-based primary health care and 
upgrading selected healthcare service delivery networks in marzes to provide more 
accessible, quality and sustainable health care services to the population.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A:  Family Medicine Development (estimated total cost US$4.70 million).  
This component will continue supporting the strengthening of institutional capacity to 
train well-qualified family physicians and nurses as first-line PHC providers and improve 
their working environment. Under this component, the project will complete the planned 
(re)training of 1650 physicians and an equal number of nurses to ensure 100% population 
coverage based on the ratio of about one team per 1700 to 2000 population.  In addition, 
Page  2
about 50 rural ambulatories will be upgraded and outreach activities will be conducted to 
ensure community participation.   
 
Component B:  Hospital Network Optimization (estimated total cost US$20.77 million).  
This component will support the implementation of the optimization plans in the 
remaining eight marzes by upgrading selected hospitals and refurbishing them with 
modern medical, IT and health care waste management (HCWM) equipment. In addition, 
under this component, the project will finance technical work for architectural design, 
and training in hospital management, quality assurance, accountability and fiduciary 
management arrangements and HCWM.  
 
Component C:  Institutional Strengthening (estimated total cost US$2.58 million).  This 
component will help to strengthen MOH's capacity for policy making, planning, 
regulation, human resources development and monitoring and evaluation for more 
effective system governance and control of NCDs. It will also support strengthening the 
governance and management structures of health care facilities and the oversight function 
of marz administrative structures. Support will also be made available to strengthen SHA 
operations, improve costing of publicly financed services and reimbursement 
mechanisms. In addition, under this component, the SMU will benefit from consultancy 
services to upgrade its medical curriculum, improve its teaching and training facilities 
and introduce new technologies for continuous medical education (CME).  
 
Component D: Project Management (estimated total cost US$1.57 million). The 
objective of this component is to provide institutional support to the MOH through 
Health Project Implementation Unit (HPIU) which will be in charge of implementing 
day-to-day project activities and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The project will 
finance annual financial audits as well as training and operating costs of the HPIU, 
including the costs of core and short-term staff salaries, office related expenses and 
monitoring and evaluation of project implementation and performance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Renovation of primary health care centers and hospitals in eight marzes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The immediate impact of the project activities on the environment is limited. The main 
physical investments for the proposed project are rehabilitation and new construction of 
family medicine practices in the rural communities as well as rehabilitation and 
refurbishment of selected space in selected hospital networks in 8 marzes. Therefore, the 
environmental category rating remains "B", the safeguard screening category rating 
remains "S3" as it was under the APL 1. As such, the existing Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) remains valid, albeit subject to amendment to new sites. To 
date, compliance with the EMP has been satisfactory. Therefore, site-specific 
environmental screening for all project-supported rehabilitation of PHC centers and 
hospitals will be carried out as per the EMP. An environmental management framework 
has been prepared and publicly disclosed in Armenia in December 2006.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential adverse environmental impacts are summarized below and are restricted in 
scope and severity:  
 
-Dust and noise due to demolition and construction;  
 
-Encroachment into private property;  
 
-Risk of damage to unknown historical and archaeological sites;  
 
-Dumping of demolition and construction wastes and accidental -spillage of machine 
oil, lubricants, etc; and  
 
-Risk for inadequate handling of hazardous wastewater, waste gases and spillages of 
hazardous material during operation of the hospitals; and  
 
-Risk from inadequate handling of medical waste.  
 
These risks were reviewed during project preparation and measures of their mitigation 
are envisioned in the design, planning and construction supervision process as well as 
during the operation of the facilities.  The project is classified  as Environmental 
Page  4
Category B (as well as on-going Health System Modernization Project) in accordance 
with World Bank operational policies and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
was prepared.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The prefered option of renovating and refurbishing existing hospitals is the least intrusive 
way with minimal impact on the environment, relative to building new hospitals which 
would have had more environmental impact in addition to potentially triggering other 
safeguard policies, i.e., involuntary settlement.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The on-going APL 1 financed consultancy services and training on medical waste 
management. Under APL2 which is basically a repeater project, albeit in the remaining 
eight marzes in the country, the same approach will be taken, i.e., use of the same EMP 
and consultancy and training services. More specifically, substantial work has been done 
to review the existing legal framework on waste management, to develop a draft legal 
package and national guidelines on health care waste management (HCWM). A Training-
Of-Trainers course on HCWM was also conducted in 2006 for epidemiologists 
responsible for waste management in merger hospitals as well as for specialists from the 
State Hygienic and Anti-Epidemic Inspectorate. Following the guidelines development, 
HCWM plans will be developed for each hospital and will include a list of HCWM-
equipment to be procured under the project. Finally, all hospital staff will attend short-
term training on HCWM.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations were held during the existing project preparation phase by an 
environmental specialist with the main stakeholders, i.e. Ministry of Health, Municipality 
of Yerevan, hospital managers, Ministry of Nature Protection, State Hygiene and Anti-
Epidemic Inspection (former San Epid) and ECOTECHARD, a private waste 
management company.  The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared in 
order to integrate environmental concerns into the design and implementation of the 
project.  
 
The following activities have been performed during the course of the Armenia Health 
System Modernization Project as proposed by the EMP.  
 
-Establishment of environmental expertise within the HPIU;  
 
-Environmental capacity building and training program;  
 
-Site Specific Environmental Screening, Review for the Rehabilitation of PHC Centers 
and Hospitals;  
 
-Development of Environmental Guidelines for Ecological planning.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/05/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/13/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Enis Baris 
01/18/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
01/23/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
01/23/2007 
Comments:   
