Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/02/2006 
Report No.:  37602
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P094225 
Project Name:  Social Investment Fund III 
Task Team Leader:  Caroline Mascarell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 13, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 24, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.67 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
1.50 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
0.13
8.30 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to support the Government?s policy to raise the living 
standards of the poor and vulnerable groups through:  
 
(i) 
Improving the quality, access, and coverage of community infrastructure and 
services in poor communities, and for the most vulnerable groups; and  
 
(ii) 
Promoting complementary institutional capacity building at the community and 
municipal level so as to improve the quality and sustainability of service delivery and 
municipal investments, increase accountability, and enhance greater stakeholder 
empowerment at the local level.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1.  Community Investments (total estimated base cost: US$24.97 million).  
This component would support social and economic infrastructure microprojects in the 
poorest communities of Armenia. Technical assistance, advisory services, and training 
would also be provided for microproject design and supervision and for field work to 
Page  2
help implement a decentralized participatory framework at the local level and to complete 
the community mapping and profiling exercise. 
 
Component 2. Local Level Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation (total 
estimated base cost: US$0.60 million).  This component would complement the 
community investment component through the provision of technical assistance, training 
and support services to local governments in such areas as financial management, 
budgeting, accounting, and asset management, designed to increase the competences and 
accountability of municipal administration in support of the Government's 
decentralization initiatives. Special studies, technical assessments, workshops and study 
tours to support and enhance monitoring and evaluation of project activities at the local 
level, would also be carried out.    
 
Component 3.  Project Management (total estimated base cost US$3.14 million).  This 
component would provide institutional support to the Armenia Social Investment Fund 
(ASIF) covering operating cost, financial audits and MIS maintenance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in several regions of Armenia.  As microprojects are 
demand driven, it is not known ex-ante the exact location of the community works and 
social services. However, according to the envisaged poverty targeting, it is expected that 
community investments would be located in areas with poor vulnerable groups. No 
expropriation of land or loss of access to income is expected.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Rita E. Cestti (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No major environmental issues are anticipated under the proposed ASIF III project given 
the relatively small size and rehabilitation nature of most microprojects.  However, 
certain microproject types such as water supply rehabilitation/construction schemes to be 
funded under the project may require special environmental mitigation measures to 
protect quality of the water source (in-situ and upstream).  In the case of potable water 
project proposals which involve the construction of new reservoirs which may have 
potential risks of being linked to international waterways or trans-boundary water 
sources, a special study on this issue was conducted at the local level during project 
preparation.  The study concluded that the water sources are outside the international 
waterways, and that, as in ASIF I and II, the new water supply microprojects under ASIF 
III would be based on small wells and surface springs. It was, therefore, concluded that 
the OP 7.50 will not be triggered and that the exclusionary language to ensure this will be 
specifically incorporated in the project documents.  For other microprojects, 
environmental concerns will be mitigated during the selection and implementation of 
sub-projects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In the case of potable water projects which involve the construction of new reservoirs 
which may have potential risks of being linked to international waterways or trans-
boundary water sources, special studies are being conducted to avoid such risks   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) of the proposed ASIF III Project has been 
operating under the ASIF I and II operations as an effective management unit with close 
to 10 years of experience.  To date, close to 550 Works projects have been carried out 
with no major environmental issues encountered.  The PIU effectively monitored sub-
project implementation including ensuring that the sub-projects meet the environmental 
requirements of the country and are consistent with Bank guidelines and procedures 
incorporated in the environmental section of the ASIF III Operations Manual (OM). The 
OM lays out procedures and implementation arrangements for ensuring full consideration 
of environmental safeguards, in accordance with Bank environmental assessment 
guidelines.  The OM also will document the key laws relating to the environment.  
According to the guidelines, each microproject is individually screened and reviewed by 
the ASIF PIU - by specific type - for any negative impacts, and mitigation measures. In 
addition, the community proposals incorporate an environmental review checklist, and 
the standard microproject appraisal document includes an environmental checklist and 
Page  4
mitigation measures. Special environmental mitigation measures were included in the 
OM in the case of certain project types such as water supply rehabilitation schemes, 
sewage, sanitation systems and irrigation rehabilitation works sub-projects. As part of the 
Quality of Works Technical Reviews carried out under the ASIF II Project, training was 
provided by environmental specialists, on a regular basis, in the area of evaluation and 
monitoring of sub-projects according to agreed environmental standards.    The 
environmental section of the OM will be included and updated in the ASIF III 
Operational Manual.  
 
The ASIF III Environmental Guidelines (part of the Project draft Operations Manual) 
have been published in Armenia on July 10, 2006.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The process of consultation will take place at three stages: (i) promotion and outreach 
stage at the beginning of the microproject cycle; (ii) appraisal and follow-up stages of 
microprojects; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation stage to assess outcomes and results.  
Such consultation will be carried out continuously and systematically during project 
implementation and will include the disclosure of safeguard policies and the required 
training.  Monitoring and evaluation of this process will be the joint responsibility of the 
key stakeholders - - the ASIF PIU, the Implementing Agencies (IAs), and Bank 
supervision team.  The Ministry of Finance (MOF), as the responsible ministry for the 
ASIF III Project, with the assistance of the ASIF PIU will monitor and evaluate all three 
stages of consultations.   Impact monitoring and evaluation would also be carried out 
through beneficiary assessments, technical assessments, workshops and round table 
discussions to discuss the results and impact of project activities. The aim of the 
monitoring and evaluation activities would also be to improve communication and 
information flows, develop partnerships between central government and municipal 
officials and local communities, and donors, and thereby enhance local level 
development.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/12/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Caroline Mascarell 
06/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Rita E. Cestti 
06/21/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anush Bezhanyan 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
