Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2889 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P104433 
Project Name: ARMENIA:   Railways Restructuring 
Task Team Leader: Martha B. Lawrence 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 27, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
8.60 
 Financing 
Gap 
10.00
18.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objectives are to (a) improve the efficiency and productivity of 
Armenian Railway infrastructure between Gyumri and Airum and (b) enhance the financial 
sustainability of the railway.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project consists of three components:  
 
Component 1 for the repair of strategic infrastructure is designed to rehabilitate the Zamarlu 
railway bridge, a 250 meter, steel span construction built in 1898 and seven other major railway 
bridges located on the mainline between Yerevan and Armenia's state border with Georgia. 
Rehabilitation of railway tracks is also proposed under this component. The funds for track 
rehabilitation could be put into an infrastructure fund overseen by government and implemented 
by the concessionaire.  
 
Component 2 is the employee redundancy package, which would likely include a range of 
benefits to assist employees made redundant as a result of institutional changes in the railway 
Page  2
management system. This component also includes TA in the estimated amount of US$150,000 
to support implementation of the employee redundancy package.  
 
Component 3 is to provide assistance to the Public Service Regulatory Commission in 
developing methodology for setting access prices and to the Ministry of Transport and 
Communications in administering the concession contract.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Investment in rehabilitation of eight major railway bridges will be made along the railway 
alignment between Gyumri and the State border between Armenia and Georgia. Rehabilitation of 
tracks will likely also be in the section between Gyumri and the border, although priority 
sections could be identified in other locations. All rehabilitation will be of existing 
bridges/tracks.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project will be implemented through a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), whose 
composition has not yet been determined. The PIU is expected to have a certain level of 
institutional capacity for dealing with safeguard issues built through previous WB projects. 
However since new staff may be added, the staff of the selected PIU will additionally receive 
training on Bank's safeguard policies during the early stages of the Project implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Installation and rehabilitation of bridges and rail tracks could create temporary impacts 
including construction dust and noise. Replaced wooden sleepers treated with creosote and 
ballast would require proper disposal. Need to insure that track work does not create runoff in 
streams. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared before appraisal to ensure 
that adequate mitigation and monitoring activities protect the population and environment from 
possible key risks related to proposed railway rehabilitation works such as noise, soil erosion on 
steep slopes,  protection of waterways, passage of animals through any protected areas (if 
relevant), etc..   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Works will be performed on existing rights-of-way so is unlikely to affect any natural 
habitat. The EMP will assess any possible negative impacts of the proposed civil works to the 
natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The EMP will also include a check on potential impacts on Physical Cultural Resources 
(PCR). No major impacts on PCR may be expected during the project implementation, yet 
attention should be paid to the possibility of railway side and bridge related PCR being affected 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
by dust and vibration during the civil (rehabilitation) works.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Since works will be done in the existing right of way, involuntary settlement is not 
anticipated. The team will verify this during preparation. Works may require temporary use of 
nearby land for staging materials or access. Works contractor would enter into voluntary 
agreements with landowners for use of such land. Restoration measures will be defined in the 
EMP and the contractor will implement them.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Safeguards documents (EMP), including consultation and disclosure, will be drafted prior to 
appraisal. Since some of the components will not be defined in detail prior to appraisal (e.g., 
the exact sections of track to be rehabilitated), a framework will be developed for how World 
Bank safeguard policies will be applied in these cases.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Martha B. Lawrence 
05/14/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
05/15/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
