Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/23/2006 
Report No.:  35011
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P083352 
Project Name:  Renewable Energy Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gevorg Sargsyan 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P090058 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 27, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 21, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Infrastructure services 
for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 7.00 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
3.00 
 SUB-BORROWER(S) 
6.60
17.10 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to increase the privately owned and operated power generation 
utilizing renewable energy.  
 
The project global objective is to reduce greenhouse gas (carbon dioxide) emissions by 
overcoming barriers to the development of the renewable energy.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will provide technical assistance for removing the existing barriers to 
development of renewable energy resources and will offer loans to private investors for 
development of small hydro- and wind- power plants. Financing will be provided through 
a
qualified financial institution (Cascade Credit or CC) and will be also co-financed by 
EBRD.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Most of investments will support the development (or rehabilitation) of small hydro 
power plants (mostly with capacity of about 1-2 MW but in any case not exceeding 
10MW). It is anticipated that only few wind turbines using the wind energy will be 
constructed.  
 
Since this is "FI" category project exact investment locations are not known. However, 
the technology of micro power plants does not require erection of dams, or performing of 
other large scale civil works. The turbines are placed directly in the stream or on the top 
of pipes. It is assumed that most of investments in hydropower generation will take place 
on mountain rivers. The wind energy will also be generated in mountain areas, however, 
in the vicinity of existing power transmission lines.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Inesis Kiskis (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is not anticipated to have large scale, significant or irreversible impacts on 
environment. To the contrary, it will result in reduced consumption of fossil fuels and in 
reduced greenhouse emissions into atmosphere.  
 
The Project triggers OP 4.10 Environmental Assessment, OP 4.37 Dam Safety, and OP 
7.50 Projects on International Waterways. As per provisions of OP 7.50, the riparian 
countries have been notified about the activities to be financed by the IDA Credit and 
GEF Grant, and were given an opportunity to raise their concerns, if any.  The small 
hydro power plants located on the rivers will not adversely change neither the quality nor 
the quantity of water flows to the other riparians, and will not be adversely affected by 
the other riparianans’ possible water use.  
 
Page  3
The OP 4.37 is triggered because there is a possibility that some water for small hydro 
power plants may be derived from the reservoirs already controlled by the existing dams 
(para. 7 of the OP). However, all the dams in Armenia are covered by the on-going 
Irrigation Dam Safety 2 Project which is aimes at ensuring required minimum safety 
standards at all the existing dam controlled reservoirs in the country. Therefore, for the 
purposes of the Renewable Energy project there was no need to arrange for one or more 
independent dam specialists to conduct reviews, evaluations and provide with 
recommendations as per provisions of para. 8 of the Policy. If deemed necessary, the 
required information about the status of the dam in question will be obtained from the 
team implementing the Irrigation Dam Safety 2 Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Most of adverse impacts to environment will be limited in scope and will be 
predominantly related to the construction phase. The biggest potential adverse impact at 
the operations phase is associated with the failure to maintain necessary minimum flow in 
rivers. This can be avoided/mitigated by proper design of the plants and by compliance to 
prevailing practices in the construction business, as well as by consistent adherence to the 
provisions of the approved water use permit, issued by relevant national authorities. 
Some of measures will have to be consistently applied during operation. Besides 
maintaining the required minimum flow in the river, these include maintenance of fish 
by-passes, anti-erosion measures on slopes in the vicinty of diversion channels, 
management of the trash collected on the screens of the small hydro power plants.  
 
Within the scope of the Project no dams will be built - only small dikes to divert a part 
of the river flow to the channel or pipe. Over the channel (or a pipe) the flow will reach 
the turbine and then be returned to the river without allowing any irrigational uses. 
Investors will have to apply measures to protect water from accidental pollution (e.g. oil 
spills). Particular attention will be paid to the fish migrating to/from the spawning sites 
by building special passes and covering the intakes of pipes/turbines with special screens. 
Special attention will be drawn to ensuring a compulsory minimum flow in the parts of 
the rivers where the small hydro power plants will be located.  
 
In case of wind power generators caution will be exercised not to locate the wind 
turbines in the vicinity of bird nesting sites in order to avoid exposure to excessive noise 
levels.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since this is a "FI" project, the alternatives will be reviewed by R2E2 Fund and the 
participating financial  institution(s) during the evaluation of specific investment 
proposals.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an Environmental Management Plan, which describes the 
potential adverse impacts the project may cause, and ways to avoid or mitigate them. The 
EMP, together with an Environmental Chapter of the Operations Manual, will be used as 
a
framework document in determining the environmental screening category for each and 
every proposed subproject. Each subproject will have its own EIA Report and/or EMP (as 
appropriate) prepared and it will be the responsibility of R2E2 Fund and CC to monitor 
investors’ compliance with requirements laidout in EMP. The detailed designs and the 
bidding documents will contain provisions for complying with the respective 
environmental requirements.  
 
The borrower has only limited experience in managing environmental risks. The R2E2 
Fund is currently implementing another WB supported "FI" project (Armenia Urban 
Heating), but has not acquired significant experience to date. R2E2 Fund will employ an 
environmental specialist to screen the project proposals and monitor compliance. In CC 
that will be the responsibility of Loan Officers assigned to work with the WB project.  
 
The end borrowers will also have to fully comply with requirements of Armenian 
national environmental legislation, particularly with the requirements of the Armenian 
Water Code adopted on June 4, 2003.  
 
Right after effectiveness of the project the R2E2 Fund and CC staff will undergo 
specialized safeguards training which will be offered by the Bank staff.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the project preparation a number of consultations with stakeholders were 
undertaken. They dealt both with environmental and social aspects. In General, the 
community members have positive view of the small hydro power plant, on the ground 
that owners of small hydro power plants often invest in local infrastructure, which helps 
to improve local livelihoods. Also, small hydro power plants contribute considerable 
source of finance to local communities, in the form of tax or rent, which can be used for 
public purposes.  As per provisions of the Armenian Water Code, investors in small 
hydro power plants are required to obtain water use permit from respective authorities to 
agree with local water users association, if there exists one, over the use of water. 
Consultations with the Government and agencies and NGOs on environmental aspects 
took place in August- November, 2005.  
 
The EMP has been disclosed in Armenia and Bank's Infoshop in November 2005   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/22/2005 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/21/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/22/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  6
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gevorg Sargsyan 
11/22/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Inesis Kiskis 
11/22/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
11/22/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/22/2005 
Comments:  Cleared; based on disclosure of revised EMP 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter D. Thomson 
11/29/2005 
Comments:   
