Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2121 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/23/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P099630 
Project Name: Judicial Reform Project 2 
Task Team Leader: David S. Bernstein 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (100%) 
Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (P);Legal institutions for a 
market economy (P);Law reform (S);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
19.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.40 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
3.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.10
4.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Second Judicial Reform Project (JRP2) will have two primary objectives: (1) provide 
Armenia???s judiciary with the administration, facilities and tools necessary to improve the 
efficiency and reliability of judicial operations; and (2) assist with the implementation of a new 
Judicial Code designed to improve the quality of judicial services in Armenia.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The following project components are proposed:  
 
(1) Strengthening Institutional Capacity of the Judiciary, including developing transparent 
procedures for implementing these powers and improve judicial accountability through the 
reformed Council of Justice; providing support for the development of the new Judicial Service; 
rollout of the new Case Management system, and the development of a Judicial Database and 
Page  2
Network System to facilitate the introduction of the principal of stare decisis and precedent into 
Armenia???s judicial system.  
 
(2) Courthouse Rehabilitation including the development of design standards for smaller courts, 
reconstruction/renovation of remaining courthouses, construction of new Cassation Court and 
improved space for Ministry of Justice and judicial archives.  
 
(3) Development of a new Higher School for Judicial Training, including development of 
permanent facilities and providing equipment for the school; identification and training of 
faculty; development of curriculum and training materials for training on the new information, 
case management and decision database systems.  
 
(4) Enhancing Enforcement of Judicial Decisions. Continue to provide assistance to the 
Enforcement Service by helping it to consolidate and update legislation governing enforcement 
and the seizure and auctioning of assets, improving its links and relations with banks and other 
institutions and providing additional training.  Conduct a study, needs assessment and 
recommendations on the suitability and viability of developing a private bailiff service in 
Armenia.  
 
(5) Introducing Alternative Dispute Resolution through technical assistance, legislative drafting 
and training necessary to create a foundation for mediation and arbitration services, potentially 
the promotion of these services in the business and legal communities.  
 
(6) Improve Access to Legal Information and Expanding Public Awareness by expanding 
public access to the the recently developed Armenia Legal Information System (ARLIS) possibly 
through public terminals in local MoJ offices or courthouses), supporting the Ministry of Justice 
in developing a strategy and action plan to improve the dissemination of key information such as 
the role of precedence in court decisions under the new Judicial Code; and raising public 
awareness through alternative media (e.g., press, radio, Internet, etc.) and implementing public 
and court user surveys.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The majority of the project will be conducted in Yerevan.  However, courthouse rehabilitation 
and renovation will occur throughout the countryside.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is classified as Category B because of court rehabilitation and construction 
works.  The potential environm
ental issues that trigger the Environmental Assessment safeguard 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
policy relate to common risks identified with construction works and are localized.  
 
No environment issue has been encountered in the implementation of the on-going project. 
The PIU will review and update the EMP of the project and will develop environmental 
guidelines for contractors.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
In case the final list of buildings to be included under the project confirm that some of the 
buildings are cultural or historical monuments, the EMP will also include provisions to minimize 
impacts on cultural property.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
During preparation, staff in the field will verify title and ownership of the land on which new 
buildings are proposed to be constructed based on documentation to be prepared and presented 
by the authorities. However the team will prepare a Policy Framework for disclosure before 
appraisal, unless it is possible to ascertain before appraisal that construction will not entail any 
land acquisition that will involve resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/10/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The timing for specific safeguard-related studies will be identified should such studies be 
required.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David S. Bernstein 
03/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/13/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amitabha Mukherjee 
03/13/2006 
Comments:  This Concept Stage ISDS is cleared subject to specifying the name of the Safeguards 
Specialist to be associated with the project. 
