Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2184
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P094220 
Project Name:  Health Sector Reform 
Task Team Leader:  Enis Baris 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 6, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project would be to improve equitable access to and quality 
and use of essential healthcare services in the selected districts in a fiscally responsible 
and financially sustainable manner with a view to improving health outcomes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would have the following five components:  
 
Component A: Building MOH Capacity for Stewardship (estimated total cost US$2.5 
million). This component would assist the MOH to build its capacity in policy making, 
planning, and regulation by financing consultancy services, training, some office and 
computer equipment.  To this end, support would be provided to: (i) review and 
reorganize MOH functional and administrative structures; (ii) assist in the drafting of 
necessary legal and regulatory documents; (iii) establish a Health Policy and Planning 
Unit (HPPU) to strengthen MOH capacity with regards to health and healthcare policy 
analysis and development; (iv) design and carry out a public awareness campaign; (v) 
support the development of an accreditation and licensing system for both public and 
private health facilities and set up a mechanism for quality control and assurance of 
healthcare services; (vi) support the MOH Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Unit to 
develop and monitor effective management of national drug policy, including the 
Page  2
institutionalization of an essential drug list, standard treatment protocols, as well as the 
development of the necessary legislative and regulatory framework; and (vii) provide 
support to improve the health information system in the MOH.  
 
Component B: Improving Delivery of Healthcare Services (estimated total cost US$49 
million).  This component would aim to improve the appropriateness, quality, and 
technical and allocative efficiency of health care services in four districts of Agdas, 
Ismaili, Sheki and Xatai, as well as in the Baku region, by supporting development of 
managerial and clinical skills of the local health workforce, introducing new planning, 
management and resource allocation methods and tools, building up a patient referral 
system across the three levels of care as well as by the provision of goods, consultancy 
services and training, as well as by upgrading primary health care facilities and 
constructing three district hospitals (in Agdas, Sheki and Ismaili districts).  Activities to 
be supported under this component would only begin once a national mapping exercise of 
all health facilities is completed and a plan for each project district to rationalize health 
facilities is developed and adopted.  This component would also reform the SANEPID 
network by reviewing and revising existing roles and responsibilities of the network and 
restructure its central and field offices with a view to improving its surveillance and 
response capabilities.  
 
Component C: Ensuring Sustainable Health Financing and Resource Allocation 
(estimated total cost US$1 million).   This component would finance consultancy services 
to: (i) carry out a feasibility study to ascertain whether a mandatory health insurance 
scheme is the right mechanism for Azerbaijan, and (ii) define a set of health services to 
be provided for free as well as reimbursement rates for each type of service.  In addition, 
a
new formula for resource allocation would be developed and per capita allocations 
would also be adjusted, if possible, for various indicators representing health care 
resource needs. A pilot of the population-based formula would be implemented in the 
four districts.  
 
Component D: Human Resources Development 
–
(estimated total cost US$1.5 million). 
This component would aim to address the long term human resource needs of the health 
sector and would finance consultancy services, training, goods and minor civil works. 
Specifically, this component would help to develop a labor adjustment strategy for the 
health sector to identify the human resources needs, in terms of competence mix and 
equitable distribution, and to propose solutions regarding which areas of specialty would 
need to be emphasized and/or curtailed.  This strategy would also review early retirement 
and compensation provisions.  In addition, this component would support a review of the 
current medical reform initiatives with regard to the curriculum reform and the 
regulations pertaining to general practice and specialty training. Lastly, this component 
would support retraining of health professionals as well as developing a new licensing 
system for health professionals; in addition, a review and amendment of the regulatory 
and legal framework for strengthening the Physicians’ Association would be undertaken 
to better respond to changing needs and preferences of the medical community.  
 
Page  3
Component E: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (estimated total cost 
US$1 million).  This component would ensure effective administration and 
implementation of the project by supporting the operation of a Project Implementation 
Unit (PIU) which would be responsible for ensuring smooth implementation of the 
project.  The PIU staff would be responsible for coordinating project activities with MOH 
component coordinators and with other relevant stakeholders and donors, as well as for 
procurement, disbursement, financial management, coordination of training events, and 
for ensuring effective monitoring and evaluation of the outcomes of the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The construction of three medium size hospitals is envisaged in the districts of Agdas, 
Sheki and Ismaili.  In addition, there will be light renovation of primary health care 
centers in these same districts as well as in the Baku region and in the Xatai district in 
Azerbaijan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There would be construction of three medium scale district hospitals and light renovation 
of primary health centers on government owned lands.  The district hospitals would likely 
have no more than a 100 to 150 bed capacity, with basic but state of the art facilities.  An 
overall preliminary, environmental assessment of the candidate sites was conducted to 
evaluate the existing environment of the sites and current environmental issues related to 
medical facilities in each district. The construction and operation of the proposed 
hospitals, and associated works at the primary health care facilities, will not result in 
significant adverse environmental effects provided appropriate mitigation measures are 
implemented. These measures are described in detail in the general Environmental 
Management Plan which has been prepared and disclosed.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No detrimental impacts are expected in selected project areas.   The rehabilitation and/or 
construction of health facilities will be done on existing state owned sites, with no 
potential exclusion of people from access to land or resources.  In the regions of Sheki 
and Ismaili, there are no conflicting land uses observed at the sites proposed for new 
hospitals. In Agdas, the proposed site includes an unauthorized, uncompleted, structure 
(several low brick walls) which has no current use/or ownership.  This structure may 
require removal before the construction of a new hospital can commence.  Aside from the 
aforementioned structure, there are no other competing land uses at the Agdas site.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Health has undertaken a preliminary environmental assessment of the 
candidate sites for the new hospitals and has disclosed an Environmental Management 
Plan.  The MOH is in full agreement with the Bank that the proposed hospitals would be 
designed to treat medical and biological wastes, as appropriate.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the environmental assessment, consultations were carried out with all relevant 
stakeholders (MOH staff, district level staff, hospital staff, patients, etc.) to assess any 
potential adverse social effects of the proposed project.  None were identified, as 
described above.  An overall Environmental Management Plan has been disclosed, both 
in Azerbaijan and through the Bank information shop.  Site-specific EAs and EMPs will 
be developed during project implementation when designs for hospitals are being 
finalized.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/02/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Enis Baris 
02/23/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Brian Yates 
02/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/13/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
03/15/2006 
Comments:   
Page  6
