Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3099 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/14/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P102117 
Project Name: Education Sector Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (45%);Secondary education (40%);Tertiary education (15%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project aims to create, foster and sustain the conditions to improve the quality of 
education in Azerbaijan, as reflected in (i) better and more relevant student learning outcomes in 
primary and secondary education; (ii) new teaching methods and learning tools used in primary 
and secondary schools; and (iii) increased managerial and governance capacity of MoE, REDs, 
and schools.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
While APL1 has focused on planning the reforms and building the capacity to manage them, the 
proposed APL2 will support the implementation and scaling up of the reforms. Moreover, APL2 
will concentrate on reforms related to the quality of education as these are now identified as the 
most urgent priorities. A summary of the proposed components and activities follows below:  
 
Component 1. Supporting the Implementation of the Curriculum Reform. The overall objective 
of this component is to successfully engage teachers, parents, students and education managers 
in the implementation of the new curriculum in primary and secondary education. This requires 
investments and interventions focused on supporting practitioners in schools and classrooms as 
Page  2
they introduce new standards, new contents, new assessment practices and instruments and new 
teaching methods. For instance, school libraries could be a major platform for new teaching 
skills and for introducing a new approach to student learning. That would require physical 
investment in the libraries, providing equipment, targeted training and, of course, books and 
other curriculum materials. Activities to be financed under this component would include the 
following:  
 
-
Dissemination of the new curriculum and subject syllabi at national and regional levels;  
 
-
Producing and distributing new textbooks and learning materials;  
 
-
Expanding and improving School Libraries;  
 
-
Using ICT for curriculum implementation and innovation;  
 
-
External support to schools and teachers from the regional/rayon level;  
 
-
Targeted support for foreign languages and ICT (new subjects in primary education);  
 
-
Strengthening Education Research in selected institutions; and  
 
-
Continuous review and update of the national curriculum and subject syllabi including 
preparatory work for the introduction of the 12th year of general secondary education.  
 
Component 2. Teacher Professional Development. This component would support the 
implementation of the new study plans for pre-service teacher training and the recently approved 
national strategy for in-service and teacher professional development. All this amounts to a 
radically new approach with regard to teacher policies in Azerbaijan, aimed at attracting, 
training, retaining and retraining effective and highly professional teachers. Concrete activities to 
be financed by this component include the following:  
 
-Implementing the reform of pre-service teacher training with a focus on innovative use of ICTs 
in the Pedagogical University and the Pedagogical Colleges;  
 
-
In-service teacher training and professional development in the context of the implementation 
of the new curriculum and within a new approach to professional development and the teaching 
career (induction, mentorship, leadership);  
 
-
Recruitment and training of principals (competencies and skills requirements); and  
 
-
Specific teacher training for the curriculum integration of ICTs.  
 
Component 3. Using Student Assessment Data for School Improvement and Quality-oriented 
Interventions at the Regional/Local Level. APL1 contemplated student assessment activities as 
part of the agenda related to reforms in the management of the education system. APL 2, while 
keeping and strengthening the link between centralized student assessment and the EMIS and 
PAPU, will consider student assessment as one of the pillars of the education quality reform 
agenda as it becomes increasingly focused on student learning outcomes. The overall objective 
of this component is to build up a new evaluation and assessment culture in Azerbaijan, a culture 
which emphasizes not just standards and selection of the academically able, but a commitment to 
improving learning outcomes for all students. Assessment information must be available in a 
user-friendly way to non-expert audiences, and there must be feedback from assessment to policy 
making and implementation. Concrete activities to be supported by this component include:  
 
-
Implementing the system of school-based assessment;  
 
-
Completing the definition of assessment standards for secondary education;  
Page  3
-
Reporting and dissemination of results from national and international assessments of student 
achievement at the national, rayon, and school levels;  
 
-
Develop a coordinated implementation plan for the effective use of national and international 
assessment data for school improvement purposes;  
 
-
Develop a coordinated implementation plan for the effective use of national and international 
assessment data for the identification of training needs for teachers, school directors, and local 
education administrators;  
 
-
Scaling-up the national secondary education graduation examination and reforming the 
certification/qualification system at the secondary level; and  
 
-
Participation of Azerbaijan in TIMSS and PIRLS.  
 
Component 4.  School readiness program, involving ECD and Preschool services, for children 
from vulnerable and marginalized backgrounds. The education quality objectives will not be 
achievable unless special attention is given to disadvantaged areas, and that entails forceful 
attention to introduction of preschool in those areas. The overall objective of this component is to 
support the recently approved State Program on Preschool Education, targeting selected areas of 
the country where vulnerable and marginalized children can benefit the most from early 
educational interventions. Concrete activities to be financed include:  
 
-
Early Childhood Development (ECD) programs aimed at parenting skills. Programs aimed at 
children aged 0-2, containing (i) pre-and post-natal parenting skills classes for cognitive skills for 
parents and (ii) home-based programs for children up to the age of 2  
 
-
Enhancement of preschool/kindergarten services .and pre-school programs:.Aimed at children 
aged 3-5 and including learning and cognitive development and language programs in preschool 
facilities.  
 
-
Both ECD and pre-school programs would include preventive health care and nutrition 
programs for children.  
 
Component 5. Strengthening the Capacity of Education Authorities for Managing and 
Implementing Education Reforms. This component would continue to support the Ministry of 
Education in its ongoing reorganization and in the capacity-building activities geared towards 
managing the implementation of education reforms. The overall objective is to increase and 
sustain the capacity to develop and implement policies for all sectors of education, including pre-
school, vocational, and tertiary education. Moreover, APL2 will extend these very goals and 
activities to the education department and authorities of rayons, also seeking a better 
coordination between central and regional authorities. Concrete activities to be supported 
include:  
 
Management, Planning and Supervisory Capacity  
 
-
Training of education managers of all levels;  
 
-
Reviewing and reforming the recruitment of inspectors and redefining their role in the context 
of the ongoing reforms;  
 
-
Further development of the HR strategy for education sector;  
 
-
Technical assistance to the introduction of teaching competency profiles, competitive access 
to the teaching profession and merit-based career development and performance evaluation of 
teachers;  
Page  4
-
Strengthening the Policy Analysis and Planning Unit;  
 
-
Developing and improving the communication and PR capacity of the MES; and  
 
-
Building the managerial capacity and enhancing the school support capabilities of the 
Education Departments of the Rayons.  
 
Education Management Information System (EMIS)  
 
-
Creation of WAN, nationwide network for sharing EMIS data (at least on a pilot basis);  
 
-
The reinforcement of data collection, analysis and dissemination functions of both strategic 
management units, with particular focus on data integration, joint analytical outputs (such as 
projections), and information management and dissemination; and  
 
-
Development and use of specialized software and training of users in the new software.  
 
Component 6. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. In principle, the 
implementation arrangements for the APL 2 would remain the same as for the APL 1. This 
proposal is based on the demonstrated commitment and ownership of the Government of 
Azerbaijan, especially the Ministry of Education, to the implementation of the reforms in the 
country. The Minister of Education would ensure overall leadership for the reform process, 
including project implementation. The Deputy Minister would continue as the Project 
Coordinator; the sub-component coordinators (MOE civil servants) would continue to be 
responsible for the implementation of the respective project sub-components. Since the MOE 
takes full responsibility for ensuring program coordination with the Ministry of Finance, MoED 
and other stakeholders, there is no need to keep the Project Steering Council, which was 
established under the APL 1 but never became operational.  
 
During the implementation of APL 1, the capacity of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) has 
been significantly strengthened and it successfully coordinates the implementation of project 
activities. Considering the increased workload in procurement once the APL 2 becomes 
effective, it might be advisable to hire an additional procurement staff.  
 
M&E and Impact Evaluation. Very good practice in terms of M&E has been the norm during 
the implementation of APL1. Baseline surveys were carried out in relation to many key 
interventions and the surveys have been replicated every other year since project effectiveness. 
The challenge for APL2 is to also move to rigorous impact evaluation to help inform future 
reform policies.  
 
Per-capita financing. An impact evaluation of the finance reforms piloted in 59 schools, 
supported under APL 1, is proposed to be carried out during the first years of the implementation 
of APL 2. The results of this study would be an important input to the dialogue on this reform 
and will address the technical and legal conditions needed for successful implementation on a 
broader scale. The experience in the 59 pilot schools will allow the Government to assess the 
potential of this reform while also gaining hands-on experience in managing the new funding 
approach.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
Page  5
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's Institutional Capacity will be updated to reflect the Borrower's demonstrated 
capacity and experience in supervising building rehabilitation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Decision on Initial Environmental Assessment Category: Environmental category 'B' project 
with low impact.  
 
The project will support mainly training, TA and equipment for upgrading the quality of the 
educational curricula and services.  At this stage, it is known that there will be financing of some 
minor rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, i.e. rehabilitation and expansion of some school 
libraries. Therefore a simple EMP, including the infrastructure rehabilitation checklist (to be 
provided to the team) should be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal. The team does not 
expect other civil works to be included, but cannot be certain at this early stage, particularly as 
there seems to be potential for the project to increase from $20 million to $ 40 million. It should 
be noted that the Bank's safeguards apply also to investments financed by Government co-
financing of the project.  
 
The project is categorized as low-risk B, but is not transferred at this time due to uncertainty 
as to whether additional physical investments may be included at a later stage of preparation.   
There should be a second meeting at pre-appraisal stage to reconsider.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources:  
 
It was agreed that this safeguard should be checked as not triggered at this point, however 
this needs to be verified through the EMP process.  In addition, works contracts should specify 
what is to be done in the (unlikely) case that chance finds (of physical cultural resources) occur 
in the course of implementing works.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement:  
 
It was agreed that, as no land acquisition is envisaged, this safeguard would not be 
triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  6
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/13/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
simple Environmental Management Plan, including the infrastructure rehabilitation 
checklist (to be provided to the team) will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla 
11/05/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
11/14/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mamta Murthi 
11/13/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
