Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/10/2006 
Report No.:  AC2246
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P090887 
Project Name:  AGRICULTURAL  DEVELOPMENT AND CREDIT PROJECT-II 
Task Team Leader:  Frauke Jungbluth 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (35%);Agricultural extension and research 
(35%);Agricultural marketing and trade (30%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Small and medium enterprise support 
(P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
22.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.90 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
1.61 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
5.80 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
9.20 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
22.51 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective is to enhance the access of farmers and small and medium rural 
enterprises to rural business and agricultural support services including financial, 
advisory and veterinary services and to stimulate market-oriented investments in rural 
areas. The project will build on ADCP-
I’s achievements by: (i) strengthening the credit 
union system established under ADCP-I and stimulating commercial financial services 
suited for agricultural businesses; (ii) expanding the outreach of the rural advisory and 
veterinary services established under ADCP-I; (iii) improving access to adopted 
technologies; and (iv) assisting producers and processors in marketing and improved 
product quality.  The regional expansion of the immovable property registration pilot of 
ADCP-I would be handled under a separate Real Estate and Cadastre Project.  The main 
project beneficiaries comprise individual farmers, farmer groups, rural micro-
entrepreneurs, and the small to medium agro-processing sector.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project consists of two main components addressing critical support needs at the 
farm level, and at the rural business and agro-processor level.  
 
Component I - Agricultural Business Services (US$ 39.6 million)  
 
Objective:  The objective is to support rural businesses to improve the linkages between 
their production and markets.  The component aims to develop efficient linkages and 
contractual relationships between producers and processors, and to facilitate investments 
in market opportunities through enhanced access to financial services and targeted 
business support.  
 
Activities: The component would support the further development of farmers, small 
rural businesses and agro-processors by: (a) increasing the availability of small rural 
financial services by strengthening and broadening the credit union outreach; (b) 
expanding rural financial services such as credit for working capital requirements, long-
term credit for investment purposes, and leasing programs for processing and agricultural 
equipment; (c) enhancing the efficiency of rural markets by introducing innovative 
mechanisms that encourage sustainable linkages between developing small-scale rural 
businesses and agro-processors with farmers, associations and groups; and (d) 
strengthening rural business, market information and promotion services offered through 
the rural advisory system.  
 
Component II 
–
Agricultural Support Services (US$ 18.6 million)  
 
Objective:  The objective of the component is to enable farmers to improve their 
productivity and quality of production by expanding the outreach of the advisory system, 
strengthening the provision of private veterinary services, and improving access to 
adapted technologies.  
 
Activities:  Three main sub-components have been identified: (a) supporting the further 
development of an effective information and advisory system that can provide farmers 
and other rural entrepreneurs with appropriate knowledge and skills to improve their 
productivity, quality of production, management and marketing; (b) assisting livestock 
owners to improve animal production through enhanced access to quality-assured 
veterinary and husbandry services throughout the country, and by restoring the disease 
surveillance and preparedness functions of the State Veterinary Service (SVS); and (c) 
improving the capacity of selected research institutions to provide adapted technologies 
and critical information to advisory staff and producers.  
 
Component III - Project Management (US$ 1.3 million)  
 
The project will support the establishment and operation of a Project Management Unit 
(PMU) under the Ministry of Agriculture and will build on the structures established 
under ADCP-I.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is expected to have national coverage. Some activities (advisory and 
veterinary) will be rolled-out into additional regions not covered under ADCP-I, i.e., the 
regions of Shamakhi, Barda, Salyan, Goychay and Guba/Khachmaz.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, ADCP-II is expected to have a positive environmental impact based on 
improved farming practices, improved veterinary and livestock services and strengthened 
environmental and safeguards awareness which will be undertaken.  
 
An Environmental Management Plan has been prepared to determine key actions that 
the project should take to safeguard negative environmental impacts. The Environmental 
guidelines will become an integral part of the operational manual.  
 
During preparation, the Social Impact Assessment of ADCP-I was combined with the 
Social Assessment for ADCP II.  The overall objectives were: (a) to measure the impact 
of the activities under ADCP I to see if they have achieved their development objectives 
and have increased the welfare of the intended beneficiaries; (b) highlight the lessons 
learned through ADCP-I concerning the social impact of the project on the target 
communities; (c) ensure that the proposed ADCP-II is inclusive and builds ownership by 
using lessons learned from ADCP-I; and (c) ensure that investment under ADCP II will 
reach the intended beneficiaries and contribute to poverty alleviation.  The first phase of 
the assessment was conducted through qualitative and quantitative methods as well as 
desk review of background documents and data.  The quantitative part was performed 
through a household survey and a village datasheet, while the main qualitative parts were 
through focus group discussions and key informant interviews.  The full social and 
impact assessment will further explore the social issues identified.  
 
The project is not likely to trigger large-scale land acquisition or resettlement.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will benefit from the institutional capacity developed under ADCP-I which 
stressed awareness of safeguard policies. The project’s advisory serviceactivities will 
continue to promote the adoption of improved and environmentally sound technologies, 
provide training and advice on integrated pest management techniques as well as on 
improved use and handling of fertilizer and agro chemicals.  A large number of trainings 
were provided during the first phase to all project beneficiaries including borrowers from 
the line of credit under ADCP-I.  It is planned to continue this practice under ADCP-II.  
 
The rural finance activities related to borrower groups and credit unions will deal with 
fairly small loans averaging US$ 800 which is expected to be used for agricultural inputs 
and implements, equipment and trading activities with a minimal environmental impact.  
Staff of CUs involved in lending will also be provided with training for environmental 
screening and due diligence as part of appraisal of credit applications.  Environmental 
advisors (consultants) will be contracted by the project to assist the CUs to assess the 
potential environmental impact of sub-projects and proposed mitigation measures.  The 
most common end-uses of loans have been for acquisition of quality feedstuff for 
livestock, and production of sugar beets, potato, vegetables and barley.  These activities 
are closely linked to advisory service activities and therefore usually received some 
guidance on their usage.  
 
Although the project Operational Manual (OM) of ADCP I  Rural Finance Component 
did not cover environmental aspects, borrowers received training on integrated pest 
management (IPM) techniques and improved use and handling of fertilizers and agro-
chemicals. Some 800 two-day training sessions on different environmental aspects (such 
as rules on application of pesticides, biological control measures, proper use of fertilizers, 
etc) were provided to about 8,000 farmers by the Regional Advisory Centers in all five 
project regions.  A number of information materials on different environmental topics 
have also been developed and distributed to beneficiaries.  About 86% of sub-loans made 
so far have been for livestock maintenance, specifically, for procurement of fodder 
(alfalfa mainly) for intensive feeding of animals.  For crops, the average size of 
individual loans is US$ 350.  These loans are not likely to have major environmental 
impacts as the size and numbers of such loans per project region were very small.  For 
example, over the last two years only 97 loans were made for spring barley and corn, in 
five raions in the Sheki region.  For ADCP-II it would be reviewed whether additional 
safeguard measures are required for the small loans provided through borrower groups 
and credit cooperatives.  
Page  5
ADCP-II will provide a credit line through commercial banks and non-banking 
institutions to agro-processors.  Safeguard measures for this activity will include 
screening by PFIs to determine environmental risk and provision of advisory services to 
assist credit applicants to develop sub-project environmental management measures.   It 
will be likely that the areas of investments can be narrowed down to a couple of 
industries 
–
i.e. fruit and vegetable production.  The EMP will provide guidelines for 
tracking categories of investments by region and measures to prevent over-investment in 
crops or animal husbandry that would exceed the environmental carrying capacity of the 
region.  
 
The Competitive Grants would be provided to farmer groups and processors in the areas 
of market innovations, improved processing and storage, and similar.  Each grant will be 
supported by a detailed business proposal including a description of its environmental 
impact for assessement by the PIU (or grants administrator).The EMP provides guidance 
on how such a review can be streamlined.  Investments will be in the area of US$ 20 to 
40 thousand.  
 
Use of pesticides may occur under the ADCP-II components that provide credits to 
small and medium size agribusinesses, and possibly also under the competitive grants 
component.  Pest control product screening is required when a project finances pest 
control products.  The screening establishes an authorized list of pest control products 
approved for financing, along with a mechanism to ensure that only the specified 
products will be procured with Bank funds.  Screening is appropriate for ADCP-II instead 
of preparation of a Pesticide Management Plan because: (a) expected quantities of pest 
control products that may be used are not significant from a health or environment 
standpoint; (b) no significant environmental concerns related to pest control need to be 
addressed; (c) the project will not introduce pesticide use or other non indigenous 
biological control into an area, or significantly increase the level of pesticide use; and (d) 
no hazardous products will be financed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include farmers and rural enterprises that participate in the project, 
members of Government,  
 
and Non-Government Organizations. The Project Management Unit has been holding 
regular meetings with stakeholders from the Government, Parliament, and the 
Communities to discuss the  
 
organization and content of the Operations Manual, which is being drafted by the PMU. 
The results of the Environment Assessment have been disclosed on the Ministry's 
website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/07/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/10/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Frauke Jungbluth 
04/07/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
04/10/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
04/08/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
04/10/2006 
Comments:   
