Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC1791
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P094488 
Project Name:  Highway 2 
Task Team Leader:  Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 28, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 17, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (99%);Central government administration (1%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
64.88
64.88 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main project development objective is to reduce road transport costs and improve 
access, transit and road safety within Azerbaijan's East-West and North-South corridors, 
through rehabilitation of one section on the Baku-Georgia highway (M2), upgrading 
some sections of the Alat-Masalli road of the Baku-Iran highway (M3) and rehabilitating 
the Baku-Shamakhi road (M4).   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Rehabilitation of the Kurdamir-Ujar section of the existing M2 highway 
Baku-Georgia, upgrade of some sections of the M3 highway between Alat and Masalli 
and rehabilitation of the existing M4 road Baku-Shamakhi as well as some access roads.  
 
Component 2:  Provision of technical assistance, training and goods to support 
strengthening MOT and RTSD and carrying out project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
See Project Description.   
Page  2
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Jane Olga Ebinger (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Alat-Astara study corridor is identified as the most sensitive area to the proposed 
development.  The area is very diverse ranging from less populated dry semi desert in the 
north to more densely populated areas in the southern lowlands (including swampy areas) 
and foothills of the Talysh Mountains. There are many rivers, canals, and wetland 
systems in the corridor as well as some lakes and mineral springs.  Numerous protected 
areas and other significant natural sites of both national and international importance are 
found in the study corridor including cultural heritage sites. Biodiversity is high and fish 
resources are abundant. The southern area is largely agricultural.  
 
The area of most sensitivity is the construction of the new road section between 
Shorsulu and Masalli.  Three alignments (direct and railway alignments, and expansion of 
the existing road) have been reviewed at this stage for traversing the area and both the 
direct and railway options route through existing natural wetlands.  The 'direct' alignment 
of 52 km includes a 12 km section that routes through the Madmudchala and Akhchala 
wetlands, Important Bird Area (IBA) sites that are proposed for future Ramsar 
designation but are currently unprotected. The 'railway' alignment is 55 km long and 
includes an 11 km section between Mugan Channel and Uzuntapa that runs in parallel 
and approximately 2 to 3 km to the northwest of the railway line and that also routes 
through the Akhchala wetland.  
 
The Madmudchala and Akhchala wetlands provide natural habitats for numerous rare 
and endangered wildlife species and have significance as a buffer zone for the adjoining 
wetlands that form part of the Gizilagach State Reserve, an official Ramsar site located 3 
to 5 km from this area. The water balance in the Akhchala wetland is unstable and under 
Page  3
constant threat of drying out. Controlled hunting is permitted here and there is pressure 
from poaching and fishing.  
 
The proposed project will build four-lane highway that will result in the expropriation of 
about 816 hectare of land along 136 km roads between Alat and Masalli. Physical 
relocation of households may also be necessary. Exact road alignments are not yet 
determined, and consultants are estimating social and environmental impacts of 
alternative alignments, so the alignments of least impact will be selected. The land 
expropriation and physical relocation will not be necessary during the first year when the 
first 22km of roads from Alat are expanded.  
 
The project will also rehabilitate existing Baku - Shamakhi section of road, which will 
not entail land acquisition outside of existing ROW or physical relocation of individual. 
Environmental impacts are likely to be temporary and short term and associated with 
construction such as noise, heavy vehicle traffic, dust, traffic disruption and loss or 
impaired access to properties adjacent to the ROW but no impacts on cultural properties 
are anticipated.  Within the ROW, some sections of tree plantations and shrubs that fall 
under the ownership of the State Forest Fund may require removal and management 
plans need to take careful account of Important Bird Areas.  
 
The project will also rehabilitate existing Kurdami-Ujar section of the M2 highway. 
This rehabilitation will be carried out within the existing right of way which is free of 
encroachment (i.e., no land acquisition or resettlement). Environmental impacts are likely 
to be temporary and short term and associated with construction such as noise, heavy 
vehicle traffic, dust, traffic disruption and loss or impaired access to properties adjacent 
to the ROW but no impacts on cultural properties are anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Routes through these wetland areas have significant potential for adverse environmental 
impacts including large scale sedimentation due to construction on unstable ground, 
habitat fragmentation and the creation of barriers for wildlife movement, disruption of 
breeding colonies for rare and endangered species and to the hydrology in the area.  
Natural wetlands and areas with saline soils also raise concerns for construction: saline 
soils are prone to collapse under load or vibration and may lead to the corrosion of steel 
reinforcements and also require high volumes of construction materials.  
 
The project may entail temporary loss of access during physical works, and occupation 
of open spaces to store construction material. A few settlements exist along Baku- 
Shamakhi road and along Kurdamir-Ujar section, and roadside shops may experience loss 
of income during road construction.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Based on the analysis conducted to date the 'railway alignment' between Shorsulu and 
Sarcuvar, near Masally, combines the least environmental impacts with, on balance, the 
Page  4
greatest potential for stimulating economic development in the region. However, during 
project implementation, engineering feasibility studies together with environmental and 
social assessment and economic analysis will be conducted for all route alignments prior 
to the selection of a preferred alternative for development.  
 
For each road section, specific environmental assessments, appropriate study work and 
environmental management plans will be developed during project implementation to 
specifically address the issues and concerns raised above.  
 
The expansion of existing roads was considered as a project alternative, which is 
considered less preferable since many roadside structures will need to be demolished and 
more people will be negatively affected. Community members along project roads who 
were consulted during project preparation also preferred new roads on grounds of smaller 
scale of resettlement needed.  
 
The size of resettlement for alternative alignments between Alat - Masally will be 
compared during project implementation so the alignments of minimum social impacts 
will be selected.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the exact alignment is not yet known, a Regional Environmental Review (RER) has 
been prepared covering the entire scope of the development. The RER describes the 
existing environment, discusses and compares project alternatives, and identifies risks 
and issues to be addressed during project implementation.  
 
In addition, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been developed that 
outlines the procedures for the environmental screening, management, consultation and 
disclosure related to the proposed Category A and B sub-projects.  The EMF is 
compatible with the national Law on Environmental Protection and the guidelines 
contained in Azerbaijan's EIA Handbook, which while not legally binding contains a 
framework for EIA that is consistent with international environmental assessment 
practices.  
 
In accordance with the EMF, site specific environmental assessments and/or 
management plans will be developed for each sub-project in accordance with national 
requirements and the Banks safeguard procedures. For Category A projects independent 
EA experts not affiliated with the project will carry out this work.  
 
Within RTSD the Ecology and Safety Sector (ESS), a recently established unit that is 
responsible for environmental management, will oversee the implementation of the EMF 
and related environmental management plans. Construction contractors will be 
responsible for implementing the environmental management plans for sub-projects. The 
capacity of the ESS needs to be considerably strengthened and on the job training is 
proposed prior to Board approval to raise awareness of national and world bank 
environmental assessment and management requirements, the impacts associated with 
Page  5
highway construction and their management. Independent EA consultants that will be 
engaged to prepare the sub-projects will also have a follow on capacity building and 
training component to their contract.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed in order to identify 
negative impacts that may result from project implementation and define policies, 
procedures and institutional arrangement for RAPs. RAPs will detail plans and 
procedures for the expropriation of land and physical relocation of PAP.  
 
RTSD does not have the experience to manage involuntary resettlement as per Bank 
safeguard policies. RTSD set up Land Acquisition Department (LAD) in charge of 
involuntary resettlement, but further capacity development will be necessary for 
satisfactory implementation of resettlement. The environmental and social TA that is 
being provided to RTSD under the Highway I project will help strengthen the capacity, 
but consultants will be hired during the implementation of the proposed project who will 
provide hands-on support to LAD.  RTSD will also continue to increase the number of 
local staff to LAD.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Preliminary consultations were held with local stakeholders in each administrative district 
in August 2005.  Questions revolved on basics facts about the proposed development, the 
impacts on existing settlements and compensation. Public comments on the draft RER 
and EMF are currently being sought. The draft final reports in English and Azeri 
languages for the RER, EMF and RPF of Alat Astara and Baku Shamakhi roads have 
been distributed by the Cabinet of Ministers to relevant ministries and agencies, and to 
the local executive offices along the propsoed development where they can be accessed 
by the public.  On October 20, 2005 an advert was placed in the local press to notify the 
public of the availability of these reports.  A 3 week comment period closed on 
November 10, 2005 and comments have now been incorporated into the final RER.  
 
Public consultation was also organized along project roads, where local government 
officials, community members and RTSD representatives discussed resettlement issues. 
RPF is disclosed in country for comments from interested parties. RAPs will be 
developed in consultation with PAP, and disclosed to them for comments, during project 
implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/18/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/26/2005  
Page  6
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/21/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
12/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Jane Olga Ebinger 
11/28/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
11/28/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/20/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
12/20/2006 
Comments:   
