Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3200 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P107613 
Project Name: IDP Economic Development Support Project -- Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Ellen Hamilton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(25%);General transportation sector (25%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Other social 
development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing for the IDP Economic Development Support Project (IDP-
EDS AF: P107613) will replicate part of the IDP Economic Support Project (IDP-EDS: 
P089751). The objective for the IDP-EDS AF is to improve the living conditions of IDPs 
through demand-driven community based infrastructure and service micro-projects. The Project 
is intended to contribute to the higher level objectives of enhancing the economic opportunities 
and prospects for social integration of IDPs.  
 
Key indicators:  
 
Progress in achieving development objectives will be assessed periodically by key performance 
indicators measuring project outputs and outcomes. Indicators will include the following:  
 
-
%
of
micro-projects that are rated by IDPs as satisfactory in achieving the community 
proposal to improve their living conditions;  
Page  2
-
Number of micro-project beneficiaries;  
 
-
Number and type of micro-projects completed.  
 
The social fund character of the project implies that specific sector and project choices will be 
made in the course of implementation. It is impossible to know ex-ante the nature of the 
investments to be financed. Therefore emphasis will be placed on community based participatory 
and qualitative evaluation, where communities define their living condition needs, develop 
proposals to address these needs and set their own indicators to measure whether micro-projects 
respond to these needs and improve their living conditions. This means performance indicators 
for specific sectors or project areas will be developed in a participatory manner in the course of 
implementation to reflect specific conditions and achievements.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed IDP-EDS Additional Financing will replicate Components A and C of the IDP-
EDS. IDP-EDS AF will support scaling up the micro-project component for additional 
beneficiaries in IDP communities throughout Azerbaijan. The financing will enable the 
preparation and implementation of up to 350 small-scale projects (average cost between USD 
60,000 - 80,000) for rehabilitation, repair or reconstruction (as well as the acquisition of related 
equipment for) basic small scale infrastructure, social infrastructure and temporary shelter 
facilities. The additional financing will fund the operating costs of SFDI, SFDI staff training, 
monitoring and evaluation and financial management, building capacity within SFDI for 
implementing sustainable development work with IDPs. It will also make provision for technical 
assistance to improve the quality of the project.  
 
IDP-EDS-II will not provide additional financing for the micro-credit component of the IDP-
EDS-I project due to the documented ample capacity of micro-credit organizations to sustain 
their activities without donor support.  
 
Accordingly, the Additional Financing for IDP-EDS will consist of two components: (a) micro-
projects; and (b) IDP/EDS Implementation Support.  
 
The table below provides a project cost estimate and indicative financing plan for the project 
components:  
 
Table 1: Estimated Project Costs and Indicative Financing Plan (in USD million)  
 
Total Cost 
IDA 
Government 
IDA %  
 
of
Total  
 
A.  Micro-projects 
28.00  
 
B.  IDP-EDS-II Implementation Support  
 
Total  
 
A.  Micro-projects (USD 28 million; IDA USD 28 million equivalent)  
 
Page  3
The component will finance the preparation and implementation of up to 220 small-scale 
projects (average cost about USD60 - 80,000) of rehabilitation, repair or reconstruction as well 
as the acquisition of related equipment, for:  
 
-
basic small infrastructure, such as water supply and sewage networks, electricity and natural 
gas distribution networks, access roads, drainage and irrigation systems, etc.;  
 
-
social infrastructure such as community centers;  
 
-
the rehabilitation and improvement of schools; and  
 
-
temporary shelter facilities.  
 
To be eligible for SFDI financing all such micro-projects must be identified and selected by the 
beneficiary IDP communities themselves who provide a cash-contribution of 3% of the total cost 
as a demonstration of their commitment.  
 
All projects must demonstrate that they represent the least-cost approach to the problems they 
are meant to address in terms of both the actual cost of the investment and the resulting 
operations and maintenance costs.  
 
B.  IDP/EDS Implementation Support (USD 2 million, IDA 2 million equivalent)  
 
The component will finance (a) the operating costs of SFDI (including staff salaries, office 
consumables, utilities, in-country travel, office and vehicle maintenance, insurances, etc. as well 
as renewal of office equipment and vehicles), (b) SFDI staff training, (c) portfolio development 
activities, (d) annual audits, (e) monitoring and evaluation surveys and studies, and (f) additional 
technical assistance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The micro-project component of IDP/EDS will be national in scope and will target IDP 
communities in urban and rural areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
In keeping with the procedures of the ongoing ISP-EDS Project, possible environmental 
concerns will be addressed by SFDI during the selection, development, and implementation of 
micro-projects in accordance with the practices and procedures employed by SFDI for the 
existing project and described in the SFDI Operations Manual (OM). The capacity of SFDI for 
safeguard policies during implementation of the IDP-EDS project will be assessed by the Bank 
prior to appraisal of IDP-EDS-AF.  
 
Each micro-project to be financed by IDP-ESD-AF will be individually screened and reviewed 
by SFDI. If necessary, appropriate mitigation measures will be incorporated into the project 
design and implementation. Micro-projects with identifiable significant negative impacts will be 
a
priori excluded from funding. The performance of SFDI in environmental assessment will be 
monitored by the Bank during supervision of IDP-EDS-AF implementation and corrective 
measures taken if needed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Ms Amy Evans (ECSSD) 
Ms Joanna Peace De Berry (YPP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
IDP/EDS-AF is not expected to have any significant or irreversible environmental impacts, 
and is classified as Environmental Category "F".  Many of the micro-projects are expected to 
produce environmental benefits.  However, because these projects are not pre-identified, there 
could be unforeseen environmental impacts during implementation.  The IDP/EDS OM section 
includes an Environmental Management Plan Framework (EMPF), which has recently been 
reviewed and found satisfactory for assessing and mitigating the minor impacts that could occur 
in specific micro-projects.  Adequate institutional capacity for environmental management has 
already been established in SFDI through the IDP/EDS project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Like the IDP/EDS, the Additional Finance is expected to finance inter alia community micro-
projects (of an average cost of about US$ 60,000-80,000) to upgrade, replace, and/or repair water 
supply and sewerage installations in buildings or neighborhoods occupied by small communities 
of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in rural and urban areas of Azerbaijan.  These activities 
are minor additions or alterations to existing infrastructure, and do not alter or expand its scope 
and extent.  This was the basis for the waiver of ‘Notification to Riparians under OP 7.50’ that 
was obtained for IDP-EDS. 
 
Since the project activities under the Additional Financing are identical to those of the 
ongoing IDP/EDS project, the rationale for the waiver remains applicable. No new or amended 
waiver is expected to be required for the Additional Financing.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/16/2007 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ellen Hamilton 
11/09/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
11/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
11/09/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
