Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3159 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/25/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P105116 
Project Name: Social Protection Development 
Task Team Leader: Aleksandra Posarac 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P);Improving labor markets (P);Other social protection and 
risk management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objective is to (i) improve access to and strengthen delivery of programs 
aimed at fostering the quality of labor supply and improving the matching of workers and jobs; 
and to (ii) improve access to community based social care services for vulnerable groups.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would have the following four components for an approximate project cost 
of US$30 million. A possibility for Government participation in financing the project costs will 
be explored.  
 
Component I: Integrated gate-keeping and delivery of social protection programs (US$5.0 
million): This component will support piloting of one-stop shops and introduction of case 
management and referral systems. Under this component, the project will finance: ICT, other 
goods, TA, civil works, and training with particular focus on case workers.  
 
Component II: Improving access to and strengthening delivery of active labor market programs 
and restructuring and development of the national employment services (IDA financing: 
Page  2
US$14.5 million). This component will include (i) strengthening of the labor market institutions 
and capacity building for development, implementation, and monitoring of labor market 
regulations, policies and programs; (ii) strengthening of active labor market programs, and 
restructuring and development of the national employment services, including job search and 
matching services; information collection and reporting function; training programs, job clubs, 
employer contact services, small business advisory services, etc. The National Employment 
Service local branches will become a part of the 'one-stop shop' organization of the social 
protection service delivery; (iii) development and implementation of the labor market programs 
aimed specifically at young people; and (iv) restructuring of the national service for assessment 
of disability. Under this component, the project will finance: ICT, other goods, TA, civil works, 
training and piloting of new programs.  
 
Component III: Introduction and development of integrated community based social work and 
care services (US$7.0 million): Social welfare services at the community level aimed at persons 
with disabilities, disadvantaged women, children and youth, dysfunctional families and single, 
frail elderly, will be introduced and scaled up by expanding the network of service providers, 
diversifying the menu of services, and improving their quality. Service standards will be 
developed and their implementation supported. The environment for service provision will be 
improved, including improvements in physical infrastructure and provision of adequate 
equipment such as teaching aids, physical rehabilitation aids and equipment, computers, etc. 
Contracting out of services would be piloted. Community-based social welfare services with case 
management will be piloted. Education of social workers will be improved. In the area of child 
protection, statutory, family substitute and family support services will be reorganized and 
strengthened. An innovation fund to support the development of community based services will 
be established. Under this component, the project will finance: ICT, other goods, TA, civil 
works, training and piloting of new programs.  
 
Component IV: Project Management (IDA financing: US$3.5 million), to cover consultant 
services for project implementation and incremental operating costs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's Institutional Capacity will be updated to reflect the Borrower's demonstrated 
capacity and experience in supervising building rehabilitation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Though primarily a technical assistance project, the component activities are expected to 
have modest amounts of building rehabilitation, i.e. new electrical systems, bathrooms, windows, 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
painted walls, etc. Reference will be made to the EMP Checklist for Building Rehabilitation 
Projects.  
 
Project is not expected to have any resettlement, land acquisition, or limitations on access to 
income.  OP 4.12 is not triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/05/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Management Plan - Checklist for Building Rehabilitation Projects will be 
prepared and disclosed before project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Aleksandra Posarac 
10/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/17/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
09/18/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
