                                                                                                                                                                                                         43717


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 03/29/2007                                       Report No.: AC2713
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Azerbaijan                            Project ID: P096213
                                                                                                            Project Name: Water Supply Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Andreas Rohde
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2007       Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: ECSSD                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                          Authorized
                                                                                                                                                           Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Water supply (60%);Sanitation (40%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other urban
                                    Disclosure                                                              development (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):           230.00

                                              Public                                                        IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    Borrower                                                            80.00
                                                                                                                                                                                        80.00
                                                    Authorized                                              Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                          Simple []              Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)           Yes [ ]        No [ ]

                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The objective of the project is to improve the availability, quality, reliability, and
                                                                        Public                              sustainability of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in 20 of Azerbaijan?s
                                                                                                            regional centers (Rayons). This objective will be achieved through: (a) rehabilitation and
                                                                                                            reconstruction of water supply and sanitation infrastructure in the rayons; and (b)
                                                                                                            implementation of a comprehensive Institutional Modernization Component to strengthen
                                                                                                            the WSS sector?s capacity to manage water supply and sanitation services in an efficient,
                                                                                                            effective, and sustainable manner.

                                                                              Authorized                    3. Project Description
                                                                                                            Component A: Rayon Investment Component

                                                                                                             This component would finance the rehabilitation and extension of water supply and
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            sewerage systems, as well as water, wastewater and septic sludge treatment facilities in
                                                                                                            20 rayons across Azerbaijan.
                                                                                                  Public

                                                                                                             Component B: Regional Development Plan for Greater Baku

 This component would finance preparation of a Regional Development Plan for the
Greater Baku area, and an update of the Water Supply and Wastewater Master Plan
prepared in 1998. The Regional Development Plan would not only guide future
development in the area, but would also provide a sensible framework for future
investments, not only in water supply and sanitation, but also in electricity, transport, gas
supply, roads, schools and other services.

 Component C: Institutional Modernization Component

 This component would support development and implementation of key reforms needed
for the modernization of Azersu Joint Stock Company, which is in charge of managing
WSS in Azerbaijan excluding Nakhchivan, and its subsidiary companies and to a lesser
extent to the State Amelioration and Water Management Agency (SAWMA) in charge of
services in Nakhchivan, to improve the efficiency and sustainability of WSS services.

 Component D: Project Implementation and Management

 This component will support project implementation by financing project management
activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project area covers the urban centers in twenty rayons in Azerbaijan, including
Agstafa, Tovuz, Khanlar, Gorenboy, Terter, Gazakh, Mingechevir, Shamkir, Samukh,
Zagatala, and Gakh in the West and Northwest; Oguz, Guba, and Gabala, in the North;
Bilasuvar, Sabirabad, Saatli, and Hajigabul in the East and South East, and Sharur and
Babek in Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic, as well as the villages located in close
proximity of the urban centers or along the transmission mains supplying the centers.
(See attached map). Which, if any, of the Safeguard Policies may be triggered, will vary
depending on the proposed locations for, and nature of, works in each rayon.

 The location of some project rayons (Guba, Gabala and Oguz) in the vicinity of the
Shah Dag National Park, and Zagatala in the vicinity of the Zagatala nature reserve, have
been identified as requiring special attention under the Environmental Management plan
for the project.

 The location of several rayons under the project within the catchment areas of some
international waterways including: (i) the Kura River, which flows to the Caspian Sea
through Azerbaijan from Turkey and Georgia; (ii) the Araks River which flows from
Turkey and Armenia, and along Azerbaijan?s border with Iran, joining the Kura River
near the town of Sabirabad in Azerbaijan; and (iii) the Samur River, which flows along
Azerbaijan?s border with Russia to the Caspian Sea, triggers the Bank?s International
Waterways Operational Policy. Azerbaijan is however located at the downstream end of
the above rivers.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECSSD)
   Ms Hermine De Soto (ECSSD)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

 Environmental Assessment (World Bank OP 4.01)

 The project falls into Category A for Environmental Assessment (EA) since it may
provide financing for one or more wastewater treatment plants of considerable size and
potential impact. Most sub-project investments in water supply, rehabilitation of
infrastructure, and smaller wastewater treatment plants pose less risk. Each sub-project
will be screened regarding its EA category and the appropriate instruments for
assessment, mitigation and monitoring will be put in place. Most specific utility and site
locales will not be formally selected by appraisal and the EA document for the project
centers on an environmental framework for screening, due diligence, mitigation and
monitoring. The team will ensure that these points are reflected in any updated EA
documents.

 Once operational, most of the impacts of the Project will be positive. The
environmental assessment indicates that the implementation of the project will have long-
term positive environmental impacts in terms of reducing pollution of natural resources,
generation of significant economical, social and public health benefits, and will enable
the government to enforce existing environmental regulations and standards. Specific
impacts are outlined below:

 Potential Positive Impacts

 a)     Improved WSS Services: Repair and improvement of WSS systems, especially,
distribution system, while decreasing fear of pollution, will provide high quality potable
water to a larger population. Improved WSS is also expected to result in reduced
operation and maintenance (O&M) costs to the utilities and higher efficiency through
decreased water losses and pumping costs.

 b)     Improvement of public health and environmental quality: The provision of
wastewater collection and treatment facilities will have a strong long term positive effect
on the overall environment and on public health conditions. There will be an
improvement in the water quality in the streams and rivers that flow throughout the
project area. Another major benefit expected from the project is the protection of
groundwater resources from contamination by untreated sewage, and the reduction of
untreated sewage discharge to the Caspian Sea from Kura and Araks. This will decrease
negative impacts on water quality consumed by other users from those rivers. In
addition, pollution of ground, surface water and underground water caused by flowing of
polluted water directly onto the relief in project areas will be prevented, and salination
and erosion problems which are problematic in some rayons will be avoided.

 c)     Improvement of natural habitats: The project will not cause any direct threat to
natural habitats in the project area as the project components are far away from them.
Indeed, through improvements in water quality as a result of the project, the ecological
conditions of the respective surface water bodies in rayons such as Bilasuvar are expected
to improve and to assist in the restoration of the degraded water quality of wetlands. This
improvement are expected to contribute positively to the conservation of natural habitats.

 d)     Re-use of treated wastewaters and sludge: The design of the treatment plants
under the project will take into consideration the use of their by-products (generated
sludge, and treated effluent) with the aim of protecting the environment and the scarce
water resources. This will generate significant economic, social and health benefits and
will enable the Government to enforce the laws that prohibit discharging raw wastewater
in the environment.

 e)     Additional economic benefits: As a result of the project, economic benefits will
occur in terms of decreased water volume to be pumped (because of leakagereduction
and demand management), and of increased water volume of good quality available to
consumers, increased tourism activities (especially in rayons such as Guba, Khachmaz,
and Gabala) , and lower medical costs associated with treating water-borne diseases.

 Potential Negative Impacts

 Negative environmental impacts may entail temporary loss of access during physical
works, however they are only temporary. Typical impacts include:

 (i)    the potential for increased abstraction of water from some individual sources
(although at the rayon level no net increase in water abstraction is expected);

 (ii)   Dust raised from the roads in the construction sites and from material carrying
trucks
 (iii) Waste water from construction/renovation sites
 (iv)   Disposal of solid wastes
 (v)    Use of materials that may damage health (i.e. heavy-metal (lead) containing
paints, asbestos-cement tiles, pipes, copper pipes, inflammable and toxic materials etc.)
 (vi)   Noise generated by the construction machinery
 (vii) Traffic disruption and disturbance to the residents of the area. Impacts associated
with increased traffic concern issues such as public safety, congestion of roads and
disruption of regular traffic.
 (ix)   Contamination/pollution of resource by construction, human wastes, including
fuel & oil, hazardous wastes, wastewater, etc Soils and Water Resources
 (x)    Business activity might suffer during construction from loss of pedestrian and
vehicular access. Interference with water and electrical power supplies might occur in
some urban areas, inconveniencing the public.
 (xi)   Loss of visual amenities as construction materials are stockpiled and trees and
natural vegetation cut down.

 International Waterways (World Bank OP 7.50)

 The Project triggers the World Bank's Operational Policy on International Waters OP
7.50 (the Operational Policy) and but after consultation with LEGEN was deemed to fall
within the exception to the notification requirement under Paragraph (7a) of the
Operational Policy. Several of the rayons under the Project, including Bilusuvar,
Khanlar, Guba, Tovuz, and Saatli are dependant on canals linked to the Kura River or its
tributaries for their drinking water supply, and raw wastewaters from some of them are
discharged untreated into receiving water bodies, including canals ultimately linked to the
above mentioned Rivers and the Caspian Sea. The works to be carried out under the
project are not expected to have adverse impacts on the quality and quantity of water to
the riparians, and will not be affected by the other riparians water use. It is expected that
the water intake from the rivers will actually be reduced because of the reduction in
leakages and improved demand management under the project. Proposed investments are
also expected to improve the quality of wastewater discharged into the relevant
waterways, resulting in overall improvements in their water quality. The Bank
determined in its memo, cleared by the Regional Vice President, dated November 2, 2006
that the exception to the external notification requirement set forth in paragraph 7a) of OP
7.50 is applicable.

 Involuntary Resettlement (World Bank OP 4.12)

 Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 is triggered since the project might involve land
acquisition of either fallow land, used agricultural land, and/or pasture areas used for
sheep and cattle, for specific infrastructure investments such as wastewater treatment
plants and water and sewage investments mainly outside the urban centers. As the
specific locations, land type and size have not yet been fully determined at appraisal, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is necessary for this project.

 The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional arrangements, schedules and
funding mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may occur in the project rayons as the
result of the project. The RPF will also provide guidelines to stakeholder participation in
the mitigation of adverse social impacts of the project, in order to ensure that the social
and economic well being of project affected persons (PAP)s will not be worsened as a
result of the project.

 One of the key objectives of the RPF guidelines will be to restore the income earning
capacity of project-affected people, i.e., in the case of the WWS, this will be farmers and
shepherds. The aim will be to improve or at least sustain the living conditions of the
PAPs prior to project operations. No resettlement of persons is anticipated, and the
project does not foresee any demolitions of commercial or private buildings.

 Safety of Dams (OP 4.37)

 The Safeguards Policy OP 4.47 (Safety of Dams) is for now triggered even though the
project will not finance the construction or rehabilitation of any dams or other large
control structures, because in some of the rayons (at least in one: Babek in Nakhchivan)
rehabilitation of water supply schemes which are supplied from small existing dams will
take place. Anchor or Regional Dam Safety Specialists will be consulted as to the
appropriate means for ensuring that this OP is met, and if deemed necessary
investigations of the safety of the dams might be carried out by an independent dam
safety expert in accordance with OP 4.37.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Please see positive impacts outlined in Section 1 above.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The 'no project'alternative which would maintain the status quo with respect to WSS
systems and associated conditions including environmental conditions in the project area
was considered. It would however result in a worsening situation in terms of not only the
quality of service delivery, but also additional operations and maintenance (O&M) costs.
The continued failure to effectively collect, treat and dispose of sewage would also
adversely affect the environment. Implementing the project, through the combination of
rehabilitation and reconstruction of water supply and sanitation infrastructure in the
rayons; and implementation of a comprehensive Institutional Modernization Component
to strengthen the WSS sector's capacity to manage services in an efficient, effective, and
sustainable manner, was found to be the best alternative.

 The EMP identifies feasible cost effective measures to mitigate any adverse
environmental impacts that might occur as a result of the project. The EMP covers
mitigation measures, monitoring, and institutional strengthening. Key measures for

mitigation of negative impacts in order to protect human health, environment, natural and
cultural heritage are outlined in the EMP.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
a)      Environmental Assessment: Because details of site selection and technology to
be used will be determined during project implementation, a Framework Environmental
Assessment (EA) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) have been prepared. The
Framework EA and EMP detail the procedure, form and contents for specific EAs and
EMPs to be prepared and approved for investments in each Rayon. These are outlined in
the Framework EA and EMP, as are the applicable standards and monitoring indicators
and procedures. Implementation of activities carried out under the project will conform
to relevant laws in Azerbaijan and sound environmental and construction management
principles. The short-term negative environmental impacts, which are mostly expected to
occur during construction or rehabilitation works will be minimized by proper planning
and application of preventive measures, and will be mitigated by restorative actions after
the civil works are completed. The main environmental issues to be addressed include:
(i) selection of siting and technology for wastewater treatment facilities; (ii) the
potential for increased abstraction of water from some individual sources (although at the
rayon level no net increase in water abstraction is expected); (iii) ecological disturbance
associated with the construction phase of rehabilitation and extension of the water supply
and sewer networks and wastewater treatment plants; and (iv) the potential for
bacteriological contamination if water or sludge from the wastewater treatment plants are
used for agricultural purposes.

 In addition, the Framework EA identifies the need for special attention to ecological
impacts in the EAs for Guba, Gabala and Oguz cities (which are located in the vicinity of
the Shah Dag National Park) and Zagatala (located in the vicinity of the Zagatala nature
reserve). It also provides details of requirements for assessing the appropriateness of and
safety measures for use of post-treatment wastewater and sludge for irrigation and
fertilizer.

 Overall, mitigation of any environmental effects will be the responsibility of the main
Project Implementing Units for the project, (Azersu's International Relations and
Development Department and SAWMA). In addition, it will be the responsibility of the
contractors to ensure that mitigation is carried out successfully during
construction/renovation works as it is required. The specific mitigation measures will be
implemented by the contractor under the supervision of the construction supervision
manager. The provisions described in this EMP will be incorporated in the contract with
construction companies selected to perform the works. The cost of mitigation measures
will be included in the cost of the contracts and will be borne by contractors, who will
make the necessary provisions for implementation of mitigation measures as part of their
contractual obligations.

 The contractors shall take also all necessary precautions for the types of civil works
involved, especially in residential areas and those with high circulation of persons and

vehicles. All construction and rehabilitation works should be carried out with keeping the
safety equipment rules, and health and safety regulations. Safety measures will be
adopted to protect the personnel involved in the works. Public access to construction sites
will be properly restricted. Internationally accepted practices and active regulations
should be assisted regarding restoration of construction, health and safety. The
construction contract document will incorporate all requirements to minimize disturbance
from construction activities, which will be monitored by the Supervision Engineer and
the PIU staff (Environment Specialist) to ensure compliance and implementation of the
required provisions by the contractors.

 The contractors will provide suitable and reliable equipment for construction, with a
formal maintenance program to ensure efficient operations. The WSS utilities will
develop and establish appropriate safety procedures for the operation and maintenance of
the water and wastewater treatment plants. All employees of the contractors and the WSS
utilities will get suitable training in occupational health, safety, and emergency
preparedness procedures for earthquakes. Safety equipment will also be provided.

 b)     Resettlement Policy Framework: A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is
being prepared for this project. The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional
arrangements, schedules and funding mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may
occur in the project rayons as the result of the project. The RPF will also provide
guidelines to stakeholder participating in the mitigation of adverse social impacts of the
project, in order to ensure that the social and economic well being of project affected
persons (PAP)s will not be worsened as a result of the project.

 One of the key objectives of the RPF guidelines will be to restore the income earning
capacity of project-affected people, i.e., in the case of the WWS, this will be farmers and
shepherds. The aim will be to improve or at least sustain the living conditions of the
PAPs prior to project operations. The Loan Agreement will include a clause requiring the
Resettlement Process framework to be followed in project implementation should any
issues arise in this regard. In addition, the RPF will be drafted to ensure that siting of
facilities to be built under the project will not cause displacement of people, demolishing
of illegal structures, or loss of income to illegal or non-titled inhabitants. It will also
require that initial social screening be carried out in line with Bank policies so that all
potential issues that may trigger OP 4.12 are spotted and addressed.

 c) Safety of Dams: The project will not finance any new large dams, but in some of the
rayons (at least in one: Sharur in Nakhchivan) rehabilitation of water supply schemes
which are supplied from small existing dams might take place and trigger the Banks
OP/BP 4.37 on Safety of Dams. Investigations of the safety of these dams will be carried
out by an independent dam safety expert in accordance with OP 4.37.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultations with regard to EA were held with local stakeholders in Azerbaijan in
December 2006 in accordance with Bank Guidelines for EA. The draft Final EIA

Reports have been disclosed publicly. It was published through the Bank's Infoshop on
January 31, 2007, and in-country through the Azersu Website.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     01/08/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 02/02/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  01/31/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/16/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/27/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  02/16/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process             Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector       Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                          No
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts     No
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements No
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                        No

  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification          Yes
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                       Yes
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                                Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Andreas Rohde                           03/08/2007
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist        Ms Hermine De Soto                         03/08/2007
Additional Environmental and/or      Mr Wolfhart Pohl                           03/08/2007
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Mr Ronald N. Hoffer                        03/07/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                      Mr Sumter Lee Travers                      03/08/2007
 Comments:

