Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2333 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P100582 
Project Name: REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION 
Task Team Leader: Gavin P. Adlington 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%);Housing finance and real 
estate markets (25%);Information technology (25%);General public administration sector 
(25%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
29.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
6.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective would be to ensure that there is a reliable, transparentand efficient real 
estate registration system supporting the real property markets for the private sector and the 
management and use of State-owned immovable property. This would be achieved by: (a) 
developing efficient procedures within newly developed automated systems and communications 
technology to share and manage land and property information; and (b) loading the databases 
with the spatial, legal and other information required for tenure security and good management.  
 
Overall this project would support real estate land markets and the many stakeholders -
potentially all immovable property owners in the project areas. It would assist the work of real 
estate agents, notaries, surveyors and lawyers and help build the private sector in these 
disciplines.  It would improve the transparency and security of property rights which would help 
address the use of real estate in Azerbaijan and its use for collateral and mortgage purposes.  It 
would speed-up the real estate transaction processes and aim to reduce transaction costs.  
Another focus would be to improve the efficiency of state property management (which is over 
Page  2
50% of the country) and would continue supporting the various real estate privatization programs 
in the country. Many of these goals would be supported by making real estate market 
information accessible through information technology and linkage with e-Government 
initiatives.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is planned to have four components.  Component A -Real Estate Registration - is the 
key component that will support the services of the SSRRE and help to provide security of 
property rights and a high quality of service to the public. It will involve both new and renovated 
building works designed for customer services and reduction of the opportunity for corruption. 
Offices will be equipped with good quality furniture and office equipment, staff trained, and an 
automated registration system developed. The system will be available on-line to notaries, and 
possibly other users and the public. The component will also include sub-components for: public 
awareness; legal/ procedural development; and strategic and business planning for ongoing 
sustainability of the SSRRE.  
 
Component B - Management of State Property and Register of State Property - will be managed 
by the State Committee for the Management of State Property (SCMSP). Over 50% of land and 
property is still in State ownership and this component will assist the SCMSP to identify the 
property on a digital map and to register it. They would implement a management system to 
assist with privatization or good economic practice in the use of the State property, primarily 
through leasing. The component will include training and business planning sub-components.  
 
Component C - Base Mapping and Land Cadastre - will be managed by the SLCC. The SLCC 
are responsible for topographic mapping and map production at various scales. This component 
will provide the basic data needed by Components A and B because it will supply orthophoto 
maps and property boundary information in digital form for the whole country. Equipment, 
training and some aerial photography has already been supplied following Swiss and Japanese 
assistance, but there will be a need for further aerial photography and map production. A 
continuously operating reference station system will be established by setting up base stations 
around the country so that the long term needs of survey work can be completed and there will 
contracts and assistance to help promote private sector development. Sub-components for 
training and strategic and business plan development are also included.  
 
Component D - Project Management and Coordination encompasses those activities that need 
to be jointly developed. This will include the information and communications technology 
strategy and the use of the planned State Data Network through the e-Government initiatives. 
Data standards and dictionaries (both spatial and textual) will be jointly prepared so that systems 
in each institution can transfer information easily. There will be a sub-component dealing with 
outstanding policy issues and legal development. Identified needs are primarily in the built 
environment where the policy on common ownership, privatization of land under buildings and 
land for construction is undeveloped. This component will include project management through 
a
PIU probably attached to the SSRRE and full monitoring and evaluation of project activity.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The project is expected to be implemented across the country. This will include 21 offices of the 
SSRRE, with its branch offices and up to 60 offices of the SCMSP. Much of the work relates to 
IT system development and telecommunications between offices. It is only the SSRRE offices 
that will be involved with building works.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has adequate implementation capacity, but there will be very little, if any, activity 
that triggers the safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has been assigned Environmental Category B, which means that a partial 
Environmental Assessment (EA) will be carried out to ensure that the rehabilitation and 
modernization works would be environmentally acceptable and cause no or minimum damage to 
the environment.  The EA would include an Environmental Management Plan (EMP).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/17/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gavin P. Adlington 
05/02/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
08/16/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
 
Comments:   
