Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/02/2007 
Report No.:  AC2581
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P100582 
Project Name:  REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION 
Task Team Leader:  Gavin P. Adlington 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%);Housing finance and real 
estate markets (25%);Information technology (25%);General public administration sector 
(25%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
8.57
8.57 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to ensure that there is a reliable, transparent and efficient real 
estate registration system supporting real property markets and suitable systems for the 
management and use of State-owned immovable property. The key beneficiaries will be 
those people and businesses that want security in their land or property in order to invest 
their labor or acquire capital through using real estate as security for loans. The citizens 
of Azerbaijan will also benefit by having more transparent systems operating and through 
government making better use of State owned immovable property assets. Improved use 
of State owned assets should benefit the citizens through increased revenue to 
government and more efficient use of property for social purposes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will cover the whole of Azerbaijan and by the end of the project all of the 
existing known information about the location of immovable property and the rights 
relating to that property will be entered into a single automated system that is readily 
available to the public. The base mapping will provide a complete record of all property, 
whether officially recorded elsewhere or not, and the systematic analysis of properties 
Page  2
and rights conducted in Absheron and Binagadi in Baku district and Mingechevir (or 
similar City) will help citizens to regularize their property rights and help the government 
to agree the strategies for dealing with informal settlements. The automated system will 
also include information about the location and use of all State-owned immovable 
property. The system for registering property transactions will be automated in each of 
the 21 registration offices and the established standard for registering a transaction will 
be one day. It is expected that customer satisfaction will increase and an increase in the 
number of transactions, including mortgages, will be noticed. These outcomes will be 
measured through regular statistical analyses of the number of immovable property 
objects entered into the new system and the number of sales, mortgages and leases 
registered. The project will also monitor the increase in the value of property and the total 
amount of money lent through mortgaging. Customer satisfaction will be measured 
through customer satisfaction surveys. Comparisons with other economic indicators will 
provide an estimate of the economic impact of the project against the general economic 
improvement for Azerbaijan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is expected to be implemented across the country. This will include 21 
offices of the State Service for the Registration of Real Estate (SSRRE) and 60 offices of 
the State Committee for the Management of State Proiperty (SCMSP). Both new building 
and renovation works are envisaged, but this will not include any buildings protected, or 
that should be protected, as cultural property. Mapping and survey work will cover the 
entire country. Pilot work in three sites will assess the scope and complexity of informal 
settlement problems. Registration will only involve those people that already have legal 
rights and there will be no resettlement (voluntary or involuntary) involved. It is not 
planned to include any forrested areas, wetlands or natural habitats in the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Rufiz Vakhid Chirag-Zade (ECSSD) 
Mr Shahridan Faiez (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is expected to be positive from an environemental standpoint. 
Based on the experience of similar land administration projects, the increased tenure 
security is likely to induce environmentally positive behavioral changes among property 
owners.  
 
The project will involve new building works and renovation of buildings, but existing 
building regulations and requirements are stringent and no adverse impacts are expected. 
An EMP has been prepared to minimize any possible adverse impacts. There are no land 
conversions, resource extractions or other adverse activities involved in the project. No 
buildings of cultural significance are involved in civil works and there are no plans to 
include survey or registration of forest areas, natural habitats or other sensitive sites.  
 
The project will investigate land occupation and use on a systematic basis in three pilot 
sites, but there will be no land acquisition or resettlement issues that arise as the 
investigation is just gathering facts. There will be a covenant to this effect in the 
financing agreement. A strategy is expected to be developed for resolving problems of 
informal settlement and this strategy will take into account good practice and lessons 
learned from OP 4.12 implementation in other countries.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The inclusion of large scale systematic cadastre production was considered and rejected. 
This would entail a much longer project preparation period and repeating work that had 
been completed in the rural sector within the past ten years. The funds required would be 
far in excess of those that the government are willing to borrow. The scope of building 
development without building permits is also a serious concern for the country, but many 
of the people in the informal sector are IDPs from the conflict in Nagorno-Karabach. 
Understanding the scope of the problem with informal development and the development 
of the solutions would entail a very long preparation phase. The orthophotomapping to be 
prepared under the project provides basic information for the assessment. The work on 
registration and cadastre is urgently needed and should not wait, therefore it was 
considered preferable to utilize part of the project proceeds to investigate the problems in 
the informal sector and to develop the strategies for dealing with those problems. A 
second project could be prepared after the mid-term review if it is found to be useful or 
necessary.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed an Environmental Management Plan addressing the issues 
that arise with the civil works. The government has sound legal frameworks, clear 
allocation of responsibilities and sufficient oversight capacity to implement the EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project beneficiaries will be those people who want security in their land and 
building rights. The social assessment has initiated a process of consultation with 
beneficiaries and stakeholders and a workshop held in Baku invited particpants from 
government departments, NGOs and the private sector to discuss the social issues and the 
safeguards. During the workshop it was agreed that both genders are protected by law, 
but that it is traditional for the male members of the household to be registered as owners. 
The project will be encouraging parties to register jointly and the procedures being 
implemented as standard good practice will provide greater safeguards to to protect third 
party rights. IDPs usually do not have rights that can be registered and are more likely to 
be resident in informal settlements. This issue is being addressed only from the 
perspective of a situation analysis during the project. A strategy for dealing with the 
problem may thereafter be develepod. The main issue raised during the social assessment 
workshop concerned realistic valuation of properties, which is seen as inequitable. This 
affects taxes that are paid and the prices people receive from their sales or rental 
agreements. The project will have a subcomponent to develop a methodology for 
assessing real market prices and to publish the results. The EMP provides a summary of 
how existing laws and regulations will be applied to the project building works. The EMP 
will be posted on the World Bank and SSRRE WEB sites.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/02/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gavin P. Adlington 
11/29/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Rufiz Vakhid Chirag-Zade 
11/29/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Shahridan Faiez 
11/20/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
02/20/2007 
Comments:   
