Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3068 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P102542 
Project Name: Bangladesh National Social Protection Project 
Task Team Leader: Qaiser M. Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (80%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (S);Other social 
protection and risk management (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
GERMANY: German Technical Assistance Corporation (GTZ) 
0.70
5.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Government of Bangladesh seeks to consolidate and expand social protection interventions 
to reduce the vulnerability of the poor. The objective of the proposed project is: Targeted 
beneficiaries in selected rural and urban areas will utilize social assistance programs and/or 
insurance products delivered through an efficient and accountable decentralized mechanism.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will address the needs for further developing the country’s social 
protection policy as well as the need for establishing and expanding of a set of innovative social 
protection measures geared at smoothening income variations/shocks and improve human capital 
outcomes, particularly of young children from poorest families in selected urban and rural areas. 
It is important to note that the project will not be able to achieve national coverage during its 5 
years of implementation, but it will put in place systems and mechanisms that will enable the 
country to gradually expand these measures towards a national social safety net system for the 
most vulnerable. Finally, the project will help the country to slowly move from a social 
assistance approach to a combined social assistance and social insurance (= social protection) 
Page  2
mix by including technical assistance for expanding social insurance products for the poor. To 
this end, the project includes four components with a total IDA allocation of $90 million:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Social Safety Nets through Local Governments  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening rural safety nets by enhancing local delivery, targeting and 
accountability mechanisms ($38 million). This sub-component would provide social assistance 
to the poorest and most vulnerable population of selected UPs 
–
and cover about 10 percent of 
the population of these units. It has two windows: The Cash Assistance window would be 
provided to households that do not have an able bodied person to work full time. The Cash for 
Work window would provide seasonal work opportunities to those destitute poor families that do 
have an able bodied family member, but temporarily lack a source of income (e.g. during monga 
season). Ten percent of benefits would be at the disposition of UPs to quickly respond to 
emergency situations in accordance with pre-established procedures.  Beneficiary selection 
would be done in a transparent and objective way with overall responsibility of UP councils, but 
through a mixed method approach that utilizes community knowledge and a proxy means test for 
optimal targeting outcomes. Payments would be made through the local banking sector as 
presently done for some of the disability and old age benefits. The project would strengthen the 
local government administration to deliver these social assistance benefits effectively and in a 
transparent way, building on the social accountability mechanisms set up by the LGSP. Benefits 
would, as far as possible, be linked to human capital outcomes through regular school attendance 
of beneficiaries’ children. Available benefit amounts would be equally split between cash 
assistance and cash for work benefits.  
 
This subcomponent would scale up an approach currently piloted under the Local Governance 
Support Program. The expansion strategy would be linked to the expansion of the LGSP and 
follow in its footsteps. First, participating districts would be selected in accordance with poverty 
and capacity criteria (possibly ‘Learning and Innovation Component’ districts from LGSP). 
Second, within the districts, only those UPs would be able to participate in the program that are 
part of the LGSP and have passed the respective fiduciary audits  The component would include 
financing of conditional fiscal transfers to UPs for conditional social assistance benefits, 
consultancies, payment fees to banks, equipment and training.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Urban safety nets to reduce vulnerability and improve human development 
outcomes of the extreme poor (US$38 million). This sub-component would introduce conditional 
cash transfers as a safety net mechanism in selected urban areas. It would target the poorest and 
most vulnerable families with primary school children. The project would establish 
administrative systems in selected Pourishavas to (i) select and target the poorest families based 
on geographical criteria and a proxy means test, (ii) make cash payments through the local 
banking sector, (iii) forge links with the education sector to monitor school attendance of 
beneficiary children (compliance monitoring), and (iv) monitor and evaluate the program’s 
performance and impact.  Benefits in urban areas would need to be higher than in rural areas, 
possibly paying for every child in primary school of the selected families. The Government has 
decided to initially include in the program the municipalities of Tongi and Narayanganj, both 
adjacent to Dhaka. The government’s expansion strategy is to cover a further 5 to 6 medium-
sized, growing towns surrounding Dhaka aiming to stabilize poor families in medium-sized 
Page  3
towns outside the metropolitan area. This strategy seems sensible. Benefits in urban areas are to 
be determined but would need to be higher than in rural areas, possibly paying for every child in 
primary school of the selected families.  
 
Linking cash benefits to school attendance in urban areas will be a challenge, but is widely 
accepted by government representatives and development partners as the way to go given the 
abysmal school attendance rates in urban slum areas. A preliminary assessment shows that the 
present supply of schools would only cover a maximum of 50 percent of children. Many NGOs 
operate small primary schools in slums, so-
called “satellite schools”, sometimes financed by 
local governments. But the supply of schools is already insufficient and the proposed component 
would greatly stimulate demand for schooling. Participating Local Governments have therefore 
suggested to facilitate the establishment of schools and commit to covering these respective 
operational costs. Such co-financing arrangements will be a pre-requisite for Pourishava’s 
participation in this CCT program. So far, mayors of selected Pourishavas have been very 
positive about such co-financing arrangements since they seem to see the great need for 
schooling and are ready to get more involved in social service provision as done in many other 
countries. As particularly urban Municipalities can count on increasing tax revenues over time 
from the ongoing industrialization, this “crowding in” of school service provision seems 
desirable.  Finally, there seem to be no legal impediments for Pourishavas to run local satellite 
schools.  
 
This subcomponent would include financing of block grants to Pourishavas for social assistance 
benefits, as well as for consultancies, equipment and training. It would also cover the initial 
investments for establishing satellite schools in urban slums where needed, following a model 
established by the Bank’s Reaching Out of School Children (ROSC) model, as well as USAID 
and some NGOs by renting existing facilities.  This subcomponent will be coordinated with the 
ongoing PEDP II program, with the ADB as the lead donor for primary education. Preliminary 
conversations with the ADB colleagues have not shown major issues with this approach.  
 
Component 1 would be implemented by the Ministry of Local Government as the nodal 
ministry and executed through Union Parishads (in rural areas) and Pourishavas (in urban areas). 
Within the ministry, the Local Government Division is responsible for  the project. The potential 
role of the Ministy’s Local Government Engineering Department which is an agency of the 
Local Government Division will need to be assessed during project preparation. The project 
would work towards providing an integrated Management Information System that would 
monitor both the rural and urban subcomponents.  
 
The project would be coordinated closely with the Local Government Support Project and the 
Municipal Infrastructure Project. In addition, synergies with the Ministry’s ”Local Partnerships 
for Urban Poverty Alleviation Project", which is supported by DFID/UNDP/UNHABITAT, and 
GTZ’s engagement with urban municipalities are explored and seem promising. The Ministry of 
Local Government has nominated a focal point for Social Protection who will guide project 
preparation. Coordination with other line ministries such as Education, Health, Social Welfare, 
and Children and Women will be important to create a referral system and feedback loops for the 
beneficiaries and beyond. Provisions to address the coordination issues more systematically have 
Page  4
been made under the “Non-Lending Technical Assistance Program for Strengthening Local 
Governance in Bangladesh” linked to the Bank’s LGSP project.  
 
Component 2: Expanding early childhood development (ECD) for poor children (US$8 million)  
 
This component would seek to improve early childhood development by establishing a critical 
set of educational, nutritional, and stimulation practices at the community level in selected 
districts of the country. It would channel a conditional fiscal transfers to UPs for local women’s 
groups to establish child development clubs (for children 3-5) and for children 0-3. Initially, 
parents would bring their babies and toddlers to the center for group play and individual 
interaction. In a second step, the program would explore the feasibility of home-based outreach 
activities for children 0-3 that would promote the physical and nutritional health and wellbeing 
of young children, their social competence, emotional maturity, language and cognitive skills, as 
well as communication skills and general knowledge. It would be linked to existing pre-school 
programs (e.g. BRAC), contributing towards establishing an integrated ECD system for 
Bangladesh to improve human development outcomes. Children of safety net beneficiaries 
would have priority access to these services through an incentive based selection system. The 
component would be implemented in urban and rural areas but with different features: In rural 
areas, women’s self help groups would be the key implementing units through a community-
based approach. In urban areas, this is less feasible given the more fluid character of urban 
dwellings, and therefore services would be provided through NGOs with a system of central 
development centers and satellite “backyard nurseries” of up to 6 children per group.  
 
The implementing agency for Component 2 would be the Ministry of Local Government as an 
administrative entity for channeling block grants to UPs and in accordance with LGSP guidelines 
and processes. In rural areas, the provision of the services will be carried out by women’s groups 
with strong technical support and quality assurance mechanisms from non-governmental 
institutions which would act as facilitating agencies. In urban areas, Pourishavas would receive 
conditional block grants to finance ECD services through NGOs based on calls for proposals for 
certain geographic areas. The component would include financing for conditional fiscal grants 
for ECD, consultancies, equipment, and training.  
 
Component 3: Increasing access to insurance and pension products for informal sector workers 
through microfinance institutions (MFIs) ($3 million)  
 
This component would support existing MFIs to develop financially sustainable insurance 
products for their members.  It would support internal capacity building for the management and 
implementation of micro-insurance, technical assistance in the area of microinsurance regulation 
and the provision of public goods such as mortality and morbidity databases that can be used to 
assess financing requirements. Four key areas for support through technical assistance have been 
identified.  
 
First, the microinsurance sector is operating in a regulatory vacuum.  As a result, there are no 
accepted standards or models for operating these schemes and this could lead to failures that 
would both harm scheme members as well as damaging the credibility of this general approach.  
The project would support expert advice towards developing these regulations.  While the 
Page  5
Government would take the lead, the formulation of the regulatory framework would involve all 
stakeholders including members, MFIs and pension and insurance providers.  
 
Second, there is limited internal capacity in MFIs for managing insurance activities either in-
house or through the contracting of external providers in a partner-agent arrangement, 
particularly in terms of ensuring participation, educating members about the program, facilitating 
claims for individuals with little experience in these areas and other day to day aspects of the 
scheme. While necessary, this also raises the question of the costs of administration for the 
intermediary which must be taken into account in order to ensure that the scheme is financially 
sustainable.  
 
Third, there is little information or data on the incidence of different risks or the impact of 
uninsured shocks on households with informal sector workers.  Through the coordinating efforts 
of the PKSF along with financial support for data collection and maintenance within the project, 
more accurate information on mortality and morbidity would be made available and facilitate 
actuarial assessment and premium calculation.  
 
Finally, and related to the last issue, there is a need to adapt recordkeeping and MIS systems in 
MFIs in order to provide relevant and timely information and to monitor the impact of the 
program.  
 
The implementing agency for this component would be the Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation 
(PKSF) which is the apex agency for Micro-Finance Institutions in Bangladesh with support 
from the Bangladesh Bank and the Ministry of Finance. PKSF is already being supported by the 
Bank in its functions related to micro-finance.  
 
Component 4: Strengthening the institutional capacity to manage, monitor and evaluate safety 
net programs ($ 3 million)  
 
The institutional capacity that evolved for implementing safety net programs in Bangladesh was 
anchored on the “old” risk profile in the pre-rapid growth period.   As such, the current 
institutional framework is not suitable for addressing the newly emerging risks and tracking high 
risk vulnerable groups.  This is especially the case in so far as the urban safety net is concerned. 
Therefore, the existing institutional framework for safety net needs to be adjusted and 
strengthened with local governments assuming an increasingly active part in implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation.  
 
This component would strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Local 
Government to coordinate and implement policies and programs in the social protection area. 
The component would include support for the following areas:  
 
•
At the national level, it would support the Ministry of Local Government’s facilitating 
role in the evolving social protection policy dialogue toward establishment of a national social 
protection strategy.  
 
•
At central and local levels, it would improve the general administrative systems, 
technologies, and procedures for more efficient safety net delivery.  
Page  6
•
At all levels, but under the guidance of the central level, it would establish a system for 
monitoring and evaluation of safety net programs and expenditures.  
 
The component would help develop an overarching Social Protection policy framework for 
Bangladesh. This would include research and development of a targeting mechanism for local 
governments to effectively deliver safety net programs to the poorest, ensuring consistency in 
targeting outcomes among various programs. Furthermore, it would provide funding for 
coordination and evaluation of social safety net programs, such as the  
 
non-contributory old age scheme which has been expanded rapidly by the Government.  
 
Component 4 would be implemented by the Ministry of Local Government in collaboration 
with a wide set of actors (Ministry of Finance, line ministries, NGOs, local government 
representatives, development partners). It would provide funding for technical assistance, 
surveys, and training.  
 
Development Partner Collaboration  
 
Through the work on the country’s Social Safety Net Assessment and MDG report, the SP team 
has established excellent relations with a number of development partners that are interested in 
collaboration as well as participation in the evolution of the proposed project. First, DFID is 
implementing a number of programs for extreme poverty alleviation in urban (LPUPAP) and 
rural (“Chores” project) areas and is looking at the SP project with interest to explore new ways 
of implementing extreme poverty alleviation programs. The team is working with them on 
targeting mechanisms, and is actively seeking synergies with these programs. Second, the 
German Technical Cooperation GTZ is suggesting to implement a parallel project in the same 
urban municipalities to strengthen their overall administrative and management capacities which 
would be extremely complementary to the urban component of the SP project. And finally, the 
team is working with the European Commission to harmonize implementation arrangements 
with the REOPA project regarding cash-for-work programs.  
 
Sustainability of the project investments can be expected at three levels:  
 
•
At the household level, investments in human capital (through school attendance of 
beneficiaries’ children, early childhood development, etc.) would provide beneficiaries sustained 
benefits overtime including through higher earnings, better mental and physical health, and better 
management of crises.  
 
•
At the institutional level, investments in better management systems, training of staff and 
community based organizations, and the development of public-private partnerships in the social 
protection sector would lead to more efficient and effective implementation. The social insurance 
component would help establish sustainable financing mechanisms for the provision of social 
insurance for the poor.  
 
•
At the fiscal level, the government is expected to considerably increase its social safety 
net budget over time. In addition, many development partners are looking at the SP project with 
interest (e.g. DFID, EU, GTZ) to possibly join forces in the future. The project would develop 
Page  7
systems with checks and balances to ensure that the incoming, necessary funds for social 
protection are spent in an effective way (through appropriate control and accountability 
mechanisms as usually established for CCT programs).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Both rural and urban municipalities   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Local Government is already implementing the Bank's Local Governance 
Support Project and is observing the Bank's safeguard policies already under that project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
There are no safeguards triggers.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
A
Social Assessment will be carried out during project preparation, focusing on the urban 
CCT and ECD components.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Andrea Vermehren 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mansoora Rashid 
07/18/2007 
Comments:   
