Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC1916
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P089382 
Project Name:   Investment Promotion and Financing Facility 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher Juan Costain 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 23, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (60%);General energy sector (10%);Other industry 
(10%);General transportation sector (10%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
20.00
70.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of this project are to: (i) supplement the resources of the Bangladesh 
financial markets to provide term finance for infrastructure and other investment projects 
beyond the capacity of local finance institutions; (ii) promote the role of private sector 
entrepreneurs in the development of capital projects, especially infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would consist of two components, a lending component and a 
technical assistance component.  
 
The proposed credit would be on standard IDA terms, with a maturity of 40 years, 
including a grace period of 10 years. The project would make available partial debt 
financing through private sector financial intermediaries for eligible, government-
sponsored infrastructure projects to be developed by the private sector. The project would 
also seek to assist the Government of Bangladesh in facilitating new infrastructure 
projects with  potential for private sector participation. Also, with the agreement of the 
Page  2
government, term financing might be made available under this project for other eligible 
private sector investments. An important development objective of the proposed facility 
is to promote sustainable infrastructure development by “crowding in” private sector 
investment into an areawhich has historically been dominated by donor funding and 
characterized by an absence of allocation mechanisms through market pricing.  
 
The technical assistance component is designed to assist  Bangladesh Bank in the 
implementation of the proposed project and, more broadly, to enhance the long-term 
sustainability of private infrastructure finance by supporting GOB, through IIFC, in 
further developing the framework for PPPs in infrastructure; fostering policy, regulatory, 
and institutional reforms; building capacity to manage PPP processes; and implementing 
the Private Sector Infrastructure Guidelines.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
People's Republic of Bangladesh   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Subprojects eligible for financing will be identified during implementation but are 
expected to include categories such as small power plants (gas and/or diesel fueled 
reciprocating engines), inland container terminals, river ports, port infrastructure 
(moorings, gantry cranes etc.), small scale water treatment and/or delivery systems etc.. 
Impact assessments and mitigation measures determined as part of the EIA process which 
will be undertaken for each subproject.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
See above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Subproject alternatives will be considered as part of the EIA for each subproject.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Department of Environment (DoE) is responsible for providing environmental 
clearances according to the requirements of the Environmental Conservation Act and 
Rules of 1995 and 1997. The capacity of the DoE to fulfill this function is being 
strengthened through long-term technical assistance from CIDA.  
 
To reduce risk to investors, IIFC will support much of the subproject feasibility 
analysis, including the preparation of environmental and social impact assessment to 
meet national and World Bank requirements. The safeguards responsibilities of IIFC will 
include the following:  
 
i)Screening of investment concepts against the IFC / MIGA exclusion list to ensure that 
no activities on the exclusion list are financed  
 
(http://ifchq14.ifc.org/ifcint/cesweb.nsf/Content/Exclusion+list).  
 
ii)Determination of appropriate safeguard categories under both World Bank and DoE 
classifications;  
 
iii)Contracting and reviewing environmental and social impact assessments as required 
by the World Bank and DoE;  
 
iv)Submitting draft impact assessments for all projects for no objection by the World 
Bank, prior to seeking clearance from DoE;  
 
v)Obtaining environmental clearance for all proposed investments from DoE; and,  
 
vi)Providing the World Bank with annual monitoring reports summarizing all 
investments, their safeguard category, and impact assessment / EMP status.  
 
Decisions on the financing of subprojects will be taken by participating financial 
institutions, which will have due diligence responsibilities for environmental and social 
safeguards as follows:  
 
i)Ensuring that required clearances of environmental and social impact assessments 
have been obtained from DoE and the World Bank;  
 
ii)Ensuring that any Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) or Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs) cleared by the DoE or World Bank are incorporated into the loan 
agreement / investment  
 
contract documentation; and,  
 
iii)Providing the World Bank with annual reporting of all investments supported, their 
safeguard category and clearances, and any environmental or social commitments (such 
as EMPs or RAPs)which have been incorporated into investment contracts.  
 
Page  4
To build the necessary capacity to implement this approach to environmental and social 
safeguards management, the project will support the following:  
 
i)The establishment of a safeguards function within IIFC, capable of (a) screening 
investment proposals against World Bank and DoE safeguards requirements, (b) 
preparing Terms of  
 
Reference for environmental and social impact assessment sufficient to meet national 
and World Bank requirements, (c) contracting and reviewing the quality of such 
assessments, and (d)interacting with the DoE and World Bank to obtain necessary 
safeguard clearances; and,  
 
ii)The establishment of safeguards due diligence processes and capacity within the 
participating financial institurions.  
 
The project team will seek assistance from IFC, which has developed a training program 
for Financial Intermediaries for screening and management of environmental and social 
safeguards as a key element in the capacity building process.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
To be undertaken as part of subproject EIA.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/23/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Page  5
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher Juan Costain 
11/08/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
11/08/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/14/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
11/14/2005 
Comments:   
