Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2935 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P098151 
Project Name: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (CASE) Project 
Task Team Leader: Sameer Akbar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASSD-Environment 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General Transport (60%); Other Industry (30%); Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P); Environmental policies and 
institutions (S); Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
  0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 (TBD) 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 (TBD) 
Norwegian Agency for Dev. Coop.  NORAD (US$m)      5.00 (TBC) 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
(US$m) 
5.00
45.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
 
The project development objective is to catalyze the adoption of sustainable environmental 
initiatives in urban transport and small-scale industries with a focus on reducing air pollution, 
through pilot initiatives in cities.  
 
Specific project performance indicators (to be developed further during preparation) will include: 
a) strengthening regulatory and institutional framework for air pollution control from urban 
transport and small scale industries (with a focus on DTCB and DOE respectively); b) improving 
mobility in Dhaka metropolitan area along pilot corridors (as measured by reduction in average 
travel time, increase in average travel speed, etc.); and c) adoption of cleaner technologies / 
processes in small scale industries (with a focus on brick making) leading to reduction in 
emissions as compared to the baseline. 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
Specifically, the project aims to demonstrate: a) effective regulatory and enforcement models; b) 
reduction of air pollution emissions from transport and industrial sources, and c) strengthen 
institutional capacity for development, implementation and impact evaluation of outcome-
oriented and cost-effective air quality management and sustainable transport programs.  The 
development and implementation of these programs will be achieved through two project 
components, as explained below (cost estimates are indicative).  
 
Environment Component 
($15 million): The component is aimed at strengthening the 
environmental agency’s capacity and capability to effectively address air pollution issues. This 
component will be prepared and executed by the DOE, in consultation with stakeholders from 
the key polluting sectors and sub-sectors. It will primarily provide support for the following:   
·
Capacity building for AQM:
 
Infrastructure and technical assistance to the Air Quality Cell 
(AQC) at the DOE to develop and implement the DOE’s air quality management programs 
and initiatives. The AQC staff will be provided with training and state-of-the-art facilities, so 
that they can discharge their duties effectively and efficiently
1
.
It will also include 
infrastructure for accommodation of the AQC at the DOE. The AQC will manage the 
implementation of the project subcomponent. Building on progress made under AQMP, this 
subcomponent will also support investment for air pollution monitoring (ambient, and 
emissions), calibration, data analysis, and reporting; also finance strengthening the reporting, 
and use of AQ information (through the creation of an AQ Information System), outreach 
(via website and media), stakeholder consultations, and developing public alert systems. 
·
Brick Kilns Emissions Management:  
This subcomponent will focus on demonstration of a 
program to reduce local and global air pollution from one of the major polluting sub-sectors 
in Bangladesh. The long-term objective of this subcomponent is to set up a sustainable 
institutional mechanism for access to cleaner brick making technologies / processes. As 
regulations will be tightened and enforced, the demonstration program will provide technical 
assistance and facilitate access to finance for switching to more energy efficient and less air 
polluting processes and technologies.  It will comprise – the implementation of a package of 
interlinked activities that will include: a) review and update of emission standards, with a 
view to developing action plans with a realistic timeline for enforcing new/tightened 
emission standards; b) infrastructure, technical capacity and guidelines for stack emission 
monitoring necessary for having adequate information about compliance status; c) enhanced 
inspection and enforcement strategies (including a more effective use of environmental 
license issue/renewal for enforcing compliance); d) technical assistance and outreach for 
target industries in collaboration with the brick industry association; e) using public 
information disclosure and performance rewards as a tool to facilitate compliance; f) 
facilitating access to financing for new technology / process, including carbon finance
2
.
·
Media Campaign for Clean Air: 
 Highlighting the impact of local and global emissions from 
the key transport and industry sources, this campaign will be rolled out using all available 
1
At the request of the DOE, the staffing and resource requirements for the AQC has been determined by an 
international air quality management institutions expert. 
2
A
World Bank’s carbon finance unit is already working with the brick making industry on an industrial energy 
efficiency improvement project.  
Page  3
media channels, in English as well as Bangla. It will contain targeted messages for different 
stakeholders, which will be delivered not only through the print and audio-visual media, but 
also through personal contact. Social marketing tools will be used to address those issues that 
have socio-cultural roots. The media campaign will also serve as the tool for the GOB to 
reach out to different stakeholders and include them in the efforts to achieve the project 
objectives.  
 
Transport Component 
($27 million):
 
This component is based on the premise that improving 
traffic flow, reducing conflict between motorized and non-motorized traffic and improving bus 
operations can reduce its contribution to air pollution. It is designed to deliver tangible results in 
the short term, while helping plan for interventions in the long-term. The output of this 
component is envisaged as the reduction in air pollution from urban buses and improvement in 
mobility of people through pilot interventions in Dhaka, along the directions recommended by 
the Strategic Transport Plan (STP) of 2005. The development and execution of this project 
component will include a number of key stakeholders, which include the Ministry of 
Communications (MOC), the Bangladesh Road Transport Authority (BRTA), the Dhaka 
Transport Coordination Board (DTCB), the Dhaka City Corporation (DCC), the Dhaka 
Metropolitan Police (DMP), and bus owners and operators. It will comprise the following 
subcomponents:  
·
Physical improvement of traffic flow and pedestrian mobility in the short-term. 
This will 
include small investments in traffic engineering measures that are aimed at showing quick 
results in terms of improving traffic flow and movement of pedestrians, particularly where 
there is significant conflict between traffic and pedestrians movements leading to congestion 
and poor air quality. Investments will focus on foot over bridges, pedestrian paths, and traffic 
signals. 
·
Bus Route Network Rationalization and Franchising.  
The objective of this component is to 
rationalize bus network plan and introduce competitive route contracting on a set of pilot 
routes.  It will include studies related to a) analysis of alternatives; b) bus route 
rationalization and franchising; c) detailed design and preparation of tender documents for 
operation of low-polluting (i.e. CNG fuelled) and commuter-friendly (particularly for 
women) buses on a priority corridor
3
.
In order to facilitate bus-priority operations this will 
include investments in bus bays, junction improvement, bus terminals, and pedestrian 
facilities. It is envisaged that this will encourage modal shift from existing transport modes to 
cleaner and safer transport modes on the corridor, and have a demonstration effect for the 
city in the long-term. In addition, this component will also include a study on other mass 
rapid transit options for Dhaka in the future, including Bus Rapid Transit (BRT). 
·
Institutional and regulatory reform.
 This is expected in the long-term to lead to establishment 
of a unitary authority for urban transport that can plan, implement, and coordinate a multi-
modal urban transit system. As part of project preparation, it will include a review of the 
institutional and regulatory framework for public transport with the aim of a) providing a 
pivotal role to the DTCB in planning, implementation, and coordination of urban transport; 
and b) enabling bus sector reform, with a focus on route rationalization and franchising.  
·
Technical Assistance and Capacity Strengthening
.
This will include technical assistance and 
capacity building for i) public transport regulatory institutions (DTCB); ii) design of traffic 
3
The corridor will be selected to ensure that there is minimum land acquisition and resettlement requirement.  
Page  4
engineering and construction supervision (DTCB and DCC); iii) traffic signal systems 
operation and maintenance (DCC); d) traffic management (DMP); and e) management of 
motor vehicle records (BRTA). 
 
Project management 
($3 million):
 
This component will finance the costs of project management  
(which will be anchored at the DoE),  including consulting support, travel, workshops, 
equipment, and other costs necessary for project implementation, auditing and reporting. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project area will cover major urban areas all over Bangladesh. However, the transport 
component will be restricted the transport component refers to Dhaka metropolitan area only. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The project preparation will be undertaken by a multi-sectoral Project Preparation Team (PPT) 
anchored at the DOE, which will evolve into a Project Management Team (PMT) once the 
project becomes effective. In addition, during the preparation phase there will be a multi-sectoral 
project preparation supervision committee (PPSC) headed by the Director General DOE , which 
will evolve into a project management supervisory  committee (PMSC) once the project becomes 
effective. The PPSC / PMSC will meet as and when required to provide advice and help with 
resolving conflicts. The PPT / PMT will be provided with consultant support during the 
preparation phase, and for a limited duration during project implementation. It is also proposed 
to have sector specific sub-committees, which would be set up to provide input to the respective 
project sub-components. 
 
The Air Quality Cell (AQC) will implement the environment component. The Dhaka Transport 
Coordination Board (DTCB
4
)
acting on behalf of the Ministry of Communication (MOC), and 
the Dhaka City Corporation (DCC) which is under the Local Government Division (LGD) of the 
Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MOLGRDC), will be 
counterparts for implementing the transport component. Technical assistance (TA) related to 
technology options for the brick industry will be delivered either through a financial institution 
and/or a quasi-government entity.  
 
The project size is currently estimated to be approximately $45 million and envisaged to be 
financed primarily by IDA. It may seek to raise additional financing from bi-lateral
5
agencies, 
including the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and Carbon Finance (CF) for specific 
subcomponents. Some of the project components will build on preparatory work on-going under 
the AQMP, and work already done under the DUTP. 
4
The DTCB needs to be empowered and strengthened while taking on the role of implementing agency. 
5
The Norwegian Government is considering a proposal from the DOE for training and capacity building. 
Page  5
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Environment - S. Vaideeswaran (Consultant 
–
Environment) 
Social – Nilufar Ahmad (Sr. Social Scientist) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Overall, the project will lead to positive environmental impacts due to the activities in all the 
three components as these are related to better air quality management and sustainable 
environment. However, it is possible that certain sub-projects under the transport component lead 
to incidental negative environmental impacts. Some of these sub-projects have been identified, 
whereas the others will be identified during project implementation. The project needs to have a 
simple environmental management framework to prompt appropriate action in terms of (i) 
including limited environmental assessment as part of the sub-project preparation studies, and 
(ii) ensuring that any environmental plans arising out of these limited EAs are appropriately 
incorporated in the contract agreements with the concerned sub-project proponent. 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Although no impacts on natural habitats are expected, the environmental management 
framework will cover this aspect as well, particularly in relation to the physical location of the 
sub-project investments. 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Although no forests are expected to be affected, the environmental management framework will 
cover this aspect as well, particularly in relation to the physical location of the sub-project 
investments. 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
There is no link between the sub-project investments planned and this safeguard policy. 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Although no impacts on cultural properties are expected, the environmental management 
framework will cover this aspect as well, particularly in relation to the physical location of the 
sub-project investments 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
There is no link between the sub-project investments planned and this safeguard policy. 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
TBD 
For improving pedestrian mobility, the Dhaka City Corporation (DCC) has developed a list of 
possible locations for the construction of foot overbridges (FOBs) and sidewalks. A survey is 
being carried out to (a) prioritize these locations; (b) crystallize the nature & type of FOBs and 
sidewalks that are needed at the prioritized locations; and (c) enumerate the residences / shops / 
commercial establishments and hawkers & squatters who may be affected (partially or fully; 
temporary or permanent) during the construction and / or operation of the FOB and sidewalk. 
Furthermore, this project will also pilot a bus priority corridor, which may affect livelihoods of 
the workers of displaced transport services. A study will be carried out to assess potential 
reduction of livelihood of the transport workers. In all three cases – FOBs, sidewalks, and bus 
priority corridor - the project will attempt to minimize any form of involuntary resettlement. 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
There is no link between the sub-project investments planned and this safeguard policy. 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There is no link between the sub-project investments planned and this safeguard policy. 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
There is no link between the sub-project investments planned and this safeguard policy. 
Environmental Category:
 Since there are small investments planned, the project is 
provisionally categorized as environment category B project (to be reviewed at pre-appraisal 
stage). The project will have a simple framework for environmental management. 
 
Social:
 A
sound stakeholder and political economy analysis will be undertaken coupled with 
institutional analysis, to help understand the incentives and interests of various groups in taking 
forward different project components. These analyses will feed into the proposed communication 
strategy for the project. In addition, the social analysis will inform project design with regard to 
the potential impacts on vulnerable groups 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  January 2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS: Not applicable 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
6
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
October 2007 - February 2008. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Sameer Akbar
September 5, 2007                                 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick E. Brusberg          Sept. 11, 2007 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Karin Kemper                        Sept. 11, 2007 
 
Comments:  None 
6
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
