Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No: 
40502
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  July 30, 2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID: P107906 
Project Name:  IDCOL Solar Home Systems Project 
Task Team Leader:  Arun Banerjee 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  October 8, 2007
Estimated ERPA Date: December 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASDN 
Lending Instrument: CARBON OFFSET  
Sector: Renewable Energy (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and Infrastructure (P), Climate change (P) 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ X]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [X ] 
B.  Project Objectives: 
 
Objec
tive of the project is to support Bangladesh’s efforts to raise levels of social development 
and economic growth by increasing access to electricity in remote rural areas and to reduce 
carbon emissions by overcoming market barriers for renewable energy development. IDCOL’s 
Solar Energy Program has the mission of fulfilling basic electricity requirements in the rural 
areas of Bangladesh and supplementing government’s vision of ‘Electricity for All’ by the year 
2020.  IDCOL, with support from IDA, GEF, GTZ and KfW is channeling funds to small scale 
renewable energy projects under this program. 
 
C.  Project Description: 
 
The program will be implemented through sixteen NGOs/MFIs referred to as Participating 
Organizations (POs). POs select project areas and potential customers, extend loans, install the 
systems, monitor their performance, and provide maintenance support. IDCOL will provide 
grants and refinancing, set technical specification for solar equipment, develop publicity 
materials, provide training, and monitor the PO’s performance. IDCOL will offer soft loans of 
10-year maturity with 2-year grace period at 6% per annum interest to the POs.  The households 
will buy Solar Home Systems (SHS) either for cash or on credit. POs extend loan to the 
households for purchase of SHSs. The loan tenor varies from 1 to 5 years, and interest rate varies 
from 8% to 15% per annum. In all instances, the repayment frequency is monthly.   
 
IDCOL had an initial target of financing 50,000 SHS which it achieved in August 2005, three 
Page  2
years ahead of the project completion date and US$2 million below estimated costs. Following 
the success of IDCOL’s solar program, the World Bank has extended its support to this project 
and KfW has signed an agreement to provide EUR 16.5 million as a grant to the government to 
be used for further expansion of the program. GTZ has also provided grant for 33,660 SHSs. 
However, the revised target has been set at 200,000 to be achieved by December 2009. Up to 
February 2007, a total of 105,048 solar home systems have been installed under the IDCOL solar 
program. Recently the World Bank has indicated interest to provide additional assistance to 
finance 300,000 more systems.  
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known):   
All over Bangladesh
 
E.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Environment – M. Khaliquzzaman (Consultant, SASSD) 
Social – T. K. Barua (Consultant, SASEI) 
 
II.  KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
F
.
Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The SHSs will have a variety of positive social impacts enabling the users to access radio and 
television signals, and students and others to work in a safer and pleasant environment.  They 
will also be environmentally beneficial as use of fossil fuel will be reduced.  The only potential 
environmental hazard may arise from improper disposal of lead-acid storage batteries used in 
SHS. These types of batteries have been used in the context of SHS in Bangladesh for more than 
10 years now and good practice examples of safe disposal are well-known and are being 
practiced.  No negative environmental impacts are therefore expected. 
 
2.  
Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard 
policy or due to multiple project components:
 
None 
 
3. 
Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area:  None 
 
4.  
Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts:  None 
 
5. 
Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues.  Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
The POs which are implementing the SHS program have more than 10 years of experience in the 
safe disposal of lead-acid batteries.  The POs have agents all over Bangladesh and they are 
already assisting SHS owners in the O&M of their systems, which includes the safe disposal of 
batteries.  These arrangements are an integral part of PO operations and will continue. 
 
6.  
Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: Not 
Applicable
 
A. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Not 
Applicable
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
B. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Not 
Applicable
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Not 
Applicable
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Not 
Applicable
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Not 
Applicable
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Not 
Applicable
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Not 
Applicable
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Arun Banerjee 
7/30/07 
Environmental Specialist: 
M. Khaliquzzaman 
7/30/07 
Social Development Specialist 
T. K. Barua 
7/30/07 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
7/31/07 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Karin Kemper 
8/01/07 
Comments:   
