Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No: 40490  
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  July 30, 2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID: P106135 
Project Name:  Grameen Shakti Solar Home Systems Project 
Task Team Leader:  Arun Banerjee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 8, 2007 
Estimated ERPA Date: December 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASDN 
Lending Instrument: CARBON OFFSET  
Sector: Renewable Energy (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and Infrastructure (P), Climate change (P) 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [X ] 
B.  Project Objectives: 
 
The objective of the proposed project is to contribute to sustainable development through the 
provision of renewable solar electricity to households not connected to the electricity grid and 
thereby reduce Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions by displacing kerosene and diesel use for 
lighting and off-grid electricity generation. 
 
C.  Project Description: 
 
The project envisages installing 929,169 Solar Home Systems (SHS) all across Bangladesh 
between 2007 and 2015.  The SHS will provide facilities for lighting, TV and radio and comprise 
of: (a) a Solar Module (10 to 120wp), (b) battery ( 47 Ah to 130 Ah), (c) Charge Controller, (d) 
fluorescent tube lights with special electronic ballasts, (e) mounting structure, (f) installation kit, 
and (g) cables and connecting devices. The capacity of individual SHS will vary according to the 
consumer choice and demand. The cost of SHS would be recovered through monthly instalments 
over a period of up to 4 years which will be within the affordable capacity of the targeted 
consumers.  Upon full implementation in year 2015, the project activity will annually replace 
20,075 kilo litres per annum of kerosene usage, equivalent to an emissions reduction of 
48,380.75 tonnes CO2e per annum and 16,600,500 KWh/ year of electricity generation using 
diesel generators.  
 
Page  2
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known):   
All over Bangladesh
 
E.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Environment 
–
M. Khaliquzzaman (Consultant, SASSD) 
Social – T. K. Barua (Consultant, SASEI) 
 
II.  KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
x
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X 
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X 
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
x 
 
Page  3
F
.
Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 
1.  Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2.  The SHSs will have a variety of positive social impacts enabling the users to access radio 
and television signals, and students and others to work in a safer and pleasant 
environment.
 
They will also be environmentally beneficial as use of fossil fuel will be 
reduced.  The only potential environmental hazard may arise from improper disposal of 
Lead-acid storage batteries used in SHS. Grameen Shakti has more than 10 years of 
experience in the safe disposal of such batteries and thus no negative environmental 
hazard is expected. 
 
3.  Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard 
policy or due to multiple project components:  None 
 
4. 
Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area:  None 
 
5.  Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts:
 
None 
 
6.  Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues.  Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
7.  Grameen Shakti has more than 10 years of experience in the safe disposal of lead-acid 
batteries and has a wide network of agents all over Bangladesh assisting SHS owners in 
the O&M of their systems, which includes the safe disposal of batteries.  These 
arrangements are an integral part of Grameen Shakti operations and will continue. 
 
8.  Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: Not 
Applicable 
 
A. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Not 
applicable 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
B. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Not 
Applicable
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Not 
Applicable
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Not 
Applicable
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures included in project cost? 
Not 
Applicable
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Not 
Applicable
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents? 
Not 
Applicable
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Arun Banerjee 
7/10/07 
Environmental Specialist: 
M. Khaliquzzaman 
7/10/07 
Social Development Specialist 
T. K. Barua 
7/10/07 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
7/18/07 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Karin Kemper 
7/21/07 
Comments:   
