Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/01/2007 
Report No.:  AC2571
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P102305 
Project Name:  Avian Influenza Preparedness and Response Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mohinder S. Mudahar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the Project is to minimize the global threat posed by HPAI to 
humans by controlling such infections in domestic poultry, and preparing for, controlling, 
and responding to possible human infections, especially an influenza epidemic and 
related emergencies. Though the objective is specific to HPAI, the interventions are 
expected to contribute to the control of other zoonotic diseases and other types of 
infectious diseases, in terms of building overall response capacity in the country.  The 
objective will be achieved through three types of interventions: (i) prevention, (ii) 
preparedness and planning, and (iii) response and containment.  The Project will thus 
support the implementation of the National Avian Influenza and Human Pandemic 
Influenza Preparedness and Response Plan (NAIP) prepared by the GOB, in collaboration 
with FAO and WHO.   
 
3. Project Description 
The AI Program consists of two parts: (a) the Avian Influenza Preparedness and 
Response Project (AIPRP); and (b) the AI component of the on-going Health, Nutrition 
and Population Sector Program (HNPSP).  
Page  2
The AIPRP has three components: (i) animal health, (ii) public awareness and 
information, and (iii) implementation support and monitoring & evaluation. A summary 
of project components and activities is provided below.  
 
Component 1:  Animal Health:  The animal health component has six subcomponents. 
These are (a) Enhancing Prevention and Preparedness Capability; (b) Strengthening 
Disease Surveillance and Diagnostic Capacity; (c) Strengthening Control Programs and 
Containment Plans; (d) Improving Bio-Security in Poultry Production and Trade; (e) 
Support for Surveillance of Migratory Birds; and (f) Contingency Fund.  
 
Component 2.  Public Awareness and Information:  This component has two sub-
components: (a) Capacity Building; and (b) Information and Communication Services, 
including advocacy and collaboration with stakeholders, production and dissemination of 
communication material, and developing community-based communication pilots.  
 
Component 3.  Implementation Support and Monitoring & Evaluation: This component 
would have two sub-components. (a) Implementation and Technical Support, and (b) 
Monitoring and Evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The AIPRP will be implemented nationally since approximately 50% of the national 
poultry flock is backyard poultry with minimal bio-security and spread all throughout the 
country.  Specific locations are targeted where the project will invest in strengthening 
disease surveillance and laboratory diagnosis, such as the Central Disease Investigation 
Laboratory (CDIL) in Dhaka and the national network of 7 Field Disease Investigation 
Laboratories (FDILs).  Initially, the preference would be given to high risk areas known 
as ?hot spots?.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is assessed as a Category B project based on the type of interventions 
proposed under the project and the nature and magnitude of potential environmental 
impacts.  The project is likely to have limited adverse environmental impacts as the 
interventions are largely on public sector capacity building and improved readiness for 
dealing with outbreaks of AI in domestic poultry.  These prevention focused activities are 
expected to have positive environmental impacts because project investments in facilities, 
equipment, laboratories and training will improve the effectiveness and safety of existing 
AI handling and testing procedures by meeting international standards established by the 
World Organization for Animal Health (OIE).  This would be reinforced by the 
mainstreaming of environmental safeguards into the protocols and procedures for culling 
and disposal of animals in the event of an AI outbreak, decontamination of production 
facilities and laboratory bio-safety.  However, adverse environmental health impacts, 
mainly inadvertent spread of HPAI, could occur when an emergency operation involves 
containment of HPAI outbreaks through quarantine, isolation and stamping out actions 
and when relevant mitigation measures are not in place.  Therefore, precautions have 
been taken under the Project to avoid or minimize such impacts by integrating 
environmental and public health safety aspects in the preparation/design and 
implementation of the project.  
 
The Project will have significant positive social impact by protection of human lives 
through HPAI early warning, prevention and containment, improved poultry farming 
practices, increased public awareness of HPAI and improved hygiene and food 
preparation practices and waste management.  
 
The main safeguard issues that pertain to the project are inadvertent human exposure 
and spread of the virus due to: improper culling and disposal of dead birds (sick and dead 
birds from backyard and commercial poultries, wild birds); lack of or improper use of 
personal protection equipment; improper disposal of farm waste (bedding, manure, 
washings, etc.,) during and after an outbreak; and inadequate lab bio-safety protocols.  In 
addition, adverse environmental impacts can arise from inadvertent release of chemicals 
in the environment from unsatisfactory decontamination procedures (for personnel, 
poultry sheds and transport vehicles) as well as the potential from the release of 
chemicals and infectious agents into the environment from inadequate laboratory and 
medical facility waste management.  
 
There will be no land acquisition under the project, therefore voluntary or involuntary 
resettlement will not be an issue. However, the issue of compensation for culled birds 
will be a major concern.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The potential adverse environmental impacts identified above will be mitigated by 
integrating environmental and public safety aspects in all stages of the project.  The 
Government has prepared guidelines for safe culling, transport and safe disposal of 
carcasses.  An Environmental and Social Safeguards Management Framework (ESSMF) 
and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), that outlines the measures proposed to 
address all potential adverse environmental and social impacts, has been prepared and 
will serve as a guide to ensure that the project will not result in any potential indirect 
and/or long-term impacts.  The preparation of the guidelines has involved an evaluation 
of suitable alternatives for safe culling, transport and particularly for safe disposal of 
carcasses.  The project will finance the implementation of the selected alternatives 
according to the EMP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESSMF outlines the procedures and steps to be taken to assess and mitigate the 
environmental and social impacts arising from the project.  Inadvertent human exposure 
and the spread of the virus will be minimized by strictly adhering to the guidelines 
prepared for safe culling, transport and disposal of dead birds.  The guidelines include the 
proper use of personal protection equipment, proper disposal of farm waste and proper 
biosafety protocols.  Guidelines in the EMP contain procedures to ensure that proper 
decontamination procedures are followed.  Guidelines need to be prepared to deal with 
waste arising from laboratory and health facilities associated with AI so that waste 
disposal is in keeping with internally accepted standards and norms.  If the borrower does 
not have adequate technical expertise to prepare the above mentioned guidelines, the 
project will provide technical assistance to the borrower to achieve the above.  The 
borrower however, has adequate capacity to adhere to and implement the guidelines 
prepared under the project and be able to implement the ESSMF and EMP in full.  
 
There are no Social Safeguards triggered by the project because there will be no land 
acquisition, voluntary or involuntary. Therefore, there would be no displacement of 
people.  If any land is required, either temporarily or permanently, for burial pits for mass 
disposal of dead birds, or for construction of incinerators or for open burning of 
carcasses, or for the construction of laboratories and/or other medical or veterinary 
facilities, such land will be provided by the Government.  Such lands will be free of 
squatters or other encumbrances.  GOB is developing a policy for compensation to 
compensate affected farmers for culled infected birds.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key Government stakeholders are (i) the Department of Livestock Services (DLS) 
and the Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute (BLRI) under the Ministry of Fisheries 
and Livestock (MOFL); and (ii) the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW).  
In addition, the commercial poultry producers, semi-intensive small scale poultry farmers 
Page  5
and backyard poultry farmers are critical stakeholders in this project.  Prior to finalization 
of the guidelines for compensation for culled poultry, consultations will be held by the 
Government with small scale farmers, as well as commercial producers, to formulate an 
acceptable policy for compensation.  The project has a component specifically designed 
to communicate with stakeholders and ensure the communities are well aware of the risks 
and mitigation measures proposed in the EMP.  The ESSMF and EMP will be disclosed 
by the Government in local languages as well as in English.  It will also be made 
available for public access at the World Bank?s Infoshop   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/06/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/01/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Environment Management Framework for the Human Health Component was 
already prepared and disclosed as part of the HNPSP, 2005.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohinder S. Mudahar 
11/08/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
11/17/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/01/2007 
Comments:  This project is transferred to SASSD / rural for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
03/01/2007 
Comments:   
