Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2944 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P096555 
Project Name: Bangladesh Dhaka Environment and Water Resources Management 
Task Team Leader: Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%);Other industry 
(20%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Other urban development (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
2.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the project is to promote integrated water and environmental quality 
management in the greater Dhaka area, and through a series of preventive and abatement 
measures in selected industrial hot spots, to contribute to the reduction of industrial pollution of 
the water resources in the greater Dhaka area.  The effectiveness of specific project interventions 
will be enhanced through the following project outcomes: (i) strengthening of environmental 
management in industrial clusters, (ii) attending to environmental concerns in the planning of 
industrial developments, (iii) more effective monitoring and prevention, and (iv) investments in 
pollution abatement and groundwater management.  
 
The project will diminish the trend of deterioration of surface and groundwater quality in 
selected hotspots which will be measured relative to the project baseline data. In a number of 
targeted industries a measurable reduction in pollution load will be observed as a result of 
improved compliance with effluent regulations. The project will support developing a culture of 
Page  2
corporate environmental compliance through improved monitoring, implementation of 
negotiated water pollution control plans in selected industrial cluster/Special Economic Zones, 
and though introducing incentives for cleaner production techniques which offer prospects for 
increased productivity and competitiveness.  This will be measured by the process of continuous 
environmental improvements, through regular monitoring and reporting. The impacts of selected 
industrial clusters will be measured by the results of environmental audits in selected industries 
during project implementation. Furthermore, through providing basic environmental information 
to stakeholders in Greater Dhaka the project will enable them to better understand water 
pollution problems, make informed decisions and set priorities.  Finally, the success of the 
project?s integrated approach will be measured by the administrative commitment of stakeholder 
agencies to the established priorities and inter-sectoral Greater Dhaka Watershed Forum 
supported by the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will address industrial wastewater management at the level of national 
government, the municipal authorities and the private sector through a combination of 
investments in environmental management capacity and monitoring infrastructure. Due to the 
rapid expanding scale of the industrial pollution problems, it is proposed that the project focuses 
on the urgent pollution problems in one or two main pollution hotspots.  Simultaneously, the 
project will provide support to building environmental management capacity and infrastructure 
in the communities around Dhaka that coop with an increasing number of industries within their 
municipality border. The project will promote appropriate mechanisms for institutional reform 
and capacity building, including incorporating institutional incentives which motivate 
government officials to coordinate and improve enforcement of environmental regulations, and 
market mechanisms such as carbon finance which will provide an additional annual revenue 
stream for the sale of emission reductions based on performance.  
 
Based on the overall project objective, the specific project components at concept stage are 
identified below as:  
 
-
Strengthening of environmental management. The component will provide investment and 
technical assistance for improvements in the regulatory framework and effective monitoring and 
management of wastewater pollution and industrial pollution at the national, regional and 
municipal levels of governance. The proposed component will support DOE and the Ministry of 
Industry (MOI) to improve the Environmental Clearance and EIA process of industrial 
operations and new developments and transform it to an inclusive process where key institutional 
stakeholders are included; assistance to the DOE and RAJUK to develop the framework for 
introducing Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA) and water sensitive urban planning; 
procurement of hardware and the development of a methodology for a comprehensive water 
quality monitoring system. The project will support the establishment of publicly accessible 
environmental information database and establishment of research unit within the Department of 
Environment and Management of industrial pollution at the local level.  
 
-
Promoting pollution prevention and control in industrial development.  This component will 
support measures that target the public and private sector stakeholders in industrial development 
in order to assist them with the implementation of industrial pollution prevention and control 
options.  Specifically, the World Bank?s involvement will support:  technology packages and 
demonstrations for process optimizations and demonstration projects, which are likely to be 
Page  3
eligible for carbon finance; technical assistance to industries for improved compliance with 
environmental regulations; compliance incentives and a clean production promotion fund which 
will propel international experiences and technological innovations in the areas of wastewater 
treatment technologies - the project will support a funding window to provide incentive grants to 
industries willing to invest in process optimization and cleaner production technologies.  
 
-
Industrial pollution abatement in greater Dhaka.  This component will support investments in 
Common Effluent Treatment Plant(s) (CETP) in one of the main industrial clusters in the Dhaka 
urban area and municipality or in one of the emerging industrial clusters at the periphery of the 
greater Dhaka area. For this component the project will explore the feasibility of accessing 
carbon finance for management of CETPs, as emission reductions can arise from both the 
reduction of the biological oxygen demand (BOD) in the effluents and energy efficiency 
measures against current baseline conditions.  
 
-
Water resources, groundwater and soil contamination management.  This component will 
support technical assistance and investments in monitoring network and early-warning systems 
for groundwater pollution and abstraction based on a pollution risk assessment, to enable 
DWASA to monitor groundwater flows and the migration of pollution towards the drinking 
water wells. It will provide technical assistance for preparation of Greater Dhaka industrial 
pollution management plan and a Water Resources Management Plan for Greater Dhaka. 
Furthermore, risk management and decision-support systems (DSS) for pollution prevention and 
mitigation will be developed, as well as a risk management strategy to decide where and when 
interventions are needed to prevent or mitigate identified pollution hazards. The project will 
support feasible mitigation technologies that are identified through the DSS and technical 
support for land remediation and brown field redevelopment of former industrial sites, including 
brown field redevelopment demonstration pilots.  
 
-
Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation and Training estimated cost.  This would cover 
the cost of project management and implementation. It includes a system for monitoring and 
evaluation of project outcomes, staff training, equipment and operational and maintenance 
expenses for project management during implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in the Greater Dhaka watershed covering the city of Dhaka and the 
adjacent peri-urban areas (i.e., Greater Dhaka Metropolitan area, selected industrial areas - e.g. 
Narayanganj, Tongi, Gazipur and Savar etc. - with a high concentration of medium and small 
industrial units that co-exist with neighboring urban populations).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project rests on two pillars: strengthening environmental management capacity and water 
and wastewater management.  DWASA is the prime authority for water and wastewater 
management in Dhaka, whereas the DOE is the main authority in all matters pertaining to 
environmental regulation.  Therefore, project preparation and implementation will be conducted 
by two agencies with different mandates and organizational structures.  Alternative 
implementation arrangements involving multiple institutional implementation partners will be 
carefully studied during project preparation, and lessons learned will be considered in the design.  
 
The project proponent is the Local Government Division (LGD) of the Ministry of Local 
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives. A Project Preparation Unit with 
Page  4
representatives from DWASA and DoE has been established by LGD, headed by Director of 
Monitoring. The execution of the PHRD grant (approved) will be the responsibility of LGD with 
technical inputs from DWASA and DoE.  
 
The DOE under the Environment Conservation Act of 1995 (ECA95) and Environmental 
Conservation Rules of 1997 (ECR97) has wide-ranging mandate to enforce environmental 
safeguards compliance. By linking the two agencies through the project, the institutional capacity 
for the implementation of safeguards policies will be enhanced.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Jennifer Solotaroff (SASDN) 
Mr Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Overall, the project will lead to positive environmental impacts due to the activities in all the 
four components, as these are related to better water and waste water management in the Dhaka 
watershed. However, the implementation of site construction may lead to temporary site impacts 
for which mitigation plans will be developed.  It may be possible that sub-projects under the 
industrial pollution abatement component may lead to incidental negative environmental impacts 
(i.e. excavation of soil and disposal, backfilling, sludge disposal). Some of these sub-projects 
have been identified, whereas others will be identified during project implementation. The 
project needs to develop an environmental management framework to prompt appropriate action 
in terms of (i) including site-specific environmental assessment as part of the sub-project 
preparation studies, and (ii) ensuring that any environmental plans arising out of these limited 
EAs are appropriately incorporated in the contract agreements with the concerned sub-project 
proponent.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Although no impacts on natural habitats are expected, the environmental management 
framework will cover this aspect as well, particularly in relation to the physical location of the 
sub-project investments.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Although no impacts on cultural properties are expected, the environmental management 
framework will cover this aspect as well, particularly in relation to the physical location of the 
sub-project investments.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although most of the sub-projects are likely to be sited on Government land, there are likely 
to be issues with squatters in the sub-project areas ? as has been the case with some other Bank 
projects in Bangladesh.  As part of project preparation activities, the Environment and Social 
Assessment (ESA) will assess the applicability of safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12 in each sub-
project site in order to determine whether the policy is triggered and develop appropriate 
mitigation strategies accordingly.  The ESA, along with the site
-
specific Environmental 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Management Plan and RAP (if applicable) will be submitted for review by RSA before project 
appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/07/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
PHRD grant provided for project preparation will provide funding for Environmental and 
Social Assessment for which Terms of reference will be agreed. DoE will seek internal 
clearance and approvals.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
11/02/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/05/2007 
Comments:  The PCN-stage ISDS is cleared for disclosure in the InfoShop. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
11/05/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
