Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3130 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/21/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P106332 
Project Name: Bangladesh Disability and Child Protection Project 
Task Team Leader: Qaiser M. Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Other social protection and risk management (P);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
22.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
2.50
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Project is to expand the coverage, use, and quality of social care 
services for persons with disabilities and vulnerable children as a means of promoting equity and 
social inclusion . In particular, Bank support for the Project would include: (i) increasing the 
coverage and quality of disability services, awareness, and capacity through strengthening of the 
NFDDP, and improving the knowledge base and monitoring of disability in Bangladesh, as well 
as capacity  for policy development; (ii) strengthening and scaling up integrated social services 
for  vulnerable children aged 0-18, particularly street children, primarily in urban and 
metropolitan areas?and (iii) build  the capacity of the Ministry of Social Welfare to manage and 
monitor efforts aimed at disabled and vulnerable children through developing public and private 
partnerships.  
 
Tentative outcome indicators include: (i) increase in use and quality of social and rehabilitation 
services among target groups (persons with disabilities, vulnerable children and their families), 
as evidenced by higher uptake and coverage of, and satisfaction with, services; (ii) higher rates 
of early detection of disabilities and impairments and successful treatment of disabilities and 
Page  2
developmental delays in children; (iii) increased number of children with disabilities and street 
children in school, and (iv) greater participation of PWD in the workforce.  Further outcome and 
output indicators will be developed during project preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is expected to include the following three components for an approximate 
cost of US$30 million over a period of 5 years.  
 
COMPONENT A: Expanding Disability Services, Improving Awareness, and Building 
Capacity (US$17 million)  
 
This component would expand social and rehabilitation services for the disabled and build the 
capacity of NGOs  and government agencies that support the disabled and their families, and/or 
that work for greater disability awareness, inclusion, and empowerment. The component would 
support the restructuring and scaling up of the NFDDP, established under the Societies Act by 
the Government to channel grants to NGOs that support PWDs.  The component would be 
implemented by the NFDDP and would comprise two sub-components:  
 
Sub-component A.1: Restructuring and capacity building of the NFDDP to become a center of 
excellence for disability services, promotion/awareness building, research, monitoring and 
evaluation, and establishing good practices.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Provision of Disability Services through NGO/DPOs to increase focus on 
rehabilitation, prevention, counseling, communication and awareness, empowerment, early 
detection, skills development, provision of assistive devices, or community-based rehabilitation 
(CBR).  
 
COMPONENT B:  Establishing a network of Child Protection Services (US$ 10 million)  
 
The component would adopt a two-pronged approach:  (i) it would provide financing and 
technical assistance for scaling up the services NGOs for street children and other vulnerable 
children with a focus on improving relevance and quality of the services; and (ii) gradually shift 
the social care paradigm of MOSW both at the policy and programmatic level to adopt a 
proactive and preventive approach with a stronger focus on reintegration and 
deinstitutionalization. The component would be implemented by MOSW in close collaboration 
with NGOs, and would comprise two sub-components:  
 
Sub-component B.1: Improving and scaling up of services for street and other vulnerable 
children. These services would be contracted out to NGOs, based on the experience of the 
UNICEF sponsored ?Protection of Children at Risk (PCAR)? project which focuses on re-
socialization of street children while combining social work/case management (provided by 
MOSW staff) as well as care and rehabilitation services (provided by NGOs) with a view to 
establish an effective referral system between governmental and non-governmental services.  
 
Sub-component B.2: Strengthening the cooperation between public and private service 
provision for child protection:  The cooperation between public and private service providers 
Page  3
will be guided by the underlying principle of shifting social care paradigm of MOSD both at 
policy and programmatic level to adopt a proactive and preventive approach with a stronger 
focus on reintegration and deinstitutionalization.  Key areas of intervention needed are: (i) 
developing standards of services for child protection and monitoring mechanism for compliance 
with those standards; (ii) strengthening the skills of service providers to deliver effective services 
for vulnerable children; and (iii) reviewing the legal and policy implications for transforming 
child protection towards preventive care.  
 
COMPONENT C:  Institutional strengthening of the MOSW (US$ 3 million)  
 
This component would strengthen the knowledge and skills of the managerial and technical 
officials in the Ministry of Social Welfare to provide relevant and effective services for 
vulnerable groups, with a special focus on disability and child protection. It would build the 
competencies of social workers to enable them to function as effective gatekeepers for a social 
welfare system. It is envisioned to promote seconding/training of MOSW personnel, especially 
social workers, in experienced NGOs to gain experience and knowledge in order to effectively 
respond to the needs of the beneficiaries. Finally, this component would build the capacity of the 
ministry to better manage social care and rehabilitation institutions.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Dhaka, Bangladesh  
 
Ministry of Social Welfare (MOSW); National Federation of Organizations Working for the 
Disabled (NFOWD)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is a category C project, and therefore requires no institutional set up for safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard related studies will be required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Qaiser M. Khan 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/26/2007 
Comments:  The ISDS is cleared and the project endorsed as category C. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mansoora Rashid 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
