Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC2416
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P084078 
Project Name:  National Agricultural Technology Project 
Task Team Leader:  Paul Singh Sidhu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 17, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (50%);Crops (30%);Animal production 
(20%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
20.00
25.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Lending Instrument.  Since institutions building, especially in the case of agricultural 
research and extension, is a long-term undertaking, a programmatic approach using an 
Adaptable Program Loan (APL) instrument is proposed.  
 
Program Phases.  The proposed program would be implemented in three phases over a 
15 year period with a total IDA commitment of about US$ 150 million.  The main focus 
of each phase, along with possible triggers for moving from one phase to the next, would 
include:  
 
Phase 1 of the program would focus on institutional development.  Key triggers would 
include: amendments of the Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council (BARC) Act and 
Acts of individual Agricultural Research Institutes (ARIs), establishment of Krisihi 
Gobeshana (Agricultural Research) Foundation (KGF), and decentralization of planning 
and funding responsibilities for demand-led extension plans to the Upazilla level 
organizations responsible for extension related to agriculture, fisheries and livestock.  
 
Page  2
Phase 2 of the program would continue with institutional strengthening, including 
reorganization of BARC, but with an increased focus on agricultural technology 
generation, dissemination and adoption.  In addition, phase 2 would address the need for 
fiduciary (financial management and procurement) and budgetary reforms for agricultural 
research and extension services.  Key triggers would include GOB's agreement to finance 
50% (25% in phase 1) of the operational costs of the sponsored public goods research 
(SPGR) and full funding of decentralized Upazilla extension programs initiated under 
phase 1.  
 
Phase 3 would continue the overall program support for institutional strengthening, but 
with a focus on agricultural technology generation, dissemination and adoption.  In 
addition, assessment of the program impact on agricultural productivity, farm income and 
poverty reduction would be initiated.  The key triggers would include an increase in GOB 
funding to 75% of operational costs of SPGR, reorganization of line departments (the 
Department of Agricultural Extension-DAE, the Department of Fisheries-DOF, the 
Directorate of Livestock Services-DLS) and ARIs to improve institutional efficiency in 
line with recommendations of special studies and rationalization of ARI network of 
research stations and sub-stations to reflect revised priorities and changing needs of the 
technology system.  
 
Program Development Objective.  The long-term objective of the proposed program 
would be to reduce rural poverty through improvements in agricultural productivity and 
farm income, with a particular focus on small and marginal farmers.  
 
Project Development Objectives.  The development objectives of the first phase project 
of this long-term program would be to reform and strengthen the national agricultural 
technology system in order to improve its performance.  This is expected to result in 
increased productivity and improved farm incomes.  
 
Outcome indicators.  The achievement of the project development objective would be 
measured against the following outcome indicators:   A more efficient and effective 
agricultural research and extension system which is able to increase: (i) the number of 
appropriate agricultural technologies developed; (ii) the number of farmers adopting new 
agricultural technologies; (iii) the number of farmers engaged in production of high value 
commodities with effective market linkages; and (iv) the level of agricultural productivity 
by farm size and type.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed approach consists of a long-term programmatic approach that is 
specifically designed to address the critical reforms, investment and institutional 
development needs that are necessary for revitalizing the national agricultural technology 
system in Bangladesh.  This would involve a series of investment projects, using the 
Adaptable Program Lending (APL) instrument for this purpose.  The proposed National 
Agricultural Technology Project (NATP) would be the first phase of this long-term 
program. Approval of subsequent phases by the World Bank Board would be contingent 
Page  3
on the progress made in implementing the agreed policy and institutional reforms in the 
previous phase.  
 
Component 1.  Agricultural Research Support  
 
This component would aim to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the national 
agricultural research system through: (a) promotion of a pluralistic institutional structure 
by enabling entry of new partners to support the research system; (b) making agricultural 
research more participatory and demand-led; (c) developing technologies to promote 
sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture and for post-harvest value 
addition; and (d) bridging the yield gap between what is possible and what is being 
currently achieved by farmers.  
 
Activities  to be financed under the component.  
 
The component will have national coverage, and the following activities would be 
financed.  
 
(i) 
Establishment of an Autonomous Krishi Gobeshana Foundation to manage the 
Competitive Grants Program.  GOB would establish an autonomous Krishi Gobeshana 
(Agriculture Research) Foundation (KGF), with its own Governing Board, to manage the 
Competitive Grants Program (CGP) with independence, objectivity and transparency 
(this has already been approved by the Government).  KGF would invite multi-
disciplinary agricultural research and development proposals from all organizations with 
capacity to undertake such work, including NARS institutes, universities, NGOs, and the 
private sector.  By opening the CGP to non-traditional partners, a more competitive 
pluralistic institutional structure for the NARS would be facilitated.  The priority research 
themes for competitive funding would be identified through a demand-led process 
involving farmers, including researchable priority themes/constraints identified during 
micro-level planning of agricultural extension (described under Component 2).  
 
(ii) 
Sponsored Public Goods Research (SPGR).  Long-term strategic and cross-cutting 
research would be supported on selected priority themes of public goods nature, e.g. 
issues related to sustainable management of natural resources, germplasm conservation. 
The SPGR proposals would be largely prepared and implemented by the Agricultural 
Research Institutes (ARIs) under NARS and coordinated by the Bangladesh Agricultural 
Research Council (BARC).  However, partnerships between national and selected 
international institutions with excellence in research and education in areas of relevance 
to Bangladesh, would be supported, especially to build capacity/skills of national 
institutions in ?new sciences, e.g. molecular biology, bio-informatics.  
 
(iii) 
Enhancement of Institutional Efficiency.  To improve governance, institutional 
responsibilities and management systems of NARS, the 1996 BARC Act would be 
amended and Acts of individual institutes under the Ministry of Agriculture (and possibly 
the Acts of institutes under the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock) would be revised.  
The amended Act would also incorporate proposal for introduction of uniform service 
Page  4
rules for the NARS scientists (ARIs and BARC).  BARC?s organizational structure 
would be rationalized and its capacity strengthened for improved resource allocation, 
prioritization, coordination, human resource development, monitoring and evaluation of 
research, as well as for promoting adoption of participatory research planning and 
implementation processes.  These changes would contribute to improved efficiency and 
effectiveness of the NARS.  Concurrently, capacity of BARC and ARIs would be 
enhanced to manage fiduciary responsibilities related to procurement and financial 
management. Funding would be provided for preparation and implementation of a need-
based human resource development plan, including enhancement of capacity in social 
sciences, access to IT tools and techniques for improved communications and 
dissemination of research information.  
 
Component 2. Agricultural Extension Support  
 
The long-term objective would be to establish a decentralized demand-led extension 
service, which is knowledge-based and accountable to farmers for planning and delivery 
of extension support.  The proposed interventions would draw on lessons learnt from 
extension approaches previously pilot tested in Bangladesh and other countries in the 
region, especially the decentralized and participatory technology transfer mechanism and 
institutional innovations promoted under the National Agricultural Technology Project in 
India which was completed in 2005.  
 
Geographic coverage and selection criteria.  The national coverage under this 
component of the program would be achieved in phases, covering about 25% of the 
districts/Upazillas under the current project and expanding to other districts and Upazilas 
during subsequent phases based on implementation experience and changing needs of 
farmers.  Multiple criteria, covering socio-economic, bio-physical and institutional 
considerations, would be used to select the districts, followed by selection of Upazillas.  
The selection criteria could include: poverty levels; population density; status of rural 
infrastructure; bio-physical (rainfall, soils, irrigation water) potential; major production 
systems; status of natural resource base; implementation capacity; and institutional 
support.  
 
Activities to be finance under the component..  The project would finance extension 
micro-plans, technology validation trials and demonstrations, NGO Services, 
consultancies, training, information and knowledge sharing, including publications, 
production of publicity materials for print and electronic media, office equipment and 
supplies and incremental operating costs.  Specific activities would include:  
 
(i) 
Decentralization of Extension Service.  Responsibility for preparation, 
implementation and funding of demand-led extension micro-plans (covering crops, 
horticulture, livestock and fisheries) would be delegated to the Upazilla level.  The key 
elements of the decentralized system would include: (a) targeting, motivation, 
organization and capacity building of rural producers with the help of NGOs to form 
Common Interest Groups (CIGs) based on livelihoods or some other common interest, 
e.g. credit, water use, to prepare and implement participatory extension micro-plans at the 
Page  5
Union level reflecting the priority needs of the CIG members in crops/horticulture, 
livestock and fisheries sub-sectors; (b) aggregation of Union micro-plans to provide the 
Upazilla extension plan, along with sub-sector (crops, livestock, fisheries) budget 
estimates, for review and approval by the Upazilla Extension Coordination Committee 
(UECC); (c) funding for implementation of extension micro-plans would be provided by 
line departments through respective budgets, with the project bridging the funding gap; 
(d) technical support and training of CIGs by the Upazilla and Union level extension 
teams (departmental staff, NGOs and farmer resource persons), who in turn would be 
trained and technically supported by the district level extension staff with the 
involvement of research scientists; and (d) the national level policy guidance, inter-
agency/departmental coordination and monitoring and evaluation of the decentralized 
extension system by the National Extension Coordination Committee (NECC), supported 
by the District and Upazilla level Extension Coordination Committees (DECC and 
UECC), with representation of all relevant stakeholders.  
 
(ii) 
Strengthening of Research-Extension-Farmer Linkages.  Support would be 
provided for: (a) the early involvement of researchers in extension planning and work on 
demand-based on-farm technology validation; (b) demonstrations, workshops and farmer 
exchange visits, including increased use of communications technologies for training and 
dissemination of extension related information; and (c) establishment of Farmer?s 
Information and Advice Centers at the Union level to promote farmer-to-farmer exchange 
of information/ experiences, as well as interactions with public/private service providers.  
 
(iii) 
Enhancing Institutional Efficiency.  To improve overall efficiency of the public 
extension service and to strengthen a decentralized pluralistic institutional structure of 
extension service providers, assistance would be provided to: (a) develop producer?s 
organizations (POs) based on CIGs, especially at Union and Upazilla levels, to empower 
members for greater participation in planning, implementation and monitoring of 
extension and to make the public service more responsive to their needs; (b) evaluate and 
revise current structure, functions and business procedures of different line departments 
(Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE), Department of Fisheries (DOF) and 
Directorate of Livestock Services (DLS)), including capacity to manage fiduciary 
responsibilities; (c) update MOA?s National Agricultural Policy (NAP) and the New 
Agricultural Extension Policy (NEAP), preparation of a new livestock extension policy 
consistent with GOB?s PRSP, and preparation of a national extension implementation 
strategy to strengthen coordination and synergy between extension activities of different 
line departments (DAE, DOF and DOL) and complimentarity with the private sector 
service providers; and (d) strengthen training capacity and facilities for need-based 
human resource development (DAE, DOF, DLS staff and farmers) in strategic 
partnerships with other organizations, e.g. agricultural universities, large NGOs.  
 
Component 3.  Development of Value Chains  
 
To assist with development of value chains of selected commodities (e.g. fruits, 
vegetables, flowers, poultry, dairy, meat, fisheries) in selected Upazillas, where farmers 
are already engaged in production of such commodities for the local or export markets, 
Page  6
alternative market-led approaches to farmer-market linkages and value addition would be 
tested.  As in Component 2, CIGs and POs would be the focal point for decentralized 
participatory planning and implementation.  
 
Activities to be financed under the component.  
 
The project would finance consultancies, NGO services, technology validation trials and 
demonstrations, publications, production of publicity materials for print and electronic 
media, office equipment and supplies and incremental operating costs.  In early years, 
there would be a strong emphasis on bridging the ?know-how? gap in this field based on 
analysis of selected value chains.  Specific activities would include:  
 
(i) 
Strengthening Farmer-Market Linkages.  To facilitate production of the type 
(variety) and the quality of commodities demanded by the market, the project would help 
producers to organize themselves in to groups and diversify production by self-selecting 
market options and products they wish to invest in.  This would help to vertically 
integrate small and marginal producers into value chains covering key commodities of 
interest to the poor, including rice, maize, fruits, vegetables, livestock and fisheries . 
More specifically, the project would: (a) as in Component 2, organize producers into 
CIGs and POs with a focus on small and marginal farmers; (b) where appropriate, 
promote contract farming by linking CIGs and POs with processors and/or marketing 
organizations for production of selected commodities, especially for the local market, 
building on experience gained from on-going contract farming activities in the country; 
and  (c) disseminate ?best practices? for production, post-harvest technologies, 
management of value chains and to promote quality improvement based on low-cost 
post-harvest management practices, including cleaning, grading, packing, storage and 
transport, and introduction of higher sanitary and phyto-sanitary standards (SPS) required 
by the national and/or export markets.  Different options for extension support would be 
utilized.  These could include the use of decentralized public extension service or 
contractual arrangements with other service providers, including NGOs or the private 
sector.  Option for establishment of demand-based ?user support fund? would be 
considered to provide producer groups and their organizations investing in higher-risk 
activities to access services from suppliers of their choice.  
 
(ii) 
Capacity Building and Knowledge Management.  Support would be provided for: 
(a) capacity building of trainers, and training programs aimed at capacity building of 
CIGs, POs agribusiness staff and public officials (research, extension, regulators) in 
commercial farming practices, including issues related to agribusiness development, 
access to appropriate financial services and marketing support;  (b) information sharing 
support to both the public and the private sector participants; and (c) development of 
effective linkages with the research system and support for validation trials, especially for 
work on local value chains.  
 
,
(iii) 
Enhancing Institutional Efficiency.  The focus would be on strengthening of 
institutional arrangements and ?know-how? of organizations able to support market-
oriented production systems, including: (a) support to CIGs and POs to play a central role 
Page  7
in helping members to improve access to markets, both through orderly contract farming 
and direct marketing, and other services (inputs, credit, technical support); and (b) 
improvements in institutional and operational effectiveness of Hortex, the specialized 
agency established by MOA to promote post-harvest value addition and market linkages 
to accelerate growth of high value chains of agricultural commodities; especially 
horticulture.  
 
Component 4.  Project Management and Coordination.  
 
The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) would coordinate and facilitate implementation of 
NATP under the direction and supervision of the Project Steering Committee (PSC).  The 
Project Implementation Units in BARC, DAE, DOF and DLS would be responsible for 
ensuring implementation of project activities assigned to institutions/units under their 
respective organizations.  The PCU would be headed by the Project Director and would 
have 3 National Coordinators responsible for Agricultural Research (component 1), 
Agricultural Extension (component 2) and Development of Value Chains (component 3). 
It would also have expertise in Administration, Financial Management, Procurement, 
M&E, and Social/Environmental aspects to support and develop capacity of 
implementing agencies, as needed.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Agricultural Research Support Component is national in coverage and would support 
research proposals emanating from any corner of the country.  The Agricultural 
Extension Support Component, in the first phase (5 years) would cover about 120 
Upazilas, having relatively higher agricultural development potentials.  The Chittagong 
Hill Tract does not fall under the purview of first phase. The Development of Value 
Chains Component will be taken up in a few selected Upazilas which offer the highest 
potential from technical, economic and institutional perspectives.  Overall, the 
agricultural extension and value chains area selection will be made using the following 
criteria: (i) poverty; (ii) agro-ecological potential; (iii) status of rural infrastructure; (iv) 
natural resource base; and (v) institutional capacity.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  8
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Agricultural Research support:  Both competitive grants program as well as sponsored 
public good research aim at improving the productivity, stability and sustainability of 
different production systems.  The key elements are: food security, diversification, 
commercialization, export enhancements and biodiversity conservation.  Hence, the 
impacts are expected to be mostly positive. However, in few cases, small-scale impacts 
may raise inadvertently, in the unlikely event that the selection, planning, and 
implementation of the sub-project interventions and demonstration sites are 
inappropriate/inadequate.  But identifying and addressing all the likely impacts during the 
project preparation is not possible as the nature of interventions become known, over 
time, as and when the proposals (sub-projects) are designed and implemented.  Thus, 
among the three components, safeguards management gain some significance, 
particularly in the context of the research support.  Towards this, the borrower undertook 
an environmental and social assessment which enabled identifying issues of significance 
and the likely impacts thereof.  The issues identified are manageable and the 
environmental assessment did not identify and potential large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts. Agricultural Extension Support and Development of Value Chain:  
Environmental and Social Assessment have indicated some issues which are likely to 
have small scale short-term impacts, for which Management Plans (with mitigatory 
measures) have been prepared.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No such issue has been identified by the environmental and social assessments. However, 
to manage against unforeseen risks, the project has prepared a few exclusion criteria for 
potential sub-projects, as part of the environmental and social management framework.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
Page  9
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Agricultural Research Support:  
 
As indicated earlier, identifying and addressing all likely impacts during the project 
preparation is not possible, as the nature of interventions become known, over time, as 
and when the proposals (sub-projects) are designed and implemented.  Thus, among the 
three components, safeguards management gain some significance, particularly in the 
context of the research support.  The safeguard measures hence include a Safeguards 
Management Framework which inter-alia comprise: (i) national legal framework; (ii) 
potential issues and an associated Checklist of Impacts likely to occur; and (iii) a simple 
screening matrix. These would provide guidance in addressing safeguards as and when a 
research proposal emerges.  Safeguards are not viewed in isolation, but integrated with 
the overall project implementation which would pave way for offering substantial 
opportunities to further the environmental and social development.  Selection of all 
research proposals (sub projects) will be subject to satisfactory safeguard compliance.  
Each proposal will contain a safeguards management note, as an integral part.  
 
Agricultural Extension Support and Development of Value Chain:  
 
Social Safeguards.  None of the project interventions require involuntary land 
acquisitions. Hence OP 4.12 is not triggered. While Bangladesh do have tribal 
populations, the Upazilas selected for the first phase implementation have no tribal 
population. Hence, OP 4.10 is also not triggered. However, it is agreed that GOB will, 
prior to commencing the next phase, re-visit social assessment and ensure, as appropriate, 
compliance with O P 4.10.  
 
Environmental Safeguards.  
 
Although the project will not finance pesticides and fertilizers, there is a possibility of 
negative impacts due to induced increased pesticide and fertilizer use associated with 
diversification, and this has been addressed by supporting an extensive integrated pest 
management (IPM) and integrated nutrient management program (INM) and 
encouragement of marketing of organic and safe foods.  These programs along with  
improving disease surveillance and improving environment in villages (e.g. through 
awareness building, promotion of composting, improving extension related to safe agro-
chemicals and dangers of hazardous pesticides and livestock supplements) are reflected 
in the Environmental Management Plan.  
 
The Plan integrates approaches to effectively manage pests (with a strong Integrated 
Pest Management focus), agro-biodiversity, water conservation, waste management, soil 
nutrient management, promotion of organic and safe agricultural and milk products and 
marketing, and fisheries management.  This is supplemented by capacity-building 
approaches such as training, development of effective environmental knowledge bases 
and analytical capacity and effective stakeholder consultation, awareness, extension and 
Page  10
outreach to promote environmentally-sustainable agriculture.  Annual  workshops will be 
organized by BARC, jointly with KGF, to discuss/ disseminate best practices on 
sustainable agriculture and natural resource management.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation:  
 
A
strong monitoring program has also been designed to monitor various environmental 
and social parameters and to promote their use for adaptive management.  It  will be 
monitored as a part of the overall component wise as well as sub-project (particularly in 
component 1) progress monitoring.  In addition, PCU may enlist the services of an 
external consulting agency to conduct a safeguards assessment thrice during the project 
implementation, at the end of 12th, 24th and 36th month.  Results of the evaluation will 
be used for mid-course corrections (if need be). The first six sub-project proposals,  from 
Component-1, will be shared with the Bank for comments before approving 
implementation.  Public disclosure arrangements viz., making available information 
related to all components, individually,  as well as the project, as a whole, will be made.  
 
Institutional Arrangements.  
 
Safeguards management has been integrated with the overall project's governance and 
management institutions/arrangements. At the Apex level, the Project Steering 
Committee will guide and oversee the safeguards management. Component specific 
issues will be addressed by the Project Implementation Units (PIU).  PCU will develop 
an inventory of experts available in and outside the country to assist in the 
implementation of safeguard policy.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key project stakeholders include the local farming communities  (including women, 
marginal and small farmers, Adibasis, Charlanders, women ); project functionaries at 
different levels, associated line department staff (agriculture, livestock and fisheries); 
elected representatives, particularly at the Union level;  NGOs, academia and consulting 
community; input suppliers and producers (traders, fertilizer associations); external 
donors; and consumers of agricultural, horticultural, milk and fish products associated 
with project activities. There have been consultations throughout the project preparation  
both by the Bank Missions as well as by the GOB's environmental and social assessment 
consultants team.  
 
Disclosures.  Detailed reports, including stakeholder consultation deliberations and 
technical notes are available with the PCU. ESSMF report, along with the check lists and 
screening matrix prepared as a part of the project preparation, are also available. 
Executive Summary of the Social and Environmental Assessments have been translated 
into Bengali language and the same will be disseminated widely across the country 
through the ARI institutions as well as other agencies. In accordance with the Bank's 
disclosure policy, environmental and social safeguards management notes prepared as a 
part of each sub-project proposal will be discussed locally with the stakeholders and 
Page  11
disseminated widely. They  will also be disclosed through the  Public Information Center 
of the World Bank Office in Bangladesh.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paul Singh Sidhu 
02/26/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
02/26/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish 
02/26/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
02/26/2007 
Comments:   
