Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/31/2007 
Report No.:  AC2831
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P098146 
Project Name:  Public Procurement Reform Project II 
Task Team Leader:  Zafrul Islam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SARPS 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
23.60 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.30
1.30 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed follow-on project is to improve performance of the public 
procurement system progressively in Bangladesh, focusing on the key sectoral ministries 
and targeting their implementing agencies.  The objective would be achieved by 
strengthening the on-going reform process and moving it further on with the following 
outputs:  (i) enhanced capacity in creating a sustained program of developing skilled 
procurement professionals, (ii) strengthened management and monitoring of procurement 
in target agencies and CPTU, (iii) introduction of e-government procurement in those 
agencies on a pilot basis, and (iv) enhanced monitoring with a program supporting 
behavioral change communication and social accountability.  All these actions are key 
elements in effective implementation of the procurement law/ regulations.   
 
3. Project Description 
By taking stock of the situation and to ensure sustainability of the current procurement 
reform program, the Government is now embarking on a fresh round of initiatives 
designed to address implementation challenges with beneficiary/ stakeholders 
participation by improving its capability to implement the new rules and regulations more 
efficiently (in terms of process) and effectively (in terms of outcomes).  This includes 
strengthening procurement capacity of major government departments, the development 
Page  2
of a procurement focused management information system, the adoption of an IT based 
procurement system, and the expansion and institutionalization of a training program.  
This program would be aimed at establishing a professional career path within the 
government and familiarizing non-specialists on the new rules/regulations and systems, 
including informed decision making by policy makers in approving contract awards.  
Thus, to assist the government in implementing those initiatives and to address the issues 
faced in the implementation of PPR, the proposed project will have the following four 
major components:  
 
Component 1: Furthering Policy Reform and Institutionalizing Capacity Development 
would support the capacity development program and include certain key features of core 
procurement skills to institutionalize procurement capacity in Bangladesh.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Procurement Management at Sectoral Level would support 
strengthening five key sectoral target agencies for improved management and monitoring 
of procurement (RHD, LGED, REB, and BWDB).  
 
Component 3: Introducing e-Government Procurement (e-GP) would support piloting e-
GP on a phased approach in the above target agencies to make the system more 
transparent and save costs.  
 
Component 4:  Communication, Behavioral Change, and Social Accountability would 
support creating greater public awareness of a well functioning public procurement 
system by engaging civil society, think tanks, beneficiaries, and the private sector with 
the expectation of initiating a long-term process of procurement monitoring by them.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located at Dhaka, and it does not involve environmental issues or 
population likely to be affected.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nilufar Ahmad (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
N/A 
Page  4
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Zafrul Islam 
05/16/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Nilufar Ahmad 
05/16/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/17/2007 
Comments:  This Category C project is transferred to SARPS. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Els Hinderdael-Forger 
05/31/2007 
Comments:   
