Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2453 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P083781 
Project Name: Bangladesh Tax Administration Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader: Zaidi Sattar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASPR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other industry (100%) 
Theme: Other economic management (P);Other financial and private sector development 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary objectives of the proposed project are to raise tax revenue through improved 
compliance; increase efficiency of tax administration through organizational changes, 
reengineering of business processes and automation; and establish more transparent and 
equitable tax collection services. A revenue increase will support much needed investments in 
human capital and physical infrastructure that will foster higher growth and poverty reduction. In 
addition, more transparent tax administration systems will contribute to an improved investment 
climate and public sector governance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The details of each project component will be determined in consultation with NBR and the 
Ministry of Finance. At a minimum, the project components will have to address organizational 
constraints, scale up administrative and operational reforms implemented/planned in the income 
tax and VAT LTU, and improve taxpayer services while reducing opportunities for corruption. 
The project would be prepared in collaboration with the IMF and DFID and would complement 
technical assistance provided by DFID.  
Page  2
The project has the following components (estimated Bank financing of US$60.0 million):  
 
Component 1:  Strengthening Management and Organizational Development  
 
The project would help implement a phased reorganization along functional lines, with scope to 
integrate selective elements of the taxpayer size segment approach, and strengthen core 
management functions begun under EMTAP. Strengthening of management will involve 
changes in Board procedures, training and the development of management information systems 
that will permit more timely reporting and greater transparency and will in turn enhance 
productivity, accountability and governance. The component will also build capacity for NBR to 
conduct strategic and operational planning.  
 
Component 2: Improving Revenue Operations  
 
This component would support a reengineering of NBR?s core business processes and their 
automation. Most importantly, it would seek to scale up new procedures piloted at the LTUs, 
including self-assessment and modern processes to monitor VAT compliance. New regional tax 
offices focused on medium taxpayers would be set up, co-locating income and VAT and 
providing for greater sharing of information, resources and removing duplication of functions. 
Initially, these would be introduced in one or two regions and expanded gradually to other areas 
of the country so that NBR is able to manage better these complex changes. The above changes 
would also involve implementing an integrated revenue and registration system; and 
strengthening basic areas of revenue administration, such as audit, enforcement, and appeal 
procedures. Procedural changes within customs will be more modest given reforms already 
introduced under BDXDP and further institutional building measures planned under EMTAP. 
Customs reforms will focus on further expediting clearance and strengthening risk profiling and 
post-clearance audits.  
 
This component would finance hardware, software, and technical assistance as well as civil 
works to establish an adequate working environment for NBR staff and a supporting 
environment for computers to function.  
 
Component 3:  Policy Support  
 
This component would seek to improve the legal environment in which NBR operates so that 
tax administration can become more efficient, transparent and equitable and the proposed 
operational reforms can be successfully implemented. Policy changes would involve penalties 
and other incentives to enhance compliance and facilitate enforcement. The component would 
also build capacity for conducting policy reviews, estimating compliance and revenue collection, 
and implementing joint-policy assessments with the Ministries of Finance and Commerce.  
 
Component 4 - Human resource development and professional integrity  
 
NBR has not had a dedicated HRM function. This component would build upon changes 
initiated under EMTAP which seeks to support the introduction of a modern HRM function. It 
would include modernizing recruitment, selection, hiring procedures, workforce planning and 
career development and automating HRM systems. It would support initial changes in 
compensation policies and performance incentive systems. The project would also provide 
technical training to staff to raise the level of agency professionalism and integrity, would 
Page  3
strengthen training centers with the capability of overseeing distance learning and promote 
greater integration of learning programs and curricula between the two centers.  A formal 
strategy to reduce vulnerability to corruption and strengthen professional integrity would be 
developed. This component would be prepared in close collaboration with Bank staff supporting 
civil service reform in Bangladesh.  
 
Component 5:  Taxpayer education and public accountability  
 
Taxpayer education is currently minimal and will need to be strengthened considerably to 
facilitate greater compliance. In addition, taxpayers and the public can play an important role in 
shaping NBR and improving governance and accountability. This component would include 
activities to support (i) NBR?s public disclosure and transparency, (ii) taxpayer education (e.g., 
communication programs, internet facilities, and a call centre), (iii) facilitate taxpayer 
participation in shaping NBR?s performance (e.g., through surveys and oversight panels), and 
(iv) training for freight forwarders and customs brokers to ensure maximum diffusion among 
customs clients of new procedures and diminish vulnerability to informal payments.  
 
Component 6: Project support unit  
 
This component would finance consultants on procurement and financial management to assist 
the Project Director, an NBR Member, to meet World Bank Guidelines for accountability and 
transparency.  
 
D.  
Tentative financing  
 
Source: ($m.) 
 
 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
60  
 
Total 60  
 
Safeguards Policy Approach  
 
The project focuses on modernization of tax administration primarily through organizational 
changes, business process re-engineering, and full automation of customs, income tax and VAT 
administration. Modest amounts of civil work might be necessary to install various IT and 
communication equipment to connect field offices with NBR headquarters. Environmental 
implications of these are minimal.  
 
Partnerships  
 
The Bank has been working closely with DFID and IMF. DFID has been financing 
implementation of the income tax and VAT LTUs through its Reform in Revenue 
Administration (RIRA) project. Reform in tax administration has been effectively leveraged by 
IMF?s parallel PRGF program and the Bank?s DSC. The team has been working closely with 
civil society and business groups which will continue during implementation phase. An advisory 
group of public-private stakeholders will be constituted to assist in project preparation and play 
an oversight role in project implementation.   
 
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project covers the NBR HQ located in Segun Bagicha, Dhaka, and all its zonal and district 
offices, including sea and land ports across the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The National Board of Revenue will provide physical space for the project implementation unit 
and provide the scope for completing modest amounts of civil works that might be needed to 
install IT equipment and internet facilities for online connectivity of the entire tax administration. 
It is not anticipated that the project will have any significant irreversible or long-term 
environmental impacts. NBR, the implementing agency, has been implementing tax reform 
programs earlier, financed by World Bank, and has developed capabilities for managing project 
formulation and implementation, keeping in view any environmental and social concerns that 
might arise.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/20/2006 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No negative environmental implication   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Zaidi Sattar 
07/24/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
08/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Kapil Kapoor 
08/14/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
