Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  38074 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/22/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P095965 
Project Name: Siddhirganj Peaking Power Project 
Task Team Leader: Alan F. Townsend 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 18, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
200.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
200.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary development objective is to support investments in peaking power supply capability 
in Bangladesh such that unmet demand for energy is reduced by at least 1,000-million kWh per 
year.  A secondary development objective is to build capacity in Bangladesh to manage 
effectively and efficiently complex power generation technology.  In part this would be 
accomplished through capacity building of Electricity Generation Company of Bangladesh 
(EGCB) and introduction of an Operations & Maintenance contractor.  The EGCB 
corporatization model, complemented by an O&M contract, has the potential to be implemented 
across a range of BPDB-owned power stations in Bangladesh, all of which are under-performing 
at this time.  The project would also seek to enhance the project implementation capabilities of 
Power Grid Company of Bangladesh (PGCB) and Gas Transmission Company Ltd. (GTCL), 
both of which are leading energy service companies in Bangladesh.  The two companies are 
expected to benefit in particular from exposure to Bank project appraisal approaches, including 
those related to environmental and social impacts.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
Siddhirganj, just outside the metro Dhaka area, is an existing power generation site in an 
industrial area.  The power generation component of the project involves construction of two 
150-megawatt, simple cycle, gas-fired turbines, complementing another 240 MW of peaking 
capacity at the site which have been approved for funding by the Asian Development Bank 
(ADB).  These plants are designed to run at full capacity for about 9 hours of each day, covering 
the period of peak consumption from about 3 pm until midnight.  
 
In order to ensure the availability of gas at the Siddhirganj site, the World Bank has agreed to 
consider financing of a new, 60 km, 30-inch pipeline to run from the Bakhrabad gas processing 
plant to the Siddhirganj site.  The pipeline is also intended to service two other power generation 
sites (Meghnaghat and Haripur) as well as an export processing zone that is to be developed in 
the area.  The new pipeline will be an extension of the 30-inch Ashuganj-Bakhrabad line that has 
already been built and that is an important component in ensuring that new gas supplies coming 
out of northeast Bangladesh can serve customers in Chittagong and the southern Dhaka environs.  
 
The project will also finance an 11 km, 230 kV power transmission line from Siddhirganj to a 
grid substation in south Dhaka; the financing will cover the purchase and installation of 
switchgear as well.  Finally, the project will finance a handful of critical technical assistance 
items ? specifically, the O&M and Long Term Service Agreement (LTSA) contracts for the 
power plant; and Owner?s Engineers for the gas and power transmission lines (an OE for the 
power plant is being financed by an existing IDA technical assistance credit).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The site for the power plant in located within an 88 acre property owned by the PDB.  It is a 
completely enclosed property which houses a power complex consisting of a) an old 50 MW 
Steam Turbine (ST), b) a new 210 MW Steam Turbine (ST), c) two 132 kV Sub-stations, d) gas 
metering and regulating station, e) residential complex for almost 3000 people, f) school, g) 
mosque, h) hospital, i) shops, and most other common facilities that can be expected in a small 
township.  There are plans to add an additional 210 MW ST next to the existing 210 MW ST.  
The  ADB funded 2 x 120 MW gas turbines (GTs) are to come up in place of the old 50 MW ST 
near the river on the east side, which will be dismantled.  The WB funded 2 x 150 MW GTs will 
come up in the area adjacent to the main road on the west side.  The distance between the ADB 
and WB funded sites is about 1 km.  
 
The whole property is located in an industrial area.  On the east side across the river and within 
2-3 km radius, there are three more gas fired power plants (Globeleq Haripur 360 MW, a non-
functional Bangladesh Power Development Board (BPDB) 99 MW plant, and NEPC barge 
mounted 1 x 110 MW).  There is a wooden board making factory between AES Haripur and the 
BPDB plant which is known for its high emission of fine particles that have clogged the air 
intake filters of the BPDB plant in the past.  Immediately along the Siddhirganj property, on the 
south is a large but derelict jute mill that is being converted to a Special Economic Zone, and on 
the north is a steel re-rolling mill, and then a couple of brick kilns.  There are numerous other 
industries abound in the Siddhirganj area.  To the immediate west, along the boundary of the 
property, is the Demra-Narainganj road constructed on the embankment of an irrigation canal.  
The whole Siddhirganj area is quite densely populated like any other peri-urban area around 
Dhaka.  The Sitalakha River immediately to the east of the property is used as a major waterway. 
Page  3
It is also the main source of water for all the industrial activity in the Siddhirganj area, including 
the power plants.  
 
The gas pipeline will follow a 60 km route, mostly in parallel to an existing power transmission 
line.  Most of the land is agricultural, much of that is water-covered during the wet season.  A 
small portion of the route, on the Haripur-Siddhirganj end, is congested and urban, but overall 
there are only a few households that will need to be relocated.  There are five river crossings; 
horizontal drilling and pulling methods will be used.  
 
The power transmission line will follow an 11 km route, under half of which is in a congested 
part of south Dhaka and the balance across open land (some of which is under water in rainy 
season).  This line will replace an existing, 40-year old line, and the social impact issues all relate 
to the encroachment into the right-of-way that has occurred over the course of time.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
EGCB is a newly created corporate entity that is still trying to establish itself. Hence it has no 
capacity for managing safeguard issues. However, BPDB, which is the parent entity to EGCB, 
has previously undertaken projects funded by external donors that require management of 
safeguard issues. As a result EGCB senior staff has some broad understanding of the 
requirements for managing safeguard issues. Recently EGCB has hired a qualified environmental 
specialist to enhance the organization?s environmental capacity.  Although GTCL and PGCB 
have also undertaken projects funded by external donors requiring management of safeguard 
issues, it like the other two entities is not fully familiar with the Bank?s environmental and social 
policy requirements.  In view of this, the services of qualified technical consultants will be 
engaged to prepare required safeguard studies and plans during project preparation.  All three of 
these entities will assign suitably qualified staff to provide oversight on the preparation of these 
studies and ensure their effective implementation.   Given that the capacity of these entities in 
addressing environmental and social issues, as well as the mainstreaming of these issues in their 
regular business processes needs to be strengthened, the technical consultants  will also provide 
detailed recommendations for building capacity and strengthening institutional arrangements in 
these organizations to manage the environment and social impacts.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Kirtan Chandra Sahoo (SASES) 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
All the three components of the project are likely to have adverse impacts on the 
environment.  The power generation component is located in an industrial area, which will be 
hosting multiple developments as mentioned in the description of the project location. 
Competing demand for use of available local resources to support such developments may affect 
the local environment as well as livelihood of the local population.  For instance, the impact of 
water extraction from the river and disposal of further effluent to the river could adversely affect 
the river ecosystem, as well as the fishing activity in the river.  Given the general land use in and 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
around Dhaka, the new 60 KM long gas transmission line is likely to encounter sensitive land 
uses such as densely populated mixed land uses, wet lands and water bodies along the pipeline 
corridor and cause adverse environmental impacts.  Local economic activities such as 
agriculture, fishing etc. are also likely to be affected during construction of the pipeline.  
Similarly, dismantling of the existing power transmission line and laying of the new transmission 
line is also expected to cause local impacts.  It is critical to identify all the potential impacts and 
minimize the same during project planning and preparation. OP/BP 4.01 Environmental 
Assessment is thus triggered in the project.  
 
The proposed pipeline alignment between Bakhrabad and Siddhirganj may encounter 
sensitive land uses including patches of wet lands and natural habitats.  Applicability of OP/BP 
4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OPN 11.03 (Cultural Property) will therefore be determined during 
environmental assessment.  Suitable safeguard management plans will be developed as part of 
the EA if such policies are triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Since the proposed project will support dismantling the existing 132 kV line and construction 
of the new 230 kV line, and construction of the Bakhrabad to Siddhirganj gas pipeline, some 
adverse social impacts are likely from the acquisition of privately owned land and the 
displacement of people.  Specific details of social impacts will be available once Social Impact 
Assessments (SIAs), which are being carried out for each of the three project components are 
completed. The approach to resettlement will be based on meaningful consultations and 
informed participation of affected people in the design and implementation 
interventions.Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) with an entitlement matrix for different types of 
impacts/losses will be prepared for the Siddhirganj-Maniknagar 230 kV power transmission line 
and associated GIS substation facilities, as well as for the Bakhrabad-Siddhirganj 80 km, 30-inch 
natural gas transmission pipeline.  No acquisition of privately owned land or physical 
displacement of people is expected with the proposed 300 MW simple cycle gas turbine and 
associated equipment at Siddhirganj site, however, the social impact assessment will more 
precisely detail possible social impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/25/2007 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The on-going Power Sector Development Technical Assistance (PSDTA) project will fund 
EGCB to undertake the collection and collation of information/data from primary and 
secondary sources of key baseline environmental parameters in and around the site.  This 
baseline study will serve as the basis for preparation of the TOR for the environmental 
assessment and monitoring plan.  
 
In keeping with the secondary objectives of the project, given that EGCB is a newly 
constituted company which is likely to develop other power plants in the future, this project 
is a good opportunity to assist them with developing a framework for environment, health, 
and safety management. The capacity building of EGCB could be done through TA support.  
The TA is intended to be delivered through the O&M contractor (who is to be hired for 6 
years).  The TOR for the O&M contractor to be developed by the transaction consultant will 
need to include monitoring and supervision of environmental parameters.  There are a 
number of IPPs operating in the area.  They may already be having an environmental 
management / monitoring system in place.  It would be good for the EGCB and Siddhirganj 
staff to learn about what they are doing.  
 
Environmental impact assessment of will be carried out for each of the three project 
components separately to identify the critical environmental issues in each of these 
components, as part of the project preparation.  The EIA?s will be carried out as per the Bank 
guidelines and applicable local regulations. Suitable environmental management plans will 
be prepared to mitigate the environmental issues.  Environmental impact assessment for each 
component will also include identification of the capacity building needs of the implementing 
agencies in the area of environment management and preparation of suitable capacity 
building plans as part of environment management plans.  These plans will be prepared and 
disclosed before appraisal of the project.  
 
Social Impact Assessments (SIAs) will be carried out for each of the three project 
components to assess social impacts and risks, and where adverse social impacts are 
identified, determine how they can be avoided minimized or substantially mitigated, as well 
as identify key stakeholders and establish strategies for their participation in project design, 
implementation and monitoring. Although SIAs need to be carried out, initial social 
screening indicates that the project?s transmission line and gas pipeline components may 
result in adverse social impacts resulting from relocation, loss of land and shelter, loss of 
assets or access to assets and loss of income sources or means of livelihoods.  Since these 
types of social impacts are possible, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) with an entitlement 
matrix for different types of impacts/losses will be also be prepared for the Siddhirganj-
Maniknagar 230 kV power transmission line and the for the Bakhrabad-Siddhirganj 60 km 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
natural gas transmission pipeline.  The approach to resettlement will be based on meaningful 
consultations and informed participation of affected people in the design and implementation 
interventions.  No acquisition of privately owned land or physical displacement of people is 
expected with the proposed 300 MW power plant and associated equipment at Siddhirganj 
site, however, the SIA for this project component will more precisely detail possible social 
impacts.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alan F. Townsend 
11/20/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/21/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
11/20/2006 
Comments:   
