Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2486 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/18/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P098146 
Project Name: Public Procurement Reform Project II 
Task Team Leader: Zafrul Islam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: SARPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.08 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.72
0.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to improve monitoring of procurement outcomes 
and accountability of stakeholders in the public procurement system with increased transparency 
and disclosure of information, and thereby resulting in improved governance in the sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Over the last several years, though systemic changes have been made by mandating uniform 
procurement policy, actual implementation of the regulation is slow and less progress has been 
made in improving tangible outcomes on the ground.  The current procurement reform project, 
being implemented by the Central Procurement Technical Unit (CPTU) of Implementation 
Monitoring and Evaluation Division (IMED) of the Ministry of Planning, will close in June 
2007, and to establish a robust procurement environment, there is a need for continuity of the 
program.  Thus, the project is likely to have four components:  
 
Component 1: Furthering Policy Reform and Institutionalizing Capacity Development  
 
Page  2
5. 
Furthering Policy Reform:  The Public Procurement Regulations 2003 (PPR 2003) 
framed under PPRP is in force.  All local procurement follows PPR 2003 and will continue to do 
so until detailed rules are framed based on the procurement law that has recently been passed.  
Rules will be framed by updating the existing regulations/ procedures etc.  Whatever those 
updating/ adjustments might be, they will imply consequential amendments to a number of other 
documents including the implementing procedures, the suite of standard bidding documents 
(SBDs) and any guidelines or directions issued by the CPTU in respect of the procurement 
provisions.  
 
6. 
Institutionalizing Procurement Management Capacity:  Under the current credit, as of 
now, GOB developed a critical mass of about 25 national trainers and trained about 1400 staff.  
The current training program appears to have been successful in meeting the immediate goal of 
training a core number of procurement officers in the new legal and regulatory procurement 
framework.  However, the training does not go far enough on core procurement skills such as 
evaluation mechanisms and contract administration.  Also, planning, budgeting and supply chain 
management skills are lacking.  For sustainable capacity development, its institutionalization is 
essential.  
 
7. 
Subject to the final outcomes/ findings of an assessment, currently the following 
components of a medium to long term strategy are envisaged:  
 
?
Continuation and development of current training: The program will include updating the 
contents to reflect the new legal framework in view of the law, continuing current courses, and 
institutionalizing it in a way that the existing provider (Bangladesh Institute of Management- 
BIM) develops its own faculty to continue training on a sustainable basis.  
 
?
Development of core procurement capacity:  This component envisages a more holistic 
demand-based approach concentrating on the core skills of procurement functions.  The method 
envisaged is to invite a recognized international institution like the Chartered Institute of 
Purchasing and Supply, U.K. (CIPS) to partner with a local institute to create skills at various 
levels allowing for the efficient division of labour within procurement departments and the 
creation of a distinct career path in procurement, if feasible, leading to the emergence of a well-
trained and diverse procurement regime.  
 
?
Introduction of specific training modules within existing structures:  Assistance will be 
provided to various existing public training institutes and universities to develop and include 
appropriate courses within their current syllabus.This will be a multi-dimensional approach with 
appropriate procurement modules involving institutes like Bangladesh Civil Service 
Administration Academy (BCSAA) for all entry level civil servants, Bangladesh Public 
Administration Training Center (BPATC) for senior decision-makers, the Institution of 
Engineers (training the engineering cadre) for specific course on technical specifications, BRAC 
University/ North South University/ Institute of Business Administration/ Bangladesh University 
of Engineering & Technology for academic courses.  
 
Component 2:  Strengthening Procurement Monitoring and Evaluation:  
 
Page  3
8. 
MIS Networking:  Tracking compliance with the regulations and monitoring of 
procurement outcomes in terms of performance are still the key challenges.  An initial MIS has 
been established in CPTU for on-line tracking, and it is being piloted in two agencies using large 
part of the budget.  To cater for the concerned ministries and agencies, this MIS needs to be 
expanded with appropriate linkages to all agencies.  Such a system will provide all procurement 
related data at the national level including a set of performance indicators compatible with the 
desired outcomes.  
 
9. 
Information Disclosure & Monitoring:  Disclosure of procurement process information is 
critical to transparency, and as part of the disclosure, procuring entities are to provide data to the 
CPTU?s MIS.  Since MIS data will be available in CPTU?s website, in order to make the best 
use of data and making the system more transparent and reliable to the stakeholders, involvement 
of NGOs/ civil society to review, analyze, and publicize the features of MIS data in the media 
will be considered.  This will help provide the government a central source of information and 
depending on the outcomes/ performance of the agencies, strategic improvement actions may be 
made.  
 
10. 
CPTU/ IMED:  CPTU with its current staffing and logistics is overburdened with 
numerous tasks and is simply insufficient to cope with the given mandate of policy making and 
overseeing/ monitoring implementation of procurement across the country.  Also, the linkages of 
IMED?s other sector units with CPTU is important to compile necessary information for 
dissemination to the policy makers.  This subcomponent is to increase the level of capacity of 
IMED, and in particular CPTU, to take the lead in carrying out its mandated activities and 
monitor its results.  
 
Component 3: Introducing e-Government Procurement (e-GP)  
 
11. 
Given the country environment and recent progress in procurement reform, introducing 
an e-government procurement system allowing electronic submission of bids is likely to reduce 
the threats and other problems created by powerful syndicates. E-government procurement has 
many other advantages and, for those countries using it, has proved to be an effective tool in 
fighting corruption, producing transparency and significant savings.  Recognizing the need for 
some quick results but also recognizing the risks associated with the level of technological 
capacity or organization and expertise within the public and private sectors, the results of an 
ongoing study provides ground that e-government procurement can be implemented slowly in 
phases. The plan will facilitate the government in achieving the objectives of greater 
transparency, greater efficiency, value-for-money, improved quality of public procurement 
management, and enhanced prospects for the business sector.  
 
12. 
e-GP will be conducted through a common web site that allows registration of suppliers 
and buyers, and public access to procurement policy, guidelines, procurement opportunities, 
process stages and procurement outcomes (i.e. who won the contracts, cost, duration).  Thus, the 
system will be designed and integrated centrally through CPTU with portals for each ministry 
with independent access.  Compatibility of the system with the CPTU?s MIS will be an essential 
consideration.  Detailed components are likely to involve: development of single web-based 
Page  4
system, formation of e-GP technical support unit, capacity development and training on e-GP for 
key procuring entities, e-GP awareness campaign, and piloting e-GP.  
 
Component 4:  Behavioral Change Communication and Social Accountability (BCC & SAc)  
 
13. 
Social Awareness & NGOs Involvement:  This intervention is likely to entail the 
development and implementation of four separate, but interrelated, public awareness campaigns, 
targeted at very specific audiences.  The areas of interventions are:  (a) campaign to rally 
officials? support for reform (key policy makers, officials, politicians, Member of Parliament), 
(b) public awareness campaign to educate Bangladeshi society in general about what 
procurement is and the crucial importance that it has for the proper management of public funds; 
(c) campaign on social accountability to increase the appreciation of the concept, tools and 
opportunities of social accountability in public procurement; and (d) behavioral change 
campaign to promote a change of behavior and mind-set among the members of the community 
(public officials, bidding community, civil society, politicians, etc.).  In addition, for a social 
accountability movement, it would be necessary for civil society/ NGOs to be trained in 
procurement practices.  The idea of this procurement demystification activity is to promote 
procurement literacy among civil society/ NGOs including an incentive structure.  
 
14. 
Public-Private Partnership or Civil Society Monitoring:  The creation of a public-private 
partnership to address the issue of non-governmental/ civil society monitoring of the 
procurement process as well as outcomes is an important area.  We see from early initiatives in 
Bangladesh that there already exist some agencies in civil society that monitor the government 
performance in sectors like education and health.  Two options are envisaged: (i) civil society 
organization/ NGO(s) that will be willing to work closely and constructively with CPTU to 
monitor procurement process, and (ii) a civil society?s Procurement Watch to monitor 
procurement outcomes on the ground through research, advocacy, training, and coalition 
building with other NGOs and the media. Technical support and capacity building to conduct 
workshop/training sessions would come from NGOs/institutes that have been working for some 
time in the area (for example, Center for Good Governance in Hyderabad, Procurement Watch in 
the Philippines, etc). Another aspect of this partnership could be to offer a space where the 
various stakeholders affected by the reform process can come together and discuss procurement 
reform.  
 
15. 
Media Professionals:  The aim is to provide substantive training to a core group of 
journalists on public procurement, including the investigative tools to find and bring to light 
cases of abuse and bad procurement.   In order to increase and improve the current coverage of 
procurement related issues, it would be important to emphasize the social dimension of public 
procurement ? that is, on how properly procured works, goods and services can enhance the 
wellbeing of the population.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located at Dhaka, and it does not involve environmental issues or population likely 
to be affected.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  5
Not applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nilufar Ahmad (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/23/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/08/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Zafrul Islam 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/18/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Els Hinderdael-Forger 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
