Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1597 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P078769 
Project Name: Bangladesh Private Sector Development Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Syed A. Mahmood 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
85.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)70.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will aim at supporting the pro-poor growth agenda of Bangladesh's PRSP by 
strengthening the incentives as well as the ability of firms to enhance their competitiveness.  It 
will enhance competitive pressures in the economy by helping to create an environment that 
encourages foreign investment flows and lowers barriers to entry for domestic investors. These 
are  important priorities in the World Bank's forthcoming CAS for Bangladesh.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The components likely to be included under the project are as follows:  
 
Component A: Regulatory reforms/streamlining  
 
This component aims at helping the Government of Bangladesh institutionalize the process of 
regulatory streamlining and move away from the current ad-hoc and partial approach to 
Page  2
regulatory reforms. Two activities will be supported, the first through this component and the 
second through component C:  
 
i) streamlining of 4-6 regulatory processes, and  
 
ii) development of a regulatory reform unit within government that will advocate regulatory 
streamlining and provide technical assistance to agencies that wish to streamline their processes.  
 
Component B: Economic zones  
 
This component of the proposed project will support the development of better models of 
economic zones, based on global good practices, including the use of zones as an anchor for 
forging enterprise linkages.  The project will support one or more of the following:  
 
a) 
Development of a policy, regulatory and institutional framework for Special Economic 
Zones (SEZs). Support will be provided to the Government to develop an appropriate policy, 
regulatory and institutional framework for special economic zones (and industrial parks), with an 
emphasis on private sector involvement in the development, operation and maintenance of these 
facilities.  
 
b) 
Regulatory streamlining in special economic zones. If the Bangladesh Government 
decides to go for special economic zones, this project will support a program of regulatory 
streamlining in the special zone. Selected infrastructural investments in the zone could also be 
supported.  
 
c) 
Public investment in industrial parks and export processing zones. The project may help 
finance the setting up of 3-4 new industrial parks and EPZs. In particular, the project could 
encourage private participation in parks and EPZs. This component will require land acquisition.  
 
Component C: Capacity building for investment and export promotion  
 
This component will support capacity building in the Board of Investment in the areas of 
regulatory streamlining and investment promotion, especially in light of their expected expanded 
role in regulatory streamlining.  The implementation of the special economic zones program will 
require an appropriate institutional arrangement to plan and implement the zones. This institution 
may be an independent agency (e.g., a Special Economic Zone Authority) or a department within 
BOI or BEPZA.  The project will support capacity building of the institution. This support will 
be front-loaded since a minimum capacity will need to exist to implement the SEZ component of 
the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Location of the industrial parks and economic zones to be identified.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower's capacity in this area will be assessed as part of project preparation.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova (SASES) 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental assessment will be carried out for the economic zones component of the 
project that will include an assessment of the environmental management capacity of the relevant 
implementing agencies and an assessment of the environmental impact of the construction and 
operation of economic zones and industrial parks. The assessment will lead to the development 
of an environmental and social management framework which will be implemented with support 
from the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
social assessment will be carried out for the economic zones component of the project that 
will include an assessment of the social management capacity of the relevant implementing 
agencies and an assessment of the social impact, including involuntary resettlement, of the 
construction and operation of economic zones and industrial parks. The assessment will lead to 
the development of an environmental and social management framework which will be 
implemented with support from the project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/17/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/30/2006 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental assessment: February 20, 2006  
 
Social assessment: March 1, 2006  
 
Gender equality study: February 20, 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Syed A. Mahmood 
02/17/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal 
02/17/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
02/17/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
