Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/08/2006 
Report No.:  AC2651
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P104483 
Project Name:  Social Investment Program (Supplemental) 
Task Team Leader:  Meena M. Munshi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 31, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 22, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (50%);General transportation sector (40%);Media 
(5%);General education sector (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (P);Gender 
(S);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.70 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
1.20
1.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
There will be no change to the Project Development objective (PDO) from that of the 
original project (P0535780), the Social Investment Program project (SIPP).The proposed 
additional financing would therefore continue the Original Project?s PDO of supporting 
the Social Investment Program project to develop effective and efficient financing and 
institutional arrangements for improving access to local infrastructure and basic services 
through the implementation of community-driven small-scale socio-economic 
infrastructure, social assistance and income generating activities.  Overall, it is 
anticipated that building on on-going activities in project villages and testing a revised 
strategy for future scale-up will contribute to enhanced development impact.   
 
3. Project Description 
The components of the Original Project would remain unchanged, although the menu of 
options would be broadened to incorporate recommendations of the mid term review 
(MTR) and would include a focus on livelihood activities and institutional building.  As 
Page  2
under the original project, the Additional Financing would support the following four 
components, at a total estimated cost of US$ 8 million:  
 
(i) Strengthening of SDF will support information and communication, capacity 
building, monitoring and learning and project management.  
 
(ii) Institutional Development at Community-Level will support awareness raising and 
information sharing and institutional development and planning.  
 
(iii) Implementation of Community Action Plans (CAP) will provide matching grants 
for community subprojects to finance the implementation of small scale socio-economic 
infrastructure and income generating activities, and will finance social assistance 
programs to increase the capacity of the poorest and socially excluded groups to avail 
themselves of social and economic opportunities.  
 
(iv) Pilot Private Financing of Community Utilities will finance the provision of 
technical advisory services for testing of new approaches to mobilize private participation 
in the program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
With all funds under the original project fully committed and as a follow-up to MTR 
findings, Government of Bangladesh (GoB) and the implementing agency Social 
Development Foundation (SDF) have requested IDA?s additional financial support in 
order to consolidate gains and meet existing demands of communities in the first three 
batches of villages under implementation; and also to deepen the approach with a focus 
on institutional building and livelihoods in the fourth batch of villages in four additional 
districts.  The project location will therefore remain the same as in the original project, 
i.e., Gaibandha and Jamalpur districts. In addition, as mentioned, the program would be 
expanded to 50-60 villages in 4 further poorest ?Monga?-affected  districts, also in the 
north-west of Bangladesh, neighbouring Gaibandha and Jamalpur.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTSD) 
Ms Nilufar Ahmad (SASES) 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja (SASES) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Implementation arrangements for the proposed Additional Financing would remain the 
same as those of the ongoing project, which have been performing well.  Overall, the 
project management would continue to be the responsibility of the existing 
implementation agency, SDF.  The proposed additional credit has the advantage of being 
able to benefit from the institutional capacity developed under the original project which 
stressed awareness of safeguard policies and application of an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) for subprojects financed under the project, as described 
in the approved Operational Manual (OM).  No social or environmental safeguards issues 
have been identified during implementation of the original project.  
 
Environmental: The proposed activities do not trigger any new safeguard policies or 
raise the project?s environmental category (B). The Additional Financing would fund 
community subprojects similar in scale and scope to those implemented under the 
original project.  No subprojects are approved or funds transferred until the 
environmental viability of the investments is determined, and subproject agreements 
between SDF and the community organizations contain environmental compliance 
clauses as detailed in the OM. Community subprojects will continue to be subject to the 
screening and impact assessment criteria as detailed therein.  
 
Social: While the tribal population is insignificant in the project districts (0.3 percent in 
Gaibandha and 0.1 percent in Jamalpur), a Tribal Development Plan was developed under 
the original project.  This will be applicable to the additional financing as well, and the 
guidelines are detailed in the Operational Manual.  
 
Other social impacts are expected to be positive, with project activities gradually 
leading to improved quality of life of the poor and vulnerable groups through enhancing 
their access to social and economic opportunities.  In the villages already participating 
under the ongoing project, achievements to date will be capitalized on by further 
enhancing functioning and sustainability of community groups, and broadening their 
Page  4
inclusion to ensure participation of young people and the poorest of the poor.  In the new 
villages, initial social mobilization activities will also seek to identify and include the 
poorest, introducing the principles and benefits of collective action for both social and 
economic empowerment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/08/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/08/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/08/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/08/2006  
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/08/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/08/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/08/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Given that this is Additional Financing to the original SIPP project (P053578), we are not 
required to carry out or disclose a new Environmental Assessment or Indigenous Peoples 
Plan.  Those from the orginal project will apply. We entered today's date because the 
system could not let you submit.   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meena M. Munshi 
12/05/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nilufar Ahmad 
12/05/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
12/06/2006 
Comments:   
