Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2769 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/11/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Belarus 
Project ID: P101190 
Project Name: Integrated Water Supply and Natural Hazard Mitigation Project 
Task Team Leader: Luiz Gabriel Azevedo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Water supply 
(30%);Information technology (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The principal objective of the Project is to implement a set of interrelated activities intended to 
assist the Government in providing more efficient and reliable water sector related services and 
to better manage and mitigate the impact of weather-related natural hazards. The project is 
expected to generate tangible targeted benefits for the least advantaged groups through improved 
household water supply services. In addition, the project is expected to contribute to a better 
delivery of a global public good (weather and climate information), particularly in north-eastern 
Europe and Baltic region.  
 
This objective will be achieved through rehabilitation, improvement, and expansion of water 
supply systems; adoption of advanced technologies for water treatment and de-ironization; 
improving the capacity of the Belarus Hydro meteorological Service (HMS) to provide effective 
and timely weather and hydrological services to the Government and the public; and enhancing 
overall management of the water sector.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will be financed through a specific investment loan. The estimated cost of 
the Project is US$60 million. Co-financing by other donors is being explored.  
 
The project will involve the following four components:  
 
Water Supply Development, US$39M  
 
Investments will be implemented primarily in two Oblasts - Gomel and Mogilev, which are the 
Oblasts most affected by the Chernobyl accident and will include: (a) the conversion of the water 
supply system in Gomel from surface water to groundwater; (b) the replacement of shallow well 
systems (often contaminated) used in rural areas by deep wells; (c) installation of water meters 
and rehabilitation of existing systems; (d) engineering designs; and (e) the installation of de-
ironization plants in critical areas where the iron content in groundwater is very high.  
 
Natural Hazard Mitigation, US$17M  
 
Investments will be used to modernize key elements of the technical base and to strengthen the 
institutional arrangements of the Belarus Hydro meteorological Service (HMS) including 
improvements to (a) the radar network, (b) meteorological and hydrological network; (c) the 
hydrological forecast and early warning systems for selected vulnerable river basins; and (d) 
communication and information exchange regionally and with relevant international 
organizations such as WMO.  
 
Water Sector Management, US$3M  
 
This component will support actions in order to consolidate and strengthen policies, plans and 
actions relating to the management of the sector and thus improve effective governance and 
efficiency of the water sector. Component activities will enhance the institutional and technical 
capacities as well as the systems for planning, cost recovery and monitoring and evaluation.  The 
institutional coordination, capacity building, communication, information exchange and 
stakeholder participation among relevant institutions will also be improved thereby reinforcing 
the management network for more efficient and effective operation and service provision.  
 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, US$1M  
 
This component will support project implementation and management including: (a) 
supervision of project investments; (b) PMU support, equipment, and training; (c) public 
information; (d) auditing and other fiduciary or technical services.PMU staffing will be financed 
by the government.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
At this early stage it is anticipated that water supply investments will be implemented primarily 
in two Oblasts - Gomel and Mogilev. However other parts of the country may be included. For 
the rural water supply investments (conversion of shallow to deep wells) and the implementation 
of de-ironization treatment the focus of preparation work will be on the criteria to be employed 
Page  3
for the selection (eligibility) and ranking of investments.  The GW-Mate will support the 
preparation of this component with TA.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The client seems to have strong technical capacity in some key areas related to environmental 
management. On the other hand this is not a very experienced client on World Bank financed 
project and there are obvious gaps in terms of knowledge of safeguard policies and guidelines.  
This is one of the issues that will require attention during preparation.  
 
At this early stage it is anticipated that The Ministry of Housing and Utilities will be the 
primary government coordinator and supervisor of the Project. The Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Environmental Protection and its Department for Hydro meteorology will be 
responsible for implementation of the natural hazard mitigation component. Strong coordination 
with the Ministry of Emergencies will also be necessary. Municipal executive committees and 
related organizations will also be involved in implementation of the water supply development 
component at local level.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EA will be conducted and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
At this point we do not anticipate that BP 4.04 would be triggered but this will be confirmed 
during preparation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
At this point we do not anticipate that BP 4.36 would be triggered but this will be confirmed 
during preparation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
At this point we do not anticipate that BP 7.50 would be triggered but this will be confirmed 
during preparation.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environmental assessment is planned to begin in May 2007 and will be completed and 
disclosed in accordance with World Bank guidelines.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz Gabriel Azevedo 
04/11/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/11/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
04/11/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
