Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/17/2007 
Report No.:  AC2870
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Benin 
Project ID:  P104966 
Project Name:  BJ-Energy Sector Development TAL (FY07) 
Task Team Leader:  Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt- 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (70%);Oil and gas (30%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's objectives are to (i) produce a strategic framework to develop Benin's 
energy sector; and to (ii) strengthen institutional governance and the capacity needed for 
its effective implementation, while mobilizing existing local capacity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Credit will help finance (a) energy sector planning and coordination 
through the establishment of a framework that allows for coordination of sector decisions 
at all levels; (b) gas sector development by developing an overarching gas market 
framework, which assigns clear responsibilities to all market actors; (c) sustainable 
energy services by (i) providing assistance to key sector institutions to improve their 
financial autonomy and performance and (ii) developing a cost-based framework for 
access to energy services; and (d) an Environmental and Social/Institutional Framework 
for Energy by enhancing the Government?s capacity to protect the environment and 
mitigate the potential negative social and environmental impacts of electricity generation 
and transport and the gas pipeline.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
There is no specific location, as the project consists of technical assistance only.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  3
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
There are no disclosure requirements under the project.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius 
04/18/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel E. Layec 
04/18/2007 
Comments:   
