Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2742 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Benin 
Project ID: P104881 
Project Name: Competitiveness and Integrated Growth Opportunity Project (CIGOP) 
Task Team Leader: Herve Assah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (50%);Micro- and SME finance (20%);Other 
domestic and international trade (20%);Vocational training (10%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Trade facilitation and market access 
(P);Export development and competitiveness (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Benin Competitiveness and Integrated Growth Opportunity 
Project (CIGOP) is to support investment and private sector led growth through the provisioning 
of an, institutional and business environment in selected sectors such as agro-industry, transit & 
services, tourism, called growth sectors).  
 
To that end the proposed project will: (i) further streamline business regulations to reduce red 
tape and other policy and regulatory transaction costs constraining business activity and growth 
(focusing on the ten Doing Business indicators and public-private partnership regulations, 
specially to increase and accelerate access to telecom and power services); (ii) improve 
efficiency of trade facilitation, investment promotion institutions and remove specific constraints 
to export growth and competitiveness; (iii) strengthen value chains in manufacturing and services 
and tourism sectors (iv) increase financial intermediation and promote savings and access to 
credit for SMEs, for instance in ensuring sustainability of the two largest micro-finance 
institutions in Benin, PADME and PAPME.  These initiatives will involve consideration of ways 
Page  2
and means to expand financial and non-financial services to businesses in growth sectors, 
including options for commercially-driven public-private partnerships for the delivery of these 
services.  
 
The overall outcome of the project for the country will be improvement in the ease of doing 
business in the country as reflected by a better ranking in the Doing Business survey, increased 
private sector investment leading to more employment and skills development opportunities, 
improved access to infrastructure, more efficient supply chains in the targeted growth sectors and 
thus increased household incomes leading to poverty reduction. The proposed project is also 
expected to have catalytic effect in the growth sectors areas and demonstration effects on other 
sectors in Benin and the UEMOA Region.  
 
The project will complement ongoing sector reforms, for example in the telecommunications, 
power, Customs and judiciary sectors. The project will also address constraints in human capital 
formation, governance, business environment, institutional capacity and enterprise development 
identified as impediments to development efforts.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project includes the following components:  
 
-
Business improvement facility  
 
-
Growth Sector Development Facility (including trade  
 
and transit)  
 
-
Local Entrepreneurship Development Facility  
 
(including access to credit, linkages and Women in business)  
 
The project will support the following identified activities  
 
I. 
Improvement of Business environment  
 
1.
establish and operate an investment promotion agency and a secretariat to the presidential 
Investment Council  
 
2. 
Support reforms aiming at improving Benin's ranking in  
 
the doing Business report (recruitment of consultant in  
 
low taxation labor, completion of studies etc...)  
 
3. 
Assist government in improving Public Private  
 
Partnership and regulatory framework (hiring consultants, prepare and implement economic 
and financial regulatory model, procurement of a frequency management and monitoring 
equipment, capacity building)  
 
a) Workshop and Training to strengthen capacity in PIU and selected Government units, mainly 
decision makers on PSD issues.  
 
Page  3
b) Establishment or Upgrading existing regulatory agencies, recruiting consultant highly 
experienced to assist regulatory agencies in resolving pending claims. Capacity building for staff 
over two to three years.  
 
II. 
 Development of growth sectors  
 
1. 
Development of agro-industry:  
 
a) Help government improve quality control certification facility (methodology, equipment and 
training)  
 
b) Help government improve marketing, merchandizing for export and regional trade  
 
c) Feasibility and/or construction of a cold storage unit at the cotonou airport for perishable 
goods within the airport existing compound.  
 
2. 
 Transit and Trade facilitation  
 
a)  Several studies and capacity building to improve the transport sector including rural 
transportation;  
 
b) Trade facilitation arrangement for regional cargo;  
 
3. 
Tourism and services  
 
a)  Design of a tourism master plan and identification of  tourism sites (study)  
 
b) Establishment of a regional apprenticeship school for training in tourism and hotel related 
jobs within the premises of an existing hotel (developing a specific curricular for tourism 
industry skills)  
 
III. 
Development of the National Entrepreneurship including Women in Business  
 
1. 
Improving access to credit  
 
a)provide credit lines to existing micro finance institutions upgrade management information 
system including intranet connection with their remote agencies;  
 
b) Assist in the development of credit bureaux orin the improvement of Registre de Commerce 
et de Credit mobiliers;  
 
2. 
Training and Workshops  
 
3. Improving organizational structures for corporations and professional bodies.  
 
IV. 
Institutional arrangements  
Page  4
The project will be housed in the Ministry of Finance and the implementation unit will be 
staffed with personnel coming from the current PSD operation and other bank projects. All will 
be familiar with bank operations and policies.  
 
Provide operating cost and training for PIU staff   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Cotonou - Benin   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There is an institution that works on environmental Issues, CBE (Centre Beninois pour 
l'environnement). We will closely work with this group in regards to any safeguard problem.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/13/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
There is no safeguard-related study that is needed at this time for this project. The two 
buildings planned will have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts, so no safeguard 
specialist is required if the project remains as defined. Should the project change to involve 
land acquisition, additional construction or social impacts, the team will consult ASPEN."   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Herve Assah 
02/28/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Demba Ba 
02/28/2007 
Comments:   
