Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2741 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/22/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Benin 
Project ID: P104966 
Project Name: BJ-Energy Sector Development TAL (FY07) 
Task Team Leader: Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt- 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Oil and gas (70%);Power (30%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's objectives are (i) to develop a feasible and sustainable strategic framework for the 
development of Benin's energy sector energy sector and (ii) to create the institutional capacity to 
fully realize this new framework, against the background of the energy sector's new 
opportunities for increased and efficient power generation and access to this power.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project as envisaged has four major components that target the development of an 
overarching energy sector strategy and the required institutional capacity to implement it. The 
project overall financing envelope is US$8 million.  
 
Component 1: Electricity Sector Development (US$2-3 million)  
 
The component will assist in (i) developing a comprehensive strategy and plan for the 
electricity sector;  (ii) providing technical assistance for the development of concrete generation 
additions as identified under the strategy, including for independent power producers (IPPs); and 
(iii) institutional development to ensure the efficient planning, procurement and implementation 
Page  2
of additional power plant. Under this component, at least one identified generation option will be 
prepared further.  
 
Component 2: Gas Sector Development (US$1-2 million)  
 
The component aims at the development of an overarching gas market framework (GMF), 
which assigns clear responsibilities to all market actors. The GMF will include the formulation 
of social, environmental and safety monitoring and audit mechanisms. It will focus on gas use 
for electricity and industrial processes.  The purpose of this framework is to clarify 
responsibilities among those actors already present in Benin's emerging gas market, and to 
establish sufficient confidence for future (private) actors to enter into the market. Information 
dissemination and stakeholder and public participation are at the core of this component.  
 
Component 3: Sustainable Energy Services (US$ 3 million).  
 
This component will focus on rendering energy services to consumers more sustainable by 
focusing on (i) improved financial autonomy and performance of key sector institutions; and (ii) 
development of a cost-based framework for access to energy services. Based on the elements 
produced under component 1, this component would inter alia develop a business plan for the 
energy sector, which would set out the revenue profiles for key sector institutions to allow for 
assessment of investment and operation decisions' impact on financial viability. This component 
will also build the institutional capacity of the newly created rural electrification agency in Benin 
(ABERME),  and establish a clear and transparent environment of intervention of the various 
actors working at the crossroads of rural electrification (including the SBEE).  
 
Component 4: Environmental and Social Framework for Energy (US$ 1 million). Under this 
component, a comprehensive review of Benin's environmental and policy frameworks, including 
for existing projects, will be undertaken. Relevant environmental and social management issues 
will be identified, and as appropriate remedied under the credit, including through changes in 
legislation and management practices. Specific attention would be paid to environmental, social 
and safety issues relating to gas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project activities will consist of consulting assignments, training, and workshops. Most of 
these will be conducted in Cotonou, Benin at the Ministry of Mines, Energy and Hydraulics and 
in Lome, Togo, at the headquarters of CEB.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There are no identified safeguards issues with this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/02/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/21/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard reporting instruments are required for this project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius 
02/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/22/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
02/22/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
