Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2229
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Benin 
Project ID:  P096482 
Project Name:  BENIN: Malaria Control Booster Program 
Task Team Leader:  Nadeem Mohammad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Other communicable diseases (P);Gender (S);Health system performance 
(S);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
31.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project will support the implementation of the national 2006-2010 Malaria Control 
Program over the next four years. The success of the Project will be reflected in the 
overall increase access to, and utilization of, an effective package of malaria control 
interventions to reduce morbidity and mortality from malaria. Specifically, the Project 
would contribute to strengthen malaria control capacities to: (a) improve case 
management and treatment of malaria so that by year 2010, at least 60% of malaria of < 5 
years old cases are treated adequately within 24 hours from onset of fever; and (b) 
expand prevention activities so that by 2010 at least 60% children under 5 year old and of 
pregnant women sleep under an ITN; and that at least 60% of pregnant women receive a 
prophylactic treatment.  Note that the Project would attain a significant level of the 
national targets; the gap will be addressed by other donor and government financing.   
 
3. Project Description 
Considering that the new draft National Malaria Strategic Plan (2006-2010) will be 
finalized before Project effectiveness, the Project will have the flexibility to realign its 
activities and cost allocations within its objectives to the finalized strategic plan. The 
Project will have the following 4 main components 
–
the cost estimates of the 
components  would be subject to change during the mid-term review of the project.  
Page  2
The relative balance between prevention and treatment will be an ongoing dialogue 
between the Government of Benin, World Bank, and other RBM Partners in Benin.  The 
need for Booster program to support an up-front effort to bring down disease 
transmission in Benin is clear, and the precise implementation mechanisms through 
which this transmission reduction will be achieved will be decided during the 
development of the Operations Manual, and refined at each Joint Annual Review.  
 
Component 1: Improving Case Management and Access to Treatment (US$ 14.7 
million): This component would improve malaria treatment capacity principally in the 
public health sector and pre-selected non-government organizations capable of basic 
health care management (private sector health services will be provided with information 
and training as well).   Updated care protocols for application of ACT and IPTp will form 
the basis for provision of new drugs, basic medical equipment, and improvements in case 
management and strengthened supervision.  Those involved will be able to explain the 
reason for preventive medication, alternatively identify symptoms requiring treatment, 
provide the medication, and the required reporting.  
 
The component will target increasing access to treatment of children under 5 years from 
currently ~30% to at least 60% (including expanded IMCI-related training), and of 
pregnant women from currently estimated 25% to at least 60% over the project period.  
The national targets are set over 80%, which would be met with other donor financing.  
GoB will phase out chloroquine and switch to ACT by 100% over the next 4 years.  
 
ACT and IPTp medications, while relatively new additions to the MoH pharmaceutical 
procurement, logistics, storage, stocking and supply system, will not pose an undue 
burden on it, nor will the medical equipment envisioned.  CAME and the MoH drug 
procurement unit currently handle drugs, medical equipment and supplies, already 
manage chloroquine and other malaria-related items. It will require modest modifications 
to the drug registry and tracking systems to accommodate the new items, but this should 
not pose difficulties.  
 
Component 2: Scaling up Prevention Activities (US$ 13.0 million):  This component 
would consist mainly of (i) large-scale distribution of LLINs to vulnerable populations 
(pregnant women and children under 5 years old) as part of a broadercommunity-wide 
campaign to reach the  critical community ITN coverage of 60%, involving ANC visits  
and immunization campaigns/clinics, and  (ii) introduction of IPTp for pregnant women 
attending prenatal visits. Both of the above will be linked to exclusive and 
complementary breast-feeding education programs (already part of the ANC package), 
given the potential important protective role breast-feeding can play in providing malarial 
defenses for infants.  Other measures of mass community efforts were considered, such 
as environmental management and indoor spraying. They are not included at this juncture 
because they are either not appropriate, not accepted by Benin policy, or part of the 
national strategy, or in a pilot testing phase (Larvicide pilot in Cotonou). Should they 
prove effective and meet Bank safeguard requirements, they could be considered in 
future annual plans.  
Page  3
LLINs (and IPTp medication, which is dealt with under Component 2)  will be 
supported by IEC/BCC campaigns, involving health professionals, NGOs and civil 
society organizations 
–
especially those experienced in women and child care activities. 
Prevention training in the objectives, program and use of LLINs will be an important 
element in the success of the new program.  LLIN distribution will build on channels and 
systems which already exist, including the MoH, pre-qualified NGOs, and private outlets. 
The main volume handled by NGOs which already have contracts with the public sector, 
and which can be readily amended to include LLIN tasks (as well as ACT and IPTp).  
 
Component 3: Strengthening Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 1.7 million): This 
component will strengthen malaria M&E and data management for the overall national 
program at both central and operational levels in coordination with key partners. PNLP/U 
has M&E dedicated staff in Cotonou and in the Regions/Departments, as well as close 
associations with the MoH network of M&E personnel. We have learned from the 
HIV/AIDS and Onchocerciasis programs that an effective M&E system, one which 
serves the client and is relied on for decision-making, takes time.  It is a process 
dependent on interaction between M&E managers, service providers and beneficiaries.  It 
requires steady financial and technical assistance support, which will be provided under 
this component. M&E system development, expanded sentinel sites, training, technical 
assistance to conduct studies and assessments, workshops, key equipment needs, and 
operational support will be financed. Because it is agreed that there will be only one 
M&E system for the Benin RBM Strategy, other partners are willing to contribute to the 
development and implementation of the national M&E framework and system. WHO 
Benin has been providing technical support in maintaining an information management 
system.  
 
Operational research in behavioral aspects and complementary interventions (such as 
breastfeeding) will be promoted to support the PNLP, in collaboration with knowledge 
partners such as research institutes and universities.  The capacity of partner NGO and 
civil society organizations to provide regular and simplified reporting, will be enhanced. 
With the transition to ACT, special attention will be paid to careful management of 
procurement, and a quality assurance system including monitoring of the chemo-potency 
of pre-packaged drugs, as well as with respect to bed nets, storage and supply chain 
management.  
 
Component 4: Program Management, Capacity Development and Promoting Regional 
Cooperation: (US$ 1.6 million). This component encompasses three Project aspects, each 
of which will be administered or overseen by the PNLP/U.  (a) Project Management:  The 
new program will entail expansion of tasks, both quantitatively and qualitatively.  With 
the RBMP covering the entire nation, with new prevention and treatment products 
coming on line, with increased needs for supervision and more intensive monitoring and 
evaluation, there is commensurate need to strengthen PNLP management. Operating 
manuals which are currently used for the existing program will need some modification, 
over time, to adjust to the scaling up of the malaria effort. While GoB resources will 
continue to cover the largest share of management costs, the Project will finance 
Page  4
additional staff in procurement and financial management, and support staff, short-term 
consultancies to upgrade operating manuals, limited equipment, as well as PNLP/U 
incremental operating costs. (b) Capacity Development: PNLP/U staff and implementing 
partners will require in-service training to handle the new directions and demands created 
by the RBMP. While many training aspects are dealt with under Components 1 and 2, 
coordinated training in child health and maternal health aspects, community mobilization, 
supervision, fiduciary management, reporting and monitoring are of specific priority for 
the PNLP/U. Further, new areas will emerge as the program unfolds. Development of 
training materials, workshops, short-term training, and study tours are envisioned. (c) 
Regional Cooperation and Knowledge Sharing: Benin will contribute to a regional effort 
to augment and leverage individual national efforts. The objective would be to improve: 
(i) policy development, planning, and M&E; (ii) operational research and training; (iii) 
procurement and supply chain management system improvement and (iv) multi-country 
malaria control opportunities.  Initially the approach would be for Benin and other RBM 
countries to reach agreement informally on a learning agenda, on such topics as 
ITN/LLIN distribution and utilization, pricing of malarial materials, ACT patient 
response, or environmental management options. Shared assessments and studies, cross-
country training, and information exchange meetings, are envisioned. (d) Implementation 
of the Vector/Pest Management Plan.  PNLP/U will coordinate and monitor the 
implementation of the Vector Management Plan through its dedicated Vector 
Management & Social Marketing Unit.  It will integrate vector management into 
partnership agreements with health facilities, NGOs and the private sectors benefiting 
from Government financing.  PNLP/U prepared a detailed VMP which was disclosed on 
February 10, 2006.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the Ministry of Health (National Malaria Control Unit), 
Cotonou, Benin.  The  project will benefit all 12 regions of the country.  
 
Long Lasting Impregnated Bednets will be financed by the project.  National malaria 
policy and strategy will not use spraying.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The existing health waste management plan in the Ministry of Health prepared for Benin 
MAP HIV/AIDS has been revised accordingly. Benin has been using insecticides for 
malaria control according to guidelines provided for by the WHO.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no indirect and/or potential long-term impacts due to the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Pesticide/Vector Management Plan prepared by the client, with a sufficient capacity 
building will alleviate high morbidity and mortality associated with malaria pandemic.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Under the supervision of Benin Environmental Agency, the recipient has adequate 
safeguard measures to protect humans and environment from the interventions proposed 
in the malaria program. The vector control activities of the Benin have been subjected to 
detailed assessment by specialized agencies, such as the WHO and ASPEN. The 
Recipient has prepared an addendum to the existing health waste management plan and 
has also prepared a Vector Management Action Plan that will be implemented by the 
Malaria Control Program of the Ministry of Health.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are communities, community relais, civil society organizations, 
private sector, decentralize health district center, other partners and the Government. An 
intensive stakeholder consultation process   on Vector Management Plan in Benin was 
carried covering whole country.  Another stakeholder workshop was held on February 10, 
Page  6
2006 in Cotonou to disseminate the Vector Management Plan. All the stakeholders 
present at the workshop agreed with the way forward proposed in the Plan.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2002 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/31/2002 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2002 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  7
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nadeem Mohammad 
03/13/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alexandre V. Abrantes 
 
Comments:   
