Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/02/2007 
Report No.:  AC2860
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Benin 
Project ID:  P104881 
Project Name:  Competitiveness and Integrated Growth Opportunity Project (CIGOP) 
Task Team Leader:  Herve Assah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTPS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);General industry and trade 
sector (20%);Micro- and SME finance (20%);Other domestic and international trade 
(20%);Vocational training (10%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Trade facilitation and market access 
(P);Export development and competitiveness (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Competitiveness and Integrated Growth Opportunity 
Project (CIGOP) is to stimulate private investments in order to accelerate growth in 
selected sectors such as agriculture and agro-industry, fishery, transit and trade.  
 
This would be accomplished by:  
 
(i) 
improving the investment climate including the provision of a minimum platform 
for trade facilitation infrastructure; and  
 
(ii) 
providing targeted capacity development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be conducted under an integrated growth sector approach. It will 
improve the investment climate, and the regulatory and institutional framework for 
infrastructure development. Concurrently the project will strengthen the clusters and 
Page  2
value chains in the agriculture and fishery sectors, while improving efficiency of the 
underlying transit and trade systems.  In each of these growth sectors, a combination of 
investments and technical assistance will be provided in an integrated approach around 
the following themes: (a) policy and regulatory reform, (b) institutional capacity 
strengthening, and (c) entrepreneurship development.  
 
Therefore, the project will include the following components: (i) improving the business 
environment; (ii) trade and transit facilitation; (iii) enterprise and entrepreneurship 
development.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Cotonou - Benin   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There is no safeguard-related study that is needed at this time for this project. The two 
buildings planned will have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts, so no 
safeguard specialist is required if the project remains as defined. Should the project 
change to involve land acquisition, additional construction or social impacts, the team 
will consult ASPEN.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Herve Assah 
04/02/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
04/02/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/02/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Demba Ba 
04/02/2007 
Comments:   
