Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2648 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/25/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bhutan 
Project ID: P073458 
Project Name: Private Sector Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Asya Akhlaque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (70%);Information technology (15%);Other 
industry (10%);Payment systems, securities clearance and settlement (5%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to support the efforts of the RGoB to encourage:  
 
(i) 
increased role and development of the private sector in Bhutan  
 
(ii) 
help generate employment opportunities.  
 
These objectives shall be pursued by supporting interventions in two complementary areas - i.e. 
the establishment of an IT Park; and strengthening financial sector through the use of IT.  
 
Suggested key performance indicators include:  
 
-
increase in the number of private sector IT related companies through the development of 
IT Park and IT applications in financial sector  
 
-
increase in the number of jobs created in IT sector  
 
-
the amount of private sector investment in ICT Park;  
 
-
increase in the number of trained IT manpower; and  
 
-
increase in the number of ATMs and credit/debit card usage.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
(i) Component 1 - Establishment of IT Park (USD7.0 million)  
 
(a) Development of the IT Park  
 
The feasibility study for the IT Park/Distance Learning Center while principally endorsing  the 
IT Park development in Bhutan recommended that it be preceded by establishing IT centers 
along the Phuentsholing-Thimphu-Paro fiber-optic corridor. Based on follow-on consultation 
with stakeholders and potential investors, the project team felt that any strategy for developing a 
sustainable IT sector in Bhutan would necessarily have to include a focus on external markets 
given the small size of the domestic market.  Any strategy for developing the IT sector must 
build Bhutan's capacity to address external markets. The RGoB?s ultimate goal in "ICT Master 
Plan in Bhutan" also supports the development of ICT industry that could export IT services 
abroad, similar to the Indian model. At the same time, it is envisaged that the development of IT 
Park would lead to expansion of IT applications in other local industries, particularly the 
financial sector. Use of ICT development in the financial sector is still at a rudimentary stage 
leading to operational inefficiencies that further hamper PSD in the country. The second 
component of the project addresses this gap.  
 
Bhutan's stable and secure environment provides an opportune location for attracting IT 
business continuity ventures, including possibly data centers for secure databases. The 
experience in the South Asian region has shown how high speed telecommunication links can be 
used for offshoring of services from developed countries to developing countries. India alone has 
a
market share of 65% of global IT services off-shored and 46% of BPO . The BPO sector 
globally has been growing at 49% year on year over the period 2001 to 2005. Given this steep 
growth it is estimated that even India with its large labor pool would have a shortage of 0.5 
million skilled workers by 2010 . Given that Bhutan has an increasingly well educated and 
English-literate workforce along with improved telecommunications infrastructure including a 
fiber-optic link along the Phuentsholing-Thimphu-Paro corridor connecting with Indian 
networks, the potential exists for the country to benefit from offshoring of IT enabled services.  
 
To capitalize on these opportunities, nevertheless, more concerted efforts are needed to 
strengthen telecom and establish "plug and play" infrastructure for IT/BPO firms in the country. 
Bhutan should begin exploring the prospect of attracting foreign investors into establishing such 
infrastructure without further loss of time. Based on discussions with various stakeholders, it was 
felt that an IT Park could be successfully set up in Bhutan provided the following pre-requisites 
were met:  
 
(a) identify a local Bhutanese partner to team up with one of the reputed IT infrastructure 
developers, given the fact that a successful Park would require a good understanding of local 
conditions;  
 
(b) since the private sector will invest only if there is a clear business case for the investment, it 
will be necessary to ensure that there is an anchor tenant to occupy the facility;  
 
(c) government support in terms of speedy clearances will be critical;  
 
(d) develop a minimum supply of trained manpower to sustain the industry and justify 
investments  
 
(e) availability of high quality connectivity at a reasonable cost for attracting international 
IT/ITES players to Bhutan;  
Page  3
(f) location of the IT Park be easily accessible by road and the cost of providing ancillary 
infrastructure e.g. electricity, water, sewage and broadband connectivity be minimal.  
 
The project proposes to help RGoB to attract private sector investments into the development of 
the IT Park. The private sector is expected to bring in greater speed and efficiency in designing, 
constructing and managing the Park to suit requirements of IT/BPO companies. The private 
sector is also likely to be more active in marketing the Park to prospective tenants, in case it 
makes the initial investments. It is therefore felt that involvement of the private sector will be a 
better option for attracting IT/BPO firms to Bhutan as compared to a purely public-sector 
investment led initiative.  
 
Given the nascent stage of Bhutan's IT industry and the challenges and constraints in attracting 
IT firms to locate in Bhutan, it will be difficult to persuade the private sector to make 
investments in the IT Park without government sharing part of the risks. The RGoB will share 
some of the risks of the Project by (i) providing land as equity, (ii) investing in ancillary 
infrastructure for the Park e.g. roads, power, water/sewage etc. and (iii) offering a minimum 
revenue stream for the private sector, by leasing in part of the space available in the Park.  
 
The IT Park will have the following elements:  
 
1. 
Plug and play space for IT/BPO companies.  
 
2.
Common facilities e.g. training and conference rooms for tenants.  
 
3.
Incubation facility for local IT companies.  
 
4.
Shared technology center.  
 
5.
Data center.  
 
The RGoB will take space on lease from the Park for establishing an incubation facility, a 
shared technology center and a data center. The lease amount that the government will be 
required to pay for this space will be determined through a competitive bidding process as part of 
selecting the private sector developer for the Park.  
 
The RGoB will lease in shell space for the purposes mentioned above for a period of about 5 
years and for a lease amount not exceeding $2 million. The RGoB will invest in developing the 
leased shell space and providing ancillary infrastructure like power, water/sewage and 
connectivity to the Park for an amount of $1 million. In addition it will invest in developing a 
shared technology center with an investment of about $1 million. This investment may for 
purposes of illustration be in the shape of software testing tools and/or a render farm. The exact 
nature of the investment in technology infrastructure will be determined in consultation with the 
Park developer and other stakeholders.  
 
The above investments by RGoB will take place only after the IT Park infrastructure is ready 
and therefore are expected to commence only in FY08/FY09.  
 
(b) Skills Development in IT  
Page  4
Availability of a stream of trained IT manpower is a pre-requisite for the success and 
sustainability of the IT Park in Bhutan. The project would focus on development of skills, 
through collaboration with international institutions, at the following three levels:   
 
(a) Skills for IT enabled services: This level of program would focus on improving skills in 
English language - i.e. listening and speaking - analytical ability, mathematical ability, computer 
skills and inter-personal skills.  
 
(b) IT courses would aim at developing a pool of skilled IT professionals in Bhutan with strong 
linkage with leading global institutions of IT excellence.  
 
(c) IT entrepreneurship program: There is a need to foster entrepreneurship in Bhutan in the 
field of IT.  A program could possibly be designed with a leading international management 
institute for fostering entrepreneurship.  
 
The project would provide for investments in development of training infrastructure, course 
curriculum design, faculty training, and institutional fees for the different programs mentioned 
above. These investments are expected to be in the range of $2 million.   
 
(c) Building organizational capacity for e-government applications  
 
In order to encourage the development of local IT companies in Bhutan it will be important to 
leverage government expenditure on e-government applications as also IT expenditure of state-
owned enterprises. At present there is no single coordinating agency that can help different 
government departments to develop their IT applications. A possible approach would be to 
establish a joint venture between the Department of Information Technology (MoIC), the Royal 
University of Bhutan, the Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and one or more existing 
banks in Bhutan.  This joint venture company could then help in the development of technical 
specifications for IT applications in different government departments, ensure adherence to 
interoperability standards, encourage use of shared infrastructure and services, provide 
opportunities for hands-on experience to students on live e-government projects, structure 
innovative financial mechanisms for funding of e-government applications and provide support 
to government agencies and state-owned enterprises embarking on the use of IT.  
 
An amount of $50,000 is contemplated for consulting services and initial staff training for the 
above component. It is proposed to redeploy existing staff to the new organization in order to 
minimize costs.  
 
(d)  Investment Promotion  
 
In order to manage the entire process of identifying a suitable developer for the IT Park project 
as also to market Bhutan as a destination for IT companies it will be a necessary to have an 
empowered investment promotion agency.  This agency could initially be an extremely lean 
organization that can use consultants, academic institutions, private sector personnel and 
government resources to aggressively reach out to IT investors and present Bhutan's value 
proposition.  Ideally the agency should be empowered to be a one-stop shop for providing all 
government clearances to IT companies locating in Bhutan and should be plugged into the 
highest decision-making levels in the government.  
 
Page  5
An amount of $0.95 million is proposed to be allocated for this component. The amount will be 
used for meeting the costs of consultancy support, staff training and IT infrastructure and 
applications for the agency.  
 
(ii)  Component 2 - Strengthening Financial Sector through IT Use (USD1.0 million)  
 
A
strong financial sector is critical for the growth of private sector in Bhutan. The second 
component of the project supports strengthening of financial sector through the use of IT. The 
two components of the project i.e. the establishment of the IT Park and the IT development in the 
financial sector are linked with strong synergies in both IT and financial industry. In addition the 
physical investment will be complimented by TA support for institutional strengthening, along 
with regulatory and legal policy framework.  
 
(a) IT development in financial sector at the national and individual FIs level  
 
Given that nationwide financial sector IT infrastructure cannot be efficiently built up without 
balanced IT development among FIs, IT-led financial development in Bhutan needs to be 
approached simultaneously in two dimensions:  
 
-
Development of national level financial IT infrastructures will include the creation of the 
IT framework for the national payment system with main focuses on developing electronic retail 
payment system such as credit/debit card, ATM and mobile banking to better serve the needs of 
the corporate sector, bank customers and the government; and  
 
-
PSD Project will also support physical IT system upgrade at the selected FIs - RMA, 
BOB and BDFC- in which RGoB has majority shares, by use of a matching grant scheme. The 
matching grant scheme is envisaged to catalyze IT development in these FIs, and to create strong 
ownership of IT system for FIs.  
 
(b) Institutional support for sustainable IT development in financial sector  
 
Given the rapid changes and growth in IT industry, IT development in Bhutan needs to be 
carried out in a more holistic way and an innovative manner from the inception stage. Among 
other things, it involves enhancement of IT human skills, development of regulatory and legal 
framework for financial IT infrastructure:  
 
-
Develop "Financial sector IT development strategic plan": This strategic plan (the 'Plan') 
will set out a comprehensive and detailed IT development strategy and action plan, which 
includes the creation of a national payment system framework, with a clear vision and blueprint 
to be implemented within 5 years. The assessment of the current IT system and up-gradation 
proposals, at both national and institutional level, shall be accompanied by year wise 
implementation action plan;  
 
-
Set up "Financial Sector IT Task Force" (T/F): Main roles of the T/F are to assist and 
review the preparation of the Plan, and to be actively involved in the implementation. The T/F 
will be supported by 'IT Technical working group', which will consist of Manager level IT staff 
from RMA, FIs, MOIC and private sector. The T/F can be further developed into a permanent 
financial IT committee;  
 
?
Create "IT & Payment supervisory unit in RMA": IT & Payment supervisory function is 
required in order to secure safety and soundness of electronic payment activities by minimizing  
Page  6
payment-related risks to protect customers from the misuse of electronic transaction and personal 
information, and to ensure IT development quality assurance among FIs; and  
 
-
Build a concrete legal framework for electronic financial activities: There needs to be a 
so-called 'Regulation on electric financial activities of financial institutions' in Bhutan. This 
regulation will govern all electronic payment activities i.e. large-value and retail payment 
system, usages of which are expected to be gradually expanded in the near future.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The location of the IT Park will be a key determinant of its success. Ideally it should be located 
close to Thimphu or Paro, with good ancillary infrastructure and at a minimum, five acres of 
government-owned land. Although the specific site of the project has not been finalized, during 
the project re-design mission in October 2006, the team was shown three possible government-
owned sites that could be considered for the IT Park.  These sites are:  
 
-
Bhutan Agro site at Wangchutaba: has an area of 5 acres and adjoins an existing road, 
close to the power grid, and commands an excellent view of the valley;  
 
-
A
site along the Paro-Thimphu express way:  located within Thimphu city boundary with 
an area of 3 acres; and  
 
-
A
government land at Paro: located in Paro with an area of 120 acres, a part of which 
could be made readily available for an IT Park.  
 
The final choice of the site shall be determined through an in-depth consultation among RGoB, 
the private investors and the World Bank. The physical development of the Park is envisaged 
starting from year 2 of implementation of the project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Environmental Assessment (EA) Act of Bhutan 2000 establishes procedures for the 
assessment of potential effects of strategic plans, policies, programs, and projects on the 
environment. It also stipulates the process for the determination of measures to reduce potential 
adverse effects and to promote environmental benefits. According to the EA Act, an 
Environmental Clearance (EC) shall be a prerequisite for the issuance of a Development Consent 
(DC) from a Competent Authority or National Environment Commission (NEC).  In addition, 
RGoB is required to ensure that environmental concerns are fully taken into account when 
formulating, renewing, modifying and implementing any policy or program as per regulations 
that may be adopted within the appropriate provision of the Act. The Act outlines: the 
information required to be publicly disclosed in the EA during and after the EA process; the 
functions and powers of agencies charged with implementing the EA; monitoring and control of 
offenses and penalties; and appeals and dispute resolution procedures under the Act.  
 
The existing EA clearance process, which is centralized under NEC Secretariat (NECS), is 
increasingly robust and efficient since the enactment of the Environmental Assessment Act 
(EAA) in 2000 and in particular, since the issuance of the Regulation for the Environmental 
Clearance of Projects (RECP) in 2002 clarifying NECS' roles and responsibilities for EA review 
and clearance. NECS, which has a number of qualified environmental specialists for each major 
sector, has been able to carry out its internal screening and review processes generally within the 
time frames set forth in the RECP. Based on a review of previous Bank and RGoB funded 
Page  7
projects, NEC has effectively met its regulatory responsibilities with respect to the procedural 
and substantive requirements of the EAA and the RECP including the requirements for public 
consultation as part of the EA process.  
 
Given the short period of time since its establishment in July 2003, MoIC, the key ministry of 
IT Park development, seems to have relatively limited capacity for addressing safeguard policies.  
However, until capacity is developed within MoIC, it is anticipated that NEC will provide 
technical support to MoIC to undertake the Environmental Screening, EA and other related 
activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Malcolm A. B. Jansen (SASES) 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
.
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/16/2007 
 
Page  8
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental safeguard  
 
The specific location of the IT Park has not yet been determined. However, given that the 
project supports the development of an IT Park, access roads and associated infrastructure by 
private sector developers, the potential for the environmental impacts exists. During project 
preparation, an environmental screening (ES) of the every potential site will be carried out. 
The ES will be based on a simple questionnaire rather than a full scale assessment.  The ES 
will identify specific environmental issues in each of the potential sites and identify broad 
mitigation measures for the identified environmental issues.  This will then form the basis for 
the preparation of an Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF), 
prior to appraisal of the project that will guide the identification, assessment and mitigation 
of any potential environmental impacts on the site that would be eventually selected for 
location of the IT Park.  
 
Once the site for the IT Park has been identified, a detailed EA will be undertaken and an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be developed for mitigation of any potential 
adverse impacts on the environment during the construction and operation phases of the IT 
Park. The preparation of the EA and EMP will be guided by the existing RGoB 
Environmental Assessment policies and procedures as outlined in the EA Act of Bhutan, 
2000 and its Regulations that require all projects to obtain environmental clearances before 
their commencement. The Bank has confirmed equivalence and acceptability of Bhutan's EA 
policies and procedures. The private sector developer will be responsible for implementation 
of the EMP, the conditions of which will be inscribed as part of its contractual obligations to 
the RGoB.  
 
Social safeguard  
 
The specific location of the IT Park has not yet been determined. However, given that the 
project supports the development of an IT Park, access roads and associated infrastructure, 
by private sector developers, the potential for the acquisition of privately owned land, loss of 
livelihoods and/or the displacement of people is a possibility as is the probability of  
triggering the Bank?s OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.  As part of project preparation 
an initial social screening will be carried out for each of the proposed IT Park sites to identify 
the nature and magnitude of any adverse social impacts. Final site selection will take into 
account the findings of the social screening and be made with a view to minimizing social 
impacts and the displacement of people. If OP 4.12 is triggered, a Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) based on RGoB's relevant legislation and the Bank's policy on involuntary 
Resettlement will be prepared by the responsible government agency. The RAP will define 
the legal, institutional and implementation arrangements to guide compensation and 
entitlements for people affected by adverse social impacts/losses.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Asya Akhlaque 
01/12/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/16/2007 
Comments:  Cleared but decision to transfer project to SASFP will be made when policies marked 
'TBD' are confirmed as being triggered or not. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
01/19/2007 
Comments:  Cleared 
