Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2422 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bhutan 
Project ID: P100332 
Project Name: Bhutan Second Rural Access Project 
Task Team Leader: Binyam Reja 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: February 8, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to provide all-season road access to targeted rural 
communities in Wangdue, Dagana, and Pemagatshel Dzongkhags.  
 
Monitorable Project Outcomes. The progress of the project implementation will be monitored 
and evaluated using the following indicators: (i) targeted beneficiaries will be brought to within 2 
km or 30 minutes of walking distance to all-season road; (ii) travel time by targeted beneficiaries 
to economic and social centers will be reduced by 50 percent; (ii) the number of trips taken by 
beneficiaries to key economic and social centers will increase by 50 percent; and (iii) price of 
key consumption and production commodities at beneficiary villages will be within 10 percent of 
the price at the nearest town.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will support participating Dzongkhangs with physical investments (US$ 
7.44 million) and institutional development (US$ 0.49 million) components as follows:  
 
Page  2
Construction of New Feeder Roads (US$ 6.94 million). The construction of three roads of 
approximately 75 km length total will be undertaken in Wangdue, Dagana, and Pemagatshel 
Dzongkhags. The targeted beneficiaries would be brought to within 2 km or 30 minutes of 
walking to all-season road. Environmental Friendly Road Construction (EFRC) methods will be 
used in the construction of the specified roads.  
 
Improvement of Existing Feeder Roads (US$ 0.17 million). Improvements to upgrade the 
condition of roads to all-season standards and ensure their sustainability will be carried out on 15 
km of roads in the participating Dzongkhags. The improvement works will include graveling, 
construction of retaining walls, cross drainages, drainage structures and bridges.  
 
Privatization of Routine Maintenance (US$ 0.33 million). The Department of Roads (DOR) 
will pilot the privatization of its routine road maintenance activities through a long-term, 
performance based maintenance contract with the National Work Force (NWF). This will allow 
DOR to reduce costs and improve the productivity of NWF. Similarly, the initiative will help in 
converting the NWF into small enterprises who would be paid on the basis performance-based 
contract rather than daily wages.  
 
Institutional Development and Implementation Support Component (US$ 0.49 million). The 
proposed project will continue promoting and mainstreaming technical innovation and 
supporting the professional development of the newly established Investigation and 
Development Division (IDD) within the DOR. As part of the Human Resource Development 
strategy for the road sector, training of trainers and work with local training institutions or 
universities will be arranged to institutionalize training in several areas of road planning, design 
and construction, as well as contract management and procurement. Technical assistance will be 
rendered to support pilot performance-based contracting modalities and project implementation 
support will be provided for Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) in Thimphu and Project 
Management Units (PMUs) in the three project sites.  
 
Project Cost and Financing. The total project cost is estimated to amount to US$10 million, 
with 80 percent financing by IDA and 20 percent by Royal Government of Bhutan (RGOB). 
Specific Investment Loan will be the lending instrument, as this will be a repeater project 
following Rural Access Project (RAP-I). The final project size and IDA financing will be 
determined during project preparation and will be suitably adjusted to reflect the participating 
Dzongkhangs' capacity to implement the project and DOR's capacity to coordinate.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The construction and improvement works will be executed in Wangdue, Dagana, and 
Pemagatshel Dzongkhags. The three proposed roads were selected from Royal Government of 
Bhutan's (RGOB)20-year Road Master Plan and are part of the Ninth and Tenth plan 
development programs. The proposed roads include:  
 
i) 
Jangchucholing-Tashidingka Road (20.3 kilometers) in Wangdue Dzongkhag;  
 
ii) 
Drujeygang-Balung road (42.5 kilometers) in Dagana Dzongkhag;  
 
iii) 
Khothakpa- Khar-Tsebar- (10 kilometers) in PemaGatshel Dzongkhag.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Currently the Department of Roads (DOR) approach to constructing roads is oriented towards 
Environmental Friendly Road Construction (EFRC) practices. Over the past five years of 
implementing Rural Access Project (RAP-I), this approach is by and large mainstreamed in to 
DOR process and efforts are ongoing to strengthen institutional capacity to sustain EFRC 
approach. Thus, the technical staff are tuned to implement the Environment Management Plan 
(EMP) measures as an integral part of the overall project implementation. In respect of 
institutional arrangements at apex level, Investigation and Development Division (IDD) of DOR 
will be focal point for environmental management with one Environmental Coordinator (EC) 
assigned for Second Rural Access Project (RAP-II). The ECs responsibilities will include: (a) 
inputs for project preparation, in coordination with geo-technical and design team; (b) liaise with 
EA consultants and relevant government departments and World Bank to comply with the 
necessary environmental clearances and approvals; (c) ensure that the EMP measures are 
adequately integrated in technical specifications and construction contract covenants; (d) co-
ordination with the field level implementation staff to arrange for necessary capacity 
enhancement and training programs for effective implementation of EMPs; and (e) providing 
specific inputs for overall EMP implementation supervision, monitoring and evaluation.  
 
In order to enhance the EMP implementation capacity, IDD will take up specific training 
programs for different stakeholders including field staff, contractors, workers and decision 
makers. The capacity enhancement and training programs (CETP) will focus on: (a) controlled 
blasting; (b) bio-engineering; and (c) implementation of EMP clauses of the contract. The CETP 
schedule/calendar for different stakeholders with identified resource personnel will be finalized 
and budgeted prior to Project Appraisal by the Bank.    
 
Social assessment and social impact management capacity in DOR is weak.  DOR currently 
does not have a social unit or focal staff for providing oversight on social issues.  In view of this, 
DOR will need to build technical expertise and in social development both at the apex level, as 
well as at the dzongkhag/field level and develop adequate institutional arrangements and 
mechanisms specifically related to social aspects of the project. The Environment Coordinator 
(EC) assigned for RAP II will also be tasked with oversight on social impact management and 
provided technical training to satisfactorily carry out this task.  Specifically, the EC will 
responsible for ensuring that provisions to mitigate social impacts as defined in the Social 
Assessment Framework (SAF), are adequately carried out, including: the preparation, 
implementation and monitoring of social mitigation plans, as well as liasing with relevant 
government agencies and the World Bank for required clearances and approvals.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (SASES) 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project roads locations are characterized by mountainous topography with 
moderate to steep hill slo
pes and high rainfall. The geological characteristics in the project 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
locations vary in nature and could include some sensitive geological areas. Forest is the 
predominant land use with varying density of green cover. Though limited, the expected 
environmental impacts due to the project include impacts on topography, localized impacts on 
geological conditions, and minor to moderate impact on forested areas. Thus the applicability of 
above referred safeguard policy. The expected environmental impacts and necessary 
environmental management measures are currently studied through a comprehensive EA process 
and final Environment Management Plans (EMPs) are underway (details on safeguard related 
studies are covered under III C). The EA process and EMP formulation and implementation 
would significantly benefit from Environmental Friendly Road Construction (EFRC) guidelines, 
Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) developed as part of Rural Access Project (RAP-I). 
These good practices are mainstreamed by DOR.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The expected project alignments do not fall under any protected and nature conservation 
areas declared under Forest and Nature Conservation Act of Bhutan, 1995. However, the 
proposed alignment for Janchucholing-Tashidinkha Road partly falls under buffer zone of the 
biological corridor connecting two of the national parks -Jigme Dorji National Park (JDNP) and 
Jigme Singye Wangchuk National Park (JSNP), as confirmed by Nature Conservation 
Department (NCD) officials. The applicability of the above referred safeguard policy need to be 
determined (TBD) based on final alignment and EA outcome.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Please refer to text under "Environmental Assessment" above.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The proposed project alignments do not pass through or impact any Cultural Property. 
However, as the preliminary information indicates, the proposed Drujegang - Balung Road 
alignment passes by the side of a famous holy tree and a religious lake. Based on final EA 
outcome the applicability of OPN 11.03 need to be determined (TBD).   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The proposed project is expected to have minimal negative social impacts.  To the extent 
possible, alternative designs and locations will be considered to avoid land acquisition and 
minimize adverse social impacts.  Where any project interventions require minor small scale land 
acquisition, land will be acquired on a voluntary basis.  In the event that minor land acquisition is 
unavoidable and the policy on Involuntary Resettlement possibly triggered, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to ensure that households affected by the project 
activities are compensated, relocated, and rehabilitated, if required, so as to improve their 
standard of living, income earning capacity or at least to restore them to a living standard they 
are liked to have achieved if the project had not taken place.  Special measures will be taken to 
protect socially and economically vulnerable groups such as women headed households and 
people living in extreme poverty.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  5
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/01/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft Social Assessment Framework (SAF) and Sectoral Environmental Framework, 
which were formulated in compliance with various Royal Government of Bhutan (RGOB) 
environment policies and relevant legislation and guidelines related to land acquisition, and 
the World Bank Safeguard Policies, have been completed and the final drafts are under 
revisions. Draft Final EAs for Jangchucholing-Tashidingka (JT) and Drujeygang-Balung 
(DB) roads and Environment Management Framework (EMF) are completed.  The National 
Environment Commission's (NEC) clearance of Environmental Assessments (EAs) and 
approval of the final alignments will be secured prior to Project Appraisal by the Bank. With 
regard to JT road, initial stretch of 8.5km (which includes buffer zone of biological corridor 
Jigme Dorji National Park (JDNP) and Jigme Singye Wangchuk National Park (JSNP)) has 
already been cleared by NEC. The comprehensive Environment Management Plans (EMPs) 
for implementation of JT and DB are currently underway as the final road designs are yet to 
be completed. The comprehensive EMP will be submitted for review and approval by the 
Bank. Also the approved EMP will be one of the pre-condition to clear final project designs 
and bidding documents. With regard to Kothakpa - Khar - Tsebard (KKT) road in 
Pemagatsle and the additional 6 km of JT road will be subject to EA clearance by NEC prior 
to implementation. The necessary EA/EMP for these roads will be prepared as per the EMF 
and cleared by the Bank.  
 
Although no involuntary resettlement is anticipated a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) has been prepared and is detailed in the SAF, in the event that minor land acquisition 
is unavoidable, or if project activities result in loss of privately owned assets/structures or the 
displacement of people. The RPF defines the legal, institutional and implementation 
framework to guide the compensation for lost assets, livelihoods, community property, and 
the resettlement and rehabilitation of people in accordance with the World Bank's OP 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement and RGOB guidelines and legislation.  Prior to project appraisal the 
final draft of the SAF, including the RPF will be submitted to the Bank for review and 
endorsement.  In addition, draft Social Assessments for Wangdue and Dagna dzongkhags 
have been completed.  Prior to project appraisal final drafts of these Social Assessments, as 
well as one for PemaGatshel dzongkhag will be submitted to the Bank for review and 
approval.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
Disclosure of Safeguard Documents. According to the Bank's disclosure policy, DOR will 
disclose the social and environmental safeguard documents to the public in Thimphu (in 
DOR website) and near project sites, which are accessible by stakeholders. The Executive 
Summaries for the environment and social safeguard documents will be translated into local 
language and disclosed in project sites. The safeguard documents will also be disclosed in the 
World Bank InfoShop in accordance with its guidelines. All disclosures will be completed 
before project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Binyam Reja 
07/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr G. George Tharakan 
07/13/2006 
Comments:  Acting SM's comments: Some abbreviations used need expansion - e.g. EFRC. 
