Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2739 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bhutan 
Project ID: P104558 
Project Name: Avian Influenza Control Project 
Task Team Leader: Sandra Rosenhouse 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Animal production (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Nutrition and 
food security (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objectives of the Project are to minimize the threat in Bhutan posed to humans by 
Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) infection by controlling such infections among birds, 
especially domestic poultry, and to prepare for, control, and respond to possible human 
infections, especially an influenza epidemic and related emergencies. Though the objectives are 
specific to HPAI, the interventions are expected to contribute to the control of other zoonotic 
diseases and other types of infectious diseases, in terms of building overall response capacity. 
These objectives will be achieved through three types of interventions: (i) prevention; (ii) 
preparedness and planning; and (iii) response and containment. If these types of interventions 
achieve their goals, the proposed Project will reduce the burden of disease, the consequent 
economic losses, the risk of human infection and the loss of productivity attributable to human 
infections in Bhutan and limit the risk of HPAI to other countries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
(a) 
Animal Health: This component will support activities for: (i) enhancing avian influenza 
prevention and preparedness capability; (ii) strengthening of veterinary services, disease 
surveillance, and diagnostic capacity; (iii) strengthening avian influenza control programs and 
Page  2
outbreak containment plans, and improving bio-security in poultry production and trade; (iv) the 
establishment of an appropriate compensation fund  
 
(b) 
Human Health: This component aims to prevent human illness due to avian influenza, 
and in case this cannot be prevented, reduce its impact, through: (i) year-round surveillance; (ii) 
building laboratory capacity to enable effective and accurate methods of diagnosis / case-
detection as part of the overall public health system response; (iii) prevention and containment 
activities including social distance interventions and the use of vaccines where appropriate; (iv) 
curative interventions (including case management and antiviral drugs) should human infections 
occur.  
 
(c)  
 Communications: This component is aimed at carrying out information, education, and 
communication activities to ensure appropriate behaviours on the part of poultry farmers, 
consumers, health care workers and the general public to prepare for and respond to the avian 
influenza threat.  
 
(d)  
 Project Management: There will be no Project Implementation Unit, but instead core 
coordination teams designated within the line departments to coordinate, monitor and report on 
Project activities. These core teams would be accountable for the implementation of the Project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nation-wide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Fairly well established at the Ministry of Health. For the Ministry of Agriculture, there is little 
precedent for the culling of poultry, which is the principal environmental issues -- guidelines will 
have to be established as part of Project capacity-building efforts.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASES) 
Mr Bilal H. Rahill (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Avian Influenza Control Project is assessed as a B-category project. Both the Animal 
Health and Human Health components have implications that trigger environmental safeguard 
policies. The disposal of culled poultry, the clean up of infected areas and control of surrounding 
areas in the case of Animal Health, and disposal of laboratory and health care wastes in the case 
of Human Health, trigger the World Bank Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/13/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
On the animal health side, the primary environmental risk of the proposed project is related 
to the culling and disposal of poultry and infected places. The Ministry of Agriculture has 
prepared an emergency plan that covers procedures for culling. This will be submitted to the 
World Bank by the middle of February 2007 as the proposed project?s Environmental 
Management Plan. On the human health side, the primary environmental issue is similarly 
the disposal of medical waste.A Health Care Waste Management Plan for the MoH delivered 
services has been developed as part of the Bank-financed HIV Prevention and Control 
Project and its implementation has been recently assessed. We will review the existing plan 
to ensure it addresses human influenza-related issues and will discuss any necessary changes 
with MoH before appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel M. Sellen 
02/02/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/05/2007 
Comments:  PCN ISDS is cleared. Team is requested to appoint an Environmental Specialist upon 
which project will be transfered to SASAR. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
02/05/2007 
Comments:   
