Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/05/2007 
Report No.:  AC2554
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bhutan 
Project ID:  P100332 
Project Name:  Bhutan Second Rural Access Project 
Task Team Leader:  Isabel Chatterton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is for residents of beneficiary Dzongkhags to utilize 
improved rural transport infrastructure and services.  The target beneficiaries are about 
12,000 rural residents in several geogs (blocks of villages) of Wangdue, Dagana, and 
Pemagtsel Dzongkhags, which have the highest demand for access in Bhutan.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Second Rural Access Project (RAP II) is designed to replicate the positive 
lessons and good practices from RAP I, which closed on June 30, 2006. RAP I succeeded 
in constructing 129 km of roads using Environment Friendly Road Construction (EFRC) 
methods, and improved access to more than 3700 households in isolated villages to 
markets, schools, health centers and other economic and social infrastructure. The 
proposed RAP II will apply similar approaches to bring further benefits to targeted rural 
communities and expand RAP I to three new Dzongkhags: Wangdue, Dagana, and 
Pemagatshel.  
 
The RAP II will include two components:(1)Road Access component 
and(2)Institutional Development and Implementation Support component.  
Page  2
(i) The Road Access will comprise the following sub-components:  (a)construction of 
new feeder roads of approximately 65 km length in total;  
 
(b) upgrading of about 24 km of existing roads to all-season, feeder road standards;  
 
(c) piloting low-cost sealing of feeder roads and performance based maintenance 
mechanisms using the National Work Force and/or community involvement or petty 
contracting; and  
 
(d) construction/upgrading of 8 bridges with a total approximate length of 116 mt.  
 
(ii) The Institutional Development and Implementation Support Component will 
comprise the following sub-components:  
 
(a) Human resource development and training;  
 
(b) Technical Assistance to pilot performance-based maintenance mechanisms;  
 
(c) Project implementation support for the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) in Thimphu 
and the three Project Management Units (PMUs) at project sites;  
 
(d) Socio-economic impact monitoring study; and  
 
(e) HIV/AIDS awareness of construction workers through the Nation-wide program run 
by the Ministry of Health.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in Wangdue, Dagana and Pemagatshel Dzongkhags.  
 
The proposed project road locations are characterized by mountainous topography with 
moderate to steep hill slopes and high rainfall. The geological characteristics in the 
project locations vary in nature and include some sensitive geological areas.  
 
The project is one of the first in the Region to pilot the use of Country Systems (CS) that 
meet the World Bank safeguard requirements, and has been prepared in accordance with 
the requirements of the World Bank operational policy (OP/BP 4.00) "Piloting the Use of 
Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects" issued in March 2005. Under this policy, all investments to be 
financed by the project will apply Royal Government of Bhutan (RGOB) environmental 
laws, regulations and Environmental Impacts Assessment (EIA) guidelines for selected 
safeguard policies on pilot basis as appropriate. In this regard, the "Safeguard Diagnostic 
Review Report (SDRR)", which has undergone formal public disclosure by RGOB, 
defines the agreed measures to sustain acceptability of CS. The report also defines the 
roles and responsibilities of RGOB, other stakeholders and the World Bank.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (SASES) 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASES) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The location of proposed project roads is characterized by mountainous topography with 
moderate to steep hill slopes and high rainfall. The geological characteristics in the 
project locations vary in nature and include some sensitive geological areas. Forest is the 
predominant land use with varying density of green cover. Though limited, the expected 
environmental impacts due to the project include impacts on topography, localized 
impacts on hill slopes and minor to moderate impact on forested areas. The EA for two of 
the proposed roads is completed. The EAs are comprehensive, satisfying the 
requirements of Bhutan's EA laws and regulations as required under OP 4.00. The 
potential impacts will be avoided, minimized and mitigated through EFRC methods and 
ECOPs established during implementation of RAP-I. In addition, road specific EMPs are 
being prepared under Bhutan's EMP requirements that have been determined to be 
equivalent to the corresponding requirements of OP 4.00.  
 
Although project activities are expected to cause minimal negative social impacts and 
no involuntary resettlement and rehabilitation is anticipated, a Social Assessment 
Framework (SAF) based on the Royal Government of Bhutan?s (RGOB's) relevant 
legislation and guidelines, and the World Bank?s Operational Policy 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement has been prepared by the borrower. The SAF defines the modalities for 
profiling socio-economic conditions, identifying stakeholder groups, assessing social 
impacts, voluntary land donations, the institutional structure to support social impact 
management, including capacity building requirements and monitoring and evaluation 
mechanisms, as well as measures to protect and ensure the ongoing inclusion of 
economically vulnerable groups in project implementation.  A Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) has been prepared and is detailed in the SAF, in the event that minor 
land acquisition is unavoidable, or if project activities result in loss of privately owned 
assets/structures or the displacement of people.  The RPF defines the legal, institutional 
and implementation framework to guide the compensation for lost assets, livelihoods, 
community property and resettlement and rehabilitation of people in accordance to World 
Bank's OP 4.12 and RBOG polices. Social Assessments based on the provisions of the 
Page  4
SAF, have been carried out for the Jangchucholing-Tashidingkha Road in 
Wangduephodrang Dzonkhag and for the Drujeygang-Balung Road in Dagana 
Dzongkhag.  
 
The Social Assessments also indicated that there were no social groups present in these 
areas with a social and cultural identity distinct form the dominant society that would 
make them vulnerable in the development process.  Since project interventions are based 
on local demands and identified through a highly participatory process, the policy 
requirements of the World Bank's OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples to ensure the 
participation of indigenous and vulnerable groups in decision-making throughout the 
planning and implementation phase of the project are addressed by the design of the 
project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect impacts and/or long term impacts are not envisaged as the population densities 
are very low and the Forest and Natural Conservation policies of RGOB are stringent 
with respect to land use conversions.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The road alignments were selected after analysis of alternative alignments to minimize 
impacts. The key consideration for selection of alignments included: (a) avoidance of 
slope instability and erosion prone areas; (b) minimization of dense forested areas, 
natural habitats and productive agricultural lands; and (c) cut and fill balance for 
earthwork excavations/formation cuttings. Road alignments were also selected, to the 
extent possible, on the basis of causing the least amount of social, cultural and economic 
disruption.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
DOR approach to constructing roads is oriented towards EFRC practices. Over the past 
five years of implementing RAP-I, this approach was mainstreamed in DOR processes, 
and efforts are ongoing to strengthen institutional capacity to sustain the EFRC approach. 
DOR's technical staff is tuned to implement the EMP measures as an integral part of the 
overall project implementation.  
 
Further, the Bank study on assessing Equivalency and Acceptability of RGOB's system 
through SDRR, under the World Bank's program to pilot the use of borrower safeguard 
system (OP/BP 4.00) found equivalence of RGOB's systems with the need for specific 
changes including:  
 
o
Preference for siting projects on previously converted lands: a provision stating clear 
preference for siting projects on previously converted lands instead of Natural Habitat 
(NH) sites.  
Page  5
o
Chance Finds: "provision to ensure that the terms of reference provided by the 
Competent Authority (CA) would provide for the protection of unanticipated "chance 
finds" encountered during road construction implementation as well as Physical Cultural 
Resources (PCR) previously known and/or surveyed .  
 
With regard to Involuntary Resettlement, the diagnostic review found several 
differences between OP 4.00 and RGOB's system, and hence the need to revert to the 
World Bank operational  policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  
 
The EAs/EMPs prepared for two of the proposed sub-projects (in Wangdue and Dagana 
Dzongkhags) in the first year are in line with the country systems including the above 
referred aspects. In addition, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) is also 
prepared by consolidating RAP-I experience provides generic environmental 
management measures to used in all the sub-projects as basic minimum requirements.  
 
In respect of institutional arrangements at apex level, IDD of DOR will be the focal 
point for environmental management with one Environmental Officer (EO) assigned for 
RAP-II. As part of the regular roles and responsibilities EO shall coordinate with other 
EOs in MOWHS.  In addition, as part of the capacity building program, field engineers 
will be trained for effective implementation. Field office of the NEC at Dzongkhag level 
will undertake compliance monitoring.  
 
DOR's capacity, especially at lower levels, is weak in addressing social issues, as is the 
mainstreaming of such issues in its regular business processes. The SAF details specific 
measures for building capacity within DOR on addressing social issues and applicable 
mitigation strategies.  This includes assigning a focal staff with appropriate technical 
expertise to the project team to provide oversight in the incorporation of social analysis 
and participatory processes into project design and implementation as well as raise 
awareness of these issues at the local and Dzongkhag levels.  In addition, local 
consultants, who have gained experience during the implementation of RAP-1, may be 
engaged to provide support for implementation and monitoring of social aspects of the 
proposed RAP II.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The MOWHS and NEC jointly with the World Bank organized a public consultation 
workshop to discuss the draft version of the SDRR in Thimphu, Bhutan on October 24, 
2006. In preparation for the workshop, MoWHS circulated the draft Executive Summary 
of the report in advance and at the workshop. Over fifty seven people, representing 
NGOs, consultants, donor agencies, academia, and various Government departments 
attended this workshop. Participants expressed their support for the proposal to pilot 
selected Bhutanese systems in the context of the proposed project. A revised document 
was disclosed in Infoshop in Washington DC on November 14, 2006 and in Bhutan on 
November 21, 2006.  
 
Further, the key stakeholders (including project beneficiaries at respective Dzongkhags, 
regulatory agencies who are involved in Natural Conservation) in the first year sub-
Page  6
project are involved in the project preparation through public consultation discussing the 
environmental and social aspects. As per the Bank's disclosure policy, DOR has disclosed 
the environmental and social safeguard documents to the public in Thimphu (in DOR 
website). The Executive Summaries of the environment and social safeguard documents 
has been translated to national language the "Dzongkha" and distributed to twenty 
Dzongkhags and DOR Field Divisions. The environment and social safeguard documents 
have also be disclosed in the World Bank InfoShop.  
 
The project has adopted a strong participatory approach in the selection, implementation 
and monitoring of project interventions through direct participation of beneficiary 
communities.  The SAF (developed on the basis of consultations with key stakeholders 
and affected communities) provides guidance on the overall consultation strategy and 
mechanisms to ensure community awareness and involvement in the project, as well as 
participatory monitoring and evaluation modalities.A stakeholder analysis and extensive 
consultations with key stakeholders and beneficiary communities were carried out in 
preparing the Social Assessments for roads in the Wangduephodrang and Dagana 
Dzongkhags.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  7
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Isabel Chatterton 
03/12/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli 
03/15/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja 
03/14/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/03/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
03/15/2007 
Comments:   
