Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/07/2006 
Report No.:  AC2117
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bolivia 
Project ID:  P083979 
Project Name:  Bolivia Urban Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Alexandra Ortiz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 7, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (35%);Sewerage (35%);Sanitation (30%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the access to basic services to the 
urban poor in Bolivia?s major cities through targeted infrastructure investments and the 
provision of technical assistance to municipalities in the planning, expansion and 
sustainability of urban service delivery.  
 
Specific Project Objectives are:  i) to achieve sustainable improvements in the urban 
infrastructure and living standards in the poorest neighborhoods of La Paz through 
comprehensive urban upgrading and neighborhood participation in project 
implementation; ii) to enhance mobility in the city of El Alto, removing infrastructure 
bottlenecks and introducing measures to modernize public transport services and urban 
transport management;  iii) to expand sewerage coverage in poor areas of Santa Cruz de 
la Sierra.  
 
Although the project covers three separate urban areas and three different infrastructure 
sub-sectors there is a common framework to the intervention.  First, as reflected in the 
project?s objectives, Bolivia?s major cities are committed to developing sustainable 
urban growth policies.  The current project will therefore be particularly instrumental in 
building a long-term relationship between the Bank and the municipal governments of 
Page  2
these cities.  Second, the infrastructure investments in the three cities have been targeted 
by sector and geographical area according to these cities? most vital needs, given that it is 
impossible to intervene in every sector due to limited resources.  Third, pressing actions 
will be complemented by long-term planning efforts rooted in technical assistance to 
municipalities as well as incentives for community participation.  Fourth, in order to 
foster enabling conditions for a sustained and transparent process that will build on this 
initial specific investment credit, cost recovery and monitoring and evaluation will be 
emphasized.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed lending instrument is a specific investment credit.  The project has three 
components.  
 
Component 1: Urban upgrading in La Paz (US$10.4 million, of which US$10.0 million 
IDA credit and US$0.4 million in local counterpart financing)  
 
?
Sub-component 1A: Preparation (US$0.49 million of which US$0.47 million IDA 
credit). Sub-component activities include: (a) sub-project designs; (b) preparatory studies; 
(c) development of a communication strategy and operational manual; and (d) basic 
equipment.  
 
?
Sub-component 1B: Strengthening Community Organization and Development 
(US$0.96 million of which US$0.83 million IDA credit). Sub-component activities 
include (a) community participation during the entire project cycle, including the key 
operations of sub-project selection, maintenance and operation; (b) regularization of land 
tenure rights for area residents; (c) contingency planning for responding to disasters; (d) 
eligible resettlement costs; and (e) supervision and audits of community development 
activities.  
 
?
Sub-component 1C: Physical Infrastructure (US$8.95 million of which US$8.7 
million IDA credit). The sub-component would finance a package of demand-driven local 
investments at the neighborhood level, comprising (a) basic access, i.e. primarily low-
cost road paving, sidewalks, and public transport stops; (b) street lighting; (c) 
improvements to existing drainage infrastructure, new drainage networks, street drains; 
(d) risk mitigation works; (e) installation of sanitation facilities; (f) environmental 
protection through green area creation, reforestation and solid waste collection and 
disposal; (g) community recreation facilities including community services and childcare; 
and (h) supervision and audits of physical infrastructure activities.  
 
Component 2: Urban transport in El Alto (US$ 10 million, of which US$10 million IDA 
credit)  
 
?
Sub-component 2A: Trunk Infrastructure Development (US$ 4.17 million). The 
sub-component would finance infrastructure investments for trunk roads and associated 
drainage works in El Alto to remove bottlenecks and enhance the links between the 
southern and northern parts of the city.  Investments would be directed towards the 
Page  3
completion of the city?s second ring road through: (a) the construction of a 3.7 km long 
trunk road (Avenida Litoral); (b) the construction of a 0.76 km long trunk road (Avenida 
Costanera), and (c) the construction of a 2-lane bridge over the R?o Seco at the 
intersection of Av. Litoral and Av. Costanera. The road investments would include 
typical ancillary works, such as improved road drainage and street lighting.  
 
These interventions would improve the communication between the main radial avenues 
in the city, (Av. 6 de Marzo towards Oruro, Av. Ladislao Cabrera towards Viacha, and 
Av. Juan Pablo II) and provide an improved link for heavy goods traffic between the 
outer parts of El Alto and long-distance movements between the Bolivian hinterland and 
Peru.  In addition, these improvements would promote the development of new economic 
and productive zones and reduce the concentration of activities in the congested ?La 
Ceja? zone.  
 
?
Sub-component 2B: Modernization of Public Transport Services and Urban 
Transport Management (US$ 4.66 million).  This sub-component would finance the 
design and implementation of a series of initiatives to enhance public transport services 
in the city and increase efficiency with regards to urban transport management. Said 
initiatives include:  
 
(i). 
Modernization of the Public Transport System (US$ 2.47 million).  This initiative 
includes the paving of dirt or gravel streets that currently carry high volumes of public 
transport vehicles.   It would also include capacity building and technical assistance 
activities to support the preparation of a public transport modernization strategy for the 
municipality establishing the institutional, regulatory, social and technical bases for the 
implementation of a high-capacity transit system in the metropolitan area of La Paz-El 
Alto (Bus Rapid Transit-BRT- system).  Several initiatives are being initially financed 
through a Project Preparation Facility (PPF) including: (a) a six-month study to assess the 
needs of the city (street improvements, reorganization of routes, institutional measures, 
etc) and future steps required to transform and reorganize the current system of public 
transport with an aim to develop a transport strategy based on mass transit systems and 
(b) a series of technical assistance activities to initiate a process of consultations with 
public transport operators and community leaders.  
 
(ii). 
Non-Motorized Transport (US$ 1.3 million).   A strategy is being developed, with 
funding from the Project Preparation Facility, to establish a policy and investment 
strategy for improving the conditions for pedestrian and bicycle movement in El Alto.  
Aside from ensuring the construction of paved sidewalks along Avenida Litoral (which 
has not been common practice in new road projects in El Alto until now), this sub-
component would finance strategically located bikeways and improve sidewalk 
conditions in areas with many pedestrians.  
 
(iii).  Other Road Network Improvements (US$ 0.9 million).  These improvements 
include (a) low-cost and labor intensive pavements to improve all-weather access to 
residential streets, (b) the definition and initial implementation of a traffic safety and 
Page  4
citizen?s education strategy, and (c) the elaboration of traffic management (including 
traffic signals) standards and implementation of priority traffic engineering measures.  
 
?
Sub-component 2C:  Capacity-Building and Institutional Strengthening (US$ 0.7 
million).  This sub-component would strengthen the institutional capacity in El Alto for 
urban development and transport management (in areas such as planning, budget 
execution, project evaluation, design and supervision of works, maintenance of assets, 
environmental management, traffic engineering, monitoring and administration of public 
transportation services, etc).  It would also include a long overdue re-engineering of the 
internal procedures and urban transport regulations of the municipality.  
 
?
Sub-component 2D:  Project Implementation (US$ 0.48 million).   This sub-
component would finance the contracting of a Project Director, a Civil Engineer, an 
Economist and a Traffic Engineer, as well as support personnel, equipment and training 
to provide support to the Municipality for the implementation of the project.  All these 
will be contracted as part of project preparation and will continue working within the 
municipal offices throughout the duration of the project.  
 
Component 3: Sanitation in Santa Cruz (US$ 10.0 million, of which US$10.0 million 
IDA credit)  
 
?
Sewerage and Wastewater Treatment (US$ 10.0 million of which US$10.0 
million is  IDA credit). The component would finance: (i) the construction of secondary 
sewerage networks in neighborhoods  UV-106 (partially), UV-114, UV-115, UV-118, 
UV-119, and UV-140 of Santa Cruz, which are of the poorest areas located between 
Anillos 4 and 5, thereby expanding service to 37,500 additional residents of the city; (ii) 
the construction of main collectors and a sewage pumping station in the neighborhoods to 
which the service is being extended, and interceptors which would connect these areas to 
the existing main conveyance systems which will transport the wastewater to the existing 
wastewater treatment plants; and (iii) execution of works for increasing the capacity of 
the three wastewater treatment plants of Santa Cruz so as to enable them to process the 
increased wastewater flow which would reach them in the future.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The municipality of La Paz occupies a total of 2,012 km2 of which 1,832 km2 are 
classified as rural and 180 km2 as urban. Urban La Paz has a total population of 790,000  
inhabitants (compared with only about 3,700 inhabitants in rural areas), and is situated 
inside 5 major and some 200 minor drainage basins. About 35% of La Paz?s population 
is classified as poor and is concentrated on the northern, eastern and western slopes of the 
city where a lack of physical infrastructure compounds the risks associated with steep 
gradients. About 32% of the population living in these areas resides on slopes in excess 
of 45 degrees where frequent mud slides result in significant loss of life and property.   
Overall, about one quarter of La Paz?s urban population (almost 200,000 persons) are 
thought to live in areas at risk, with very limited access to basic services.  
 
Page  5
In 2000 the Municipal Government of La Paz initiated an integrated urban upgrading 
program with the objective of improving these living conditions in the city's lowest-
income and most risk-prone neighborhoods.  Beginning with five marginal 
neighborhoods, the program subsequently expanded both in numbers as well as in scope, 
by addressing risk prevention and disaster management after a large scale landslide in 
2002.   Today the municipality?s urban upgrading program known as Barrios de Verdad 
program (meaning real neighborhoods) is in its fourth of a total of seven phases that will 
ultimately upgrade 105 neighborhoods.  The program's intervention is based on a 
selection mechanism whereby neighborhoods present proposals that are evaluated 
according to their social and economic impact.  This public competition for urban 
upgrading programs encourages wide-spread community participation and ensures that 
investments in public works respond to resident demand.  
 
Within the same metropolitan region, the municipality of El Alto is adjacent to La Paz.  
Its current population totals 650,000, 81% of whom identify themselves as indigenous of 
predominantly Aymara origin.  Yet it is one of the fastest growing areas in the southern 
hemisphere, with an average yearly growth rate of 6.7%, unlike La Paz whose population 
growth is constrained by its geography . Given its flat topography and due to deficient 
land-management policies, rapid and uncontrolled urban sprawl in El Alto has been a 
constant over the last decades. As a result, El Alto is facing strong pressures and demands 
for the provision of public services, including transport services and road infrastructure.  
However, towering 3,962 meters above sea level, El Alto also controls the slopes and 
access into the capital, which is located at 3,597 meters in a deep depression.  Thus it is 
naturally a vital transport hub that features an international airport within its city limits 
(serving La Paz), and connects via four highways with important regions of the country 
(La Paz, Desaguadero and Copacabana on the border with Peru, Oruro, Cochabamba and 
Santa Cruz and the municipality of Viacha). However, this system relies on the municipal 
urban road network which is often poorly planned and developed.  
 
The municipal transport system is characterized by chaotic traffic flows and congestion 
in the main arteries, with pedestrians, hucksters and vehicles sharing the roads in many 
critical points (La Ceja for instance, which concentrates most of the economic activity of 
the city and is the main entry point from La Paz). Contributing factors to this situation 
are: (i) inadequate infrastructure; (ii) increasing vehicle motorization; (iii) an over-supply 
of small capacity public vehicles: (iii) a business scheme in the public transport industry 
that promotes competition in the market and not for the market; (iv) lack of adequate 
infrastructure for non-motorized transport; (v) inadequate institutional management of the 
public transport system including weak enforcement of transit laws and a lack of 
coordination mechanisms among different jurisdictions.  
 
In Santa Cruz, it is the sanitation sector that faces the most immediate challenges. Santa 
Cruz has a population of about 1.3 million, growing at an annual rate of over 6%.   
Sanitation services in Santa Cruz are provided by 10 cooperatives of which the largest is 
SAGUAPAC, serving 65% of the city?s area.  Sewerage coverage in SAGUAPAC?s 
service area is only about 50%, giving Santa Cruz an overall level of sewerage coverage 
of only 32%. In addition to the immediate public health and environmental effects 
Page  6
associated with low sewerage coverage, sewage infiltration into the city?s main aquifer 
will result, within a few years, in irreversible damage. There is therefore an urgent need 
to increase the coverage of Santa Cruz?s sewerage system to avoid the much larger 
investments associated with developing an entirely new water supply source for the city.  
 
The cooperative has served the city for more than twenty years and has been recognized 
as one of the best managed in Latin America. It is run by a general assembly that names 
the top directors and their regulations grant the supervision council a veto right over the 
management council, which contributes to its stability.  The cooperative has already 
received two Bank credits and technical assistance to train its staff, both of which have 
been used very effectively.  Although its achievements have been impressive, its long 
term sustainability has been hindered by the city's constant growth as well as its need to 
protect the aquifer by reducing the infiltration of raw sewage from housing units not 
connected to the sewerage system.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN) 
Mr Maximo Liberman (LCCBO) 
Ms Ruth Llanos (LCCBO) 
Mr Jorge E. Villegas (CESIG) 
Mr Juan Manuel Garcia Diaz (LCSFU) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as B from the environmental point of view.  Therefore, 
resettlement is not envisaged but might be necessary in some specific cases.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Possible Impacts  
 
La Paz  
Page  7
1. 
Changes in the land structure:  Caused by cleaning, moving earth, channeling and 
tubing of creek water, this also includes building infrastructure works such as latrines, 
community centers, etc.  
 
2. 
Solid waste creation:  the generation of solid waste could lead to a potentially 
hazardous contamination of land during the execution stage and could take place while 
installing camps and moving soil.  
 
3. 
Increasing noise levels:  during the execution stage there will be an expected 
increase in the noise level due to machines used in construction, installations and 
excavation.  
 
4. 
Archeological remains could be found especially in La Paz since it is located 
within a river basin.  
 
El Alto  
 
Possible Impacts  
 
1.
Atmospheric emissions  
 
2. 
Noise emission  
 
3. 
Creation and disposal of solid waste in drainage networks and surface currents.  
 
4. 
Nuisance to pedestrians and site users due to total or partial obstruction of public 
space (streets, sidewalks, etc.)  
 
5. 
Loss of vegetable layer  
 
6. 
Alteration of landscape  
 
Santa Cruz  
 
Possible Impacts  
 
1.
Changes in the land structure  
 
2. 
  Solid waste creation  
 
3. 
  Soil contamination  
 
4. 
  Reduction in water quality due to contamination by wastewater  
 
5. 
  Health impacts related to the emission of particulate matter  
 
Page  8
6. 
  Increasing noise levels: during the execution stage (there will be an expected 
increase in the noise level due to machines used in construction, installations and 
excavation).  
 
7. 
Changing levels of shallow groundwater levels  
 
8. 
  Removal and impact on vegetable cover  
 
9. 
  Infrastructure damage  
 
10. 
  Water Contamination   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Management Environmental Impacts  
 
La Paz  
 
?
Avoid leveling off land during works, mixing concrete directly on the land, 
spilling fuel.  
 
?
Use household waste bins, reuse of material dug up during excavations and 
disposal of excess waste.  
 
?
Reuse hydraulic tests fluids (for example, to water crops/plants); to have chemical 
toilets for construction personnel.  
 
?
Do not store, even temporarily, excavation materials in any part of the river; 
immediately remove accidental spills with appropriate materials.  
 
?
Occasionally humidify internal pathways within the site; transport excavation 
material on established pathways.  
 
?
Carry out excavation and tube installation tasks during daylight hours and keep 
vehicles in optimum working order.  
 
?
Separate the organic material layer from the inert material; avoid weighing down 
the layer of earth with heavy machinery in and outside of the site.  
 
El Alto  
 
?
Management of construction material and recyclable waste  
 
?
Construction material management  
 
?
Liquid waste-fuel-oil-chemical management  
 
?
Superficial water management  
 
?
Vegetation management  
 
?
Machinery and equipment  
 
?
Camps and shops  
 
?
Atmospheric emissions  
 
?
Signs and traffic management  
 
?
Social communication  
 
?
Hygiene, industrial security and occupational health  
 
Page  9
Santa Cruz  
 
?
Avoid leveling off land during works, mixing concrete directly on the land, 
spilling fuel.  
 
?
Use household waste bins, reuse of material dug up during excavations and 
disposal of excess waste.  
 
?
Reuse hydraulic tests fluids (for example, to water crops/plants); to have chemical 
toilets for construction personnel.  
 
?
Do not to store, even temporarily, excavation materials in any part of the river; 
immediately remove accidental spills with appropriate materials.  
 
?
Occasionally humidify internal pathways within the site; transport excavation 
material on established pathways.  
 
?
Carry out excavation and tube installation tasks during daylight hours and keep 
vehicles in optimum working order.  
 
?
Separate the organic material layer from the inert material; avoid weighing down 
the layer of earth with heavy machinery in and outside of the site.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In terms of assessing capacity and commitment of the institutions responsible for 
implementing and monitoring the agreed plans, each city has particular institutional 
arrangements to respond to these requirements.  In the case of La Paz, the environmental 
quality unit is in charge of supervising the fulfillment of environmental policy 
recommendations set forth by the project.  The environmental study suggests that the city 
contract two technical staff members for the duration of the project.  One will take charge 
of the environmental monitoring and the other will provide environmental education 
focusing on solid waste management, sowing and the gardening in the selected 
neighborhoods.  In El Alto, the environmental assessment identified that the municipality 
lacks approved environmental planning and norms.  For that reason, the assessment 
includes a series of environmental management manuals for the city.   However, since the 
different municipal units do not presently have the technical capacity to implement these 
new instruments, institutional strengthening is recommended on several levels.  
SAGUAPAC, on the other hand, does already have an Environment and Labor Security 
Department that will enforce the current environmental legislation as well as implement 
the specific environmental guidelines laid out by the manuals.  Moreover, the project will 
be monitored during its execution by the Works Supervision Unit to ensure prevention 
and mitigation of risks.   
 
Page  10
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders:  Municipality of La Paz, Municipality of El Alto and SAGUAPAC.  
 
The environmental studies and resettlement framework have been posted on the three 
executing agencies? websites and hard copies are currently on display in their offices.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/05/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/19/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/19/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  11
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Alexandra Ortiz 
05/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
05/05/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ruth Llanos 
05/08/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Jorge E. Villegas 
05/15/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
