Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3131 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bolivia 
Project ID: P101206 
Project Name: HEALTH SECTOR REFORM PROJECT, THIRD PHASE 
Task Team Leader: Carlos Marcelo Bortman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (80%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Child health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives for APL III are the same as those of the previous two phases: 
increasing access to good quality and culturally appropriate health services to improve the health 
of the population in general and to mothers and children in particular.  As a medium-term 
objective, the APL series pursues reducing the infant and maternal mortality rates by one-third, 
as per the proposed indicators for the Program.  
 
Under APLs I and II an important set of policies and interventions were developed to 
strengthen the performance of the public health services. These policies and interventions aimed 
to improve child and maternal health status, including expansion of the insurance system (the 
Universal maternal and child insurance, SUMI, at present), the investments in primary health 
care, and the strengthening of cost-effective health interventions (PAI, IMCI). APL I introduced 
a
basic health insurance (the Seguro B?sico de Salud, today SUMI) to reinforce provisions to 
mothers and children, and a new vaccination system and set of new management tools. APL II is 
implementing an expanded version of maternal and child insurance, by supporting the 
deployment of mobile health brigades (EXTENSA) as a way of expanding service delivery to 
underserved areas, and new management tools (performance agreements, and demand-driven 
Page  2
investment policy) are being used. The Government has provided sustainability to health 
insurance as well as to the EXTENSA program that is now being absorbed by the regional and/or 
municipal budgets. The EXTENSA Unit in the MOH that was part of the APL II PIU is being 
incorporated in the structure of the MOH.  All regions benefited with support from investments, 
mainly in primary care.  
 
The proposed APL III aims to sustain the trend in improving the IMR and accelerate the 
reduction of the MMR, which a recent modeling exercise shows to be a challenge. APL III 
would consolidate the strategies implemented under APLs I and II by:  i) strengthening the 
regulatory capacity of national, regional and local levels to perform critical EFPH; ii) promoting 
the demand of maternal and infant health services through developing and enhancing the 
culturally appropriate maternal and infant health referral network; and iii) supporting 
implementation of the new expansion of the insurance system (Universal Health Insurance - 
SUSALUD.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
APL III will be implemented over a period of four years.  The estimated total project cost is 
US$25 million. The Project would have two scopes of intervention.  Some activities will be 
implemented and impact the entire health sector, while many critical interventions would target 
the 164 more vulnerable municipalities (52 in a first stage and 112 in a second stage): that 
account for 18.9 percent of the Bolivian population or about 1,800,000 inhabitants and some 
very poor peri-urban areas (that account for an additional 6 percent of the population.  In all, 
APL III activities would cover a total of 25 percent of the Bolivia's population. If this project 
were to be selected as a pilot under the Results-Based Financing Initiative, it could be scaled up 
to reach other areas.  APL III would:  
 
i. 
Strengthen the national, regional and local capacities to perform the EFPH. This is 
becoming more significant because of the ongoing process of decentralization/country division 
that will require strong national and regional/autonomic levels to perform, supervise and 
negotiate the execution of the EFPH;  
 
ii. 
Work on both the demand side and the supply side of the development of maternal and 
infant referral networks in the poorest areas. This line of work is critical for the inequity gaps of 
the Project's Development Objective indicators; and  
 
iii. 
Support managerial capacities of the updated health insurance system that will contribute 
to the financial support of the demand of health services and reduce out-of-pocket expenditures 
for basic health services.  
 
The Government would like to implement APL III through the existing internal structure of the 
MOH (i.e., without an independent PIU), with technical leadership under the MOH?s Planning 
Unit, and FM and the Procurement processes under the MOH?s Administrative Unit.  During 
preparation the different alternatives, including the incorporation of some staff of the PIU 
currently executing the APL II, as part of the MOH?s Planning Unit will be explored.  In 
addition, an institutional arrangement would be needed to execute civil works and some contracts 
through the FPS. A recent evaluation that the WB performed on the FPS shows that FPS has 
improved its performance by strengthening its internal procedures and introducing anticorruption 
strategies.  The feasibility of these institutional arrangements, and the consequent need for 
Page  3
technical assistance would be evaluated during preparation before making a final decision on 
their feasibility, however.  
 
APL II would include the following components:  
 
Component 1. Stewardship Role of Health Authorities - Essential Functions in Public Health 
(US$5 million)  
 
The objective of this component would be to strengthen the regulatory capacity of national, 
regional and local levels so that they effectively perform the critical, essential functions in public 
health.  It will focus on the need for information to improve the sector's response, the need to 
increase prevention and promotion as key elements to reduce the burden of disease among the 
poor population, efforts to strengthen regulation and enforcement to improve the quality of the 
health services, and measures to promote accountability involving the communities to support 
quality improvement and the right to demand health services.  
 
Component 2. Familiar, Community and Intercultural Health  (US$9.7 million)  
 
The objective of this component would be to improve access to appropriate maternal and infant 
health referral networks in the target area. This component would support the development of an 
Intercultural Maternal and Infant Health Referral Network in the Project target areas and 
complement the successful of the EXTENSA strategy. It would promote the demand for 
maternal and infant health care, and contribute to increase the proportion of safe institutional 
deliveries, the referral of obstetric emergencies directly from the community, and access to a 
referral system for children with acute respiratory and digestive diseases.  
 
Component 3. Health Insurance - (US$7 million)  
 
The objective of Component 3 would be to strengthen implementation of the SUSALUD by 
supporting development of the national and departmental units to manage the SUSALUD, the 
affiliation process and other tools to help management of the SUSALUD, including the 
development of the information system for SUSALUD.  The Government is exploring options to 
provide performance premiums to providers that fulfill the performance agreement, with 
counterpart resources.  
 
Component 4. Project Administration (US$2.4 million)  
 
The objective of this component would be to support project administration with equipment, 
technical assistance, training, and operating costs to finance the administration of the Project, the 
monitoring and evaluation, and the financial audits.  An update of the Project?s baseline data 
included under Component 2 would provide the data to analyze the impact of the Project on the 
intervention areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Components 1 and 3 would be implemented nationwide and Component 2 in 164 poorest 
municipalities and some periurban communities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
APL III is expected to trigger the Bank's Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01); and 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.10) policies.  In the first case, an Environmental Assessment will be 
carried out during preparation both to evaluate arrangements for compliance with the policy and 
Page  4
recommend mitigation measures in response to possible debris generated by health facilities' 
rehabilitations, and procedures for medical waste management.  With respect to Indigenous 
Peoples, Given the focus on intercultural health for the maternal and infant population, as well as 
the fact that most beneficiaries are self-identified as autochthonous, the team proposes that this 
Project be considered an Indigenous project, and therefore that a separate Indigenous People's 
Plan is not necessary.  
 
Update after PCN Meeting:  An Environmental Assessment is being conducted as part of the 
APL II supervision/APL III preparation. An update of the MOH Management Plan will be 
conducted after the environmental assessment is completed.  
 
The MOH has developed norms/guides for the hospital waste management and is evaluating the 
compliance of these norms.  
 
Upon request by the Ministry of Health of Bolivia, the Health Reform Project III will be treated 
as an Indigenous Project because it will be targeted to 164 poor municipalities of the country 
(including 52 municipalities of the Zero Malnutrition Program) inhabited mostly by Indigenous 
Peoples, and because the project is designed to deliver a culturally-appropriate model.  
Throughout project preparation, the Government and the Bank team discussed the mechanisms 
to ensure each component is designed to meet the needs of the beneficiaries. The project uses an 
"intercultural health" approach based on acknowledgement of traditional practices and respect 
for the consuetudinary rights of beneficiaries. It takes into account the complementarity between 
bio-medicine and traditional therapy, and between medical staff and traditional therapists.  
Moreover, the project design includes lessons learned from prior country experiences with 
intercultural health.  
 
Consistent with Bank O.P. 4.10, the borrower is carrying out a social assessment by means of a 
local firm.  The assessment includes consultations in a sample of 20 rural communities showing 
low health indicators in the Western highlands and Eastern lowlands of the country.The results 
of the social assessment are being used to improve the project design.  Annex 10 of the PAD will 
articulate the 'intercultural health approach' of this project, it will explain how it is integrated in 
each one of the components, and the corresponding mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation 
of this results-based approach.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Mr Jorge Villena (LCSHH) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment is being conducted as part of the APL II supervision/APL III 
preparation. An update of the MOH Management Plan will be conducted after the environmental 
assessment is completed.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Upon request by the Ministry of Health of Bolivia, the Health Reform Project III will be 
treated as an Indigenous Project because it will be targeted to 164 poor municipalities of the 
country (including 52 municipalities of the Zero Malnutrition Program) inhabited mostly by 
Indigenous Peoples, and because the project is designed to deliver a culturally-appropriate 
model.  Throughout project preparation, the Government and the Bank team discussed the 
mechanisms to ensure each component is designed to meet the needs of the beneficiaries. The 
project uses an "intercultural health" approach based on acknowledgement of traditional 
practices and respect for the consuetudinary rights of beneficiaries. It takes into account the 
complementarity between bio-medicine and traditional therapy, and between medical staff and 
traditional therapists.  Moreover, the project design includes lessons learned from prior country 
experiences with intercultural health.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/06/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The studies would be completed by the end of September, 2007.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlos Marcelo Bortman 
09/06/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
09/18/2007 
Comments:   
