Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2535 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bolivia 
Project ID: P101298 
Project Name: BO Participatory Rural Investment II 
Task Team Leader: Mark A. Austin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (25%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(25%);Sub-national government administration (25%);Roads and highways (25%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Indigenous peoples (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Local 
Communities 
5.12 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
0.00 
 
Municipalities of Borrowing Country 
3.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
29.96
38.08 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will improve the economic opportunities of poor rural producers through productive 
investments generated in participatory planning processes at the community, municipal, and 
regional level.  
 
More specifically, it will (a) facilitate participatory planning at the municipal and regional level, 
help coordinate the policies, activities, and financing of local, departmental, and national 
institutions; (b) promote the formation of municipal associations to create and implement 
territorial development strategies and achieve economies of scale in administering funds; (c) 
provide cofinancing for investments in basic infrastructure and production support services; and 
Page  2
(d) strengthen local public and civil society actors involved in defining and implementing 
territorial development strategies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
PRI 2 would maintain the same general institutional arrangements as PRI 1, with the Vice 
Ministry of Decentralization (VMD) coordinating the project and managing Component 1 
(institutional development) and the Fondo de Inversion Productiva y Social (FPS) managing 
Component 2 (rural investments). Both institutions managed similar components in PRI 1 and 
thus have proven capacity to comply with the Bank?s safeguards and fiduciary requirements.  
 
As a follow-on project, PRI 2 would be expected to consolidate the achievements of prior 
operations while providing a basis for piloting new approaches to local demand generation and 
cofinancing. Total proposed project cost is estimated at US$21 million, with US$17 million 
financed by a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). Project preparation will be closely coordinated 
with other donor institutions involved in rural development in Bolivia, including several that 
have expressed interest in the project because of the critical support it would provide to the 
government in developing a new framework for local development during the Constitutional 
transitional process. The Swiss Cooperation, which cofinanced PDCR and PRI 1, has already 
indicated that it might support the new operation.  
 
Proposed Components  
 
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening (US$ 4 million)  
 
This component would help government and social actors to implement local and regional 
development strategies. It would have three subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening municipal governments, local grassroots organizations, and 
departmental prefectures. This subcomponent would provide (i) assistance in the formulation of 
territorial development strategies at the municipal and/or regional level, ensuring the 
participation of campesino and indigenous communities, producer groups, local NGOs, and the 
private sector, as well as prefectures and other government institutions; (ii) on-demand training 
and technical assistance to municipal governments for key administrative functions such as 
implementation of annual operating plans, supervision of investments, monitoring and 
evaluation, and providing information for social accountability; (iii) on-demand training and 
technical assistance to small producers and indigenous and campesino communities to help them 
participate in formulating and implementing territorial development strategies and to effectively 
monitor and evaluate government interventions; (iv) funding and technical assistance to 
municipalities and their associations in transportation planning, including all aspects of 
construction, rehabilitation, and operation and maintenance of transportation infrastructure; and 
(v) technical assistance to prefectures to help improve the quality of services they provide to 
municipal governments.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening the Fondo de Inversion Productiva y Social (FPS). This 
subcomponent would finance technical assistance to consolidate the operational capacity of the 
FPS in (i) integration with the proposed Sistema Nacional de Financiamiento para el Desarrollo 
Page  3
(SINAFID), (ii) internal control and reporting, (iii) quality control, and (iv) transparency and 
anti-corruption.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3: Support to constitutional reforms in decentralization and rural development. 
This subcomponent would help the VMD to (i) establish transitional policies for institutional 
strengthening and cofinancing of local governments; (ii) coordinate with and provide technical 
assistance to the Constitutional Assembly in defining policies on local government and territorial 
and rural development; and (iii) develop normative and regulatory instruments to implement the 
eventual constitutional reforms.  
 
To be decided during preparation: 1) Criteria for selecting municipalities and for self-selection 
of regional associations of municipalities (piloting 2-3 experiences in different departments of 
the Borrower); 2) Institutional strengthening policy for municipalities and social organizations; 
3) transitional cofinancing policy; 4) extent and limitations of support to Constitutional 
Assembly deliberations and implementation of resulting reforms.  
 
Component 2: Rural Investments (US$14 million)  
 
This component would provide cofinancing for municipal, community, and small-producer 
subprojects identified in municipal or regional territorial development strategies. It would have 
three subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 2.1: Preinvestment studies. This subcomponent would cofinance consulting 
services for municipalities, communities, and small-producer groups to carry out feasibility 
studies and engineering designs to fulfill the financing requirements of FPS and other 
institutions.  
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Productive infrastructure and services. This subcomponent would provide 
matching funds to cofinance rural investment subprojects including technical assistance to rural 
producers, small-scale irrigation systems, storage facilities for products (including market 
storage), river embankment improvements, natural resources management, infrastructure for 
tourism and handicraft production, and other minor works identified by communities and 
municipalities.  
 
Subcomponent 2.3: Rural roads. This subcomponent would finance technical assistance for 
operation and maintenance of transport infrastructure, spot improvement of rural roads, 
construction and rehabilitation of bridges and footpaths, small fluvial transport infrastructure, 
and other minor works identified in municipal or regional transportation plans.  
 
To be decided during preparation: 1) transitional cofinancing policy including: targeting 
criteria, cofinancing rates (differentiated by poverty and type of investment), linkage to O&M, 
etc.; 2) possibility of allowing FPS, on basis of past experience and institutional capacity, to 
finance construction of new roads in non-sensitive areas; 3) terms and conditions for 
subcontracting parts/subcomponents.  
 
Component 3: Project management (US$3 million)  
Page  4
This component would support effective project management, fiduciary arrangements, 
management information systems (MIS), monitoring and evaluation, and learning arrangements. 
Although it would support the establishment and operation of a project coordination team within 
VMD, efforts will be made to integrate project coordination into the regular structure of VMD as 
much as possible.  
 
To be decided during preparation: 1) coordination with sector ministries and other agencies 
involved in implementation; 2) M&E arrangements; 3) consolidation of existing fiduciary 
capacities and integration into VMD?s structure.  
 
Partnerships and additional financing  
 
Because this project would provide a framework for cofinancing a range of municipal activities 
that involve other donors, many agencies have shown interest in its preparation, which might 
eventually translate into parallel financing and cofinancing opportunities. The Swiss Federation 
has expressed interest in helping to finance project preparation and might also want to be 
involved during project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rural communities in Bolivia   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Bolivia, through the execution of the previous project upon which this one is 
based, has demonstrated institutional capacity to manage safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
.
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
.
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
.
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/19/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
.
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mark A. Austin 
07/24/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
07/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
07/24/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
