                                                                                                                                                                                                       43945


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 11/07/2007                                     Report No.: AC3007
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Bolivia                                Project ID: P101298
                                                                                                            Project Name: Secondary Participatory Rural Investment
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Mark A. Austin
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: November 5,           Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007
                                                                                                            2007
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: LCSAR                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                            Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Irrigation and drainage (25%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                    Disclosure                                                              (25%);Sub-national government administration (25%);Roads and highways (25%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement

                                              Public                                                        (P);Indigenous peoples (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):              19.98
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                    Authorized                                                      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                  0.14
                                                                                                                    Local Communities                                                   7.57
                                                                                                                    DENMARK: Danish Intl. Dev. Assistance (DANIDA)                     10.00
                                                                                                                    Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country          24.09
                                                              Disclosure                                            Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                17.28
                                                                                                                    SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC)                    4.95
                                                                        Public                                                                                                         64.03
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                           Simple [X]          Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                                                                                                                                  Yes [ ]       No [ ]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                              Authorized                    The objective of the project is to increase access to productive services, assets, and
                                                                                                            sustainable infrastructure of approximately 38,600 rural families in 111 of municipalities
                                                                                                            in selected areas of the 9 departmental prefectures of Bolivia. This objective would be
                                                                                                            achieved by financing municipal strengthening activities and demand-driven subprojects
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            proposed by municipal governments, prefectures, communities and producer groups.

                                                                                                  Public    3. Project Description
                                                                                                            Component 1: Institutional Strengthening (US$ .63 million IDA, US$ 6.45 million total)

 The objectives of the Institutional Strengthening component are to: (a) develop the
capacities of municipal governments (and their mancomunidades) to coordinate the
actions of a variety of actors, negotiate and obtain funding, and administer investments;
(b) support collective action and empower groups of rural communities and poor
producers; (c) support the process of validation of prioritized investment ideas and pre-
investment studies; (d) assist with regular evaluations; and (e) support the national
government?s capacity to formulate enabling regulations.
 The component?s main outputs would be directed at formulating and implementing
municipal, sectoral and/or regional plans, prioritized investment ideas, co financing and
implementation arrangements, and O&M agreements.
 The component also aims at strengthening sub-regional planning in order to direct
resources at investments which may have the greatest effects by realizing scale and
network consideration. Additionally, the component will build on the successful mix of
formal and non-formal training, and locally-managed technical assistance pioneered in
the Participatory Rural Investment Project.
 Component design takes into account key lessons learned in the previous operations in
relation to the sustainability of investments: (i) O&M considerations need to be built
systematically into investment planning and execution; (ii) the effects of new investments
over the capacity to maintain the existing stock of infrastructure must be measured and
clarified; (iii) responsibilities over O&M must be clear at the outset; (iv) adequate
institutional arrangements and resources must be committed; and (v) local actors require
training and technical assistance to deploy adequate resources to O&M.
 This component would finance technical assistance and training to provide the
institutional and organizational support needed for the identification, execution, operation
and maintenance of investments co financed by local and regional agencies, communities
and producer groups. The component would give a particular focus to the development of
the institutional capacity of municipalities and their associations (mancomunidades) to
coordinate local social and non-governmental actors, prefectures and national
government agencies.
 Component implementation will be under the responsibility of the Viceministry of
Decentralization (VMD), through its Territorial Operating Units (UOT-Unidades
Operativas Territoriales), set up in each department of the Borrower by agreement with
the respective prefectures. The UOTs would promote and facilitate the activities, which
would be implemented through technical assistance contracts by municipalities and/or
mancomunidades. Depending on the scope and scale, training activities would be
implemented through contracts with private providers by UOTs or by the VMD directly.
 Subcomponent 1.1: Support to territorial planning for local economic
development(US$1.73 million)

 The objective of the territorial planning subcomponent is to enable municipal
governments (by themselves or through their associations) to increase the efficiency,
effectiveness and sustainability of investments aimed at local economic development.
Planning would be carried out at different levels, promoting a process of increased
coordination between local actors, prefectures and national agencies with local presence.
Local conditions would determine the level and type of planning to be carried out: (i) in
the sub-regions where mancomunidades have become consolidated (as evidenced by the

willingness of municipal governments to finance their operations and to delegate the
implementation or operation of some investments or services) full local development
plans would be supported; (ii) in the sub-regions where mancomunidades are weak, but
where municipal governments are willing to engage in supra-local coordination, planning
may be focused on a particular sector or sub-sector (irrigation, roads, business
environment); and (iii) in the case of municipalities that refuse to enter into sub-regional
coordination, no support would be provided in planning though they would be required to
have at least a traditional Municipal Development Plan in order to have access to
investment co financing. The latter case is maintained as a scenario, though the project
would actively promote sub-regional planning in order to help municipalities take
advantage of scale economies and network considerations. All plans will be based on the
informed and engaged participation of local communities and social groups. It is
expected that prefectures would participate actively, as the component intends to organize
financing that would be directed at both municipal-level investments and related
prefectural-level investments.
 This sub-component would also support the formulation of viable subproject ideas
arising from agreed priorities, as well as evaluation activities. Planning will include a
strong orientation towards operation and maintenance that is expected to reach beyond
the actual investments that would be financed by the project. It is expected that the
project will also improve the sustainability of the existing stock of infrastructure because
planning will allow key actors to: (i) visualize the operation of whole networks (as in the
case of roads or marketing facilities); (ii) consider the state and needs of existing
infrastructure, as well as new priorities; and (iii) clarify and establish the institutional
roles, arrangements and resources required for proper operation and maintenance.
 The outcomes of the subcomponent include
 Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening pre-investment capacities (US$.91 million)

 The objective of this subcomponent is to improve the quality of pre-investment studies
by strengthening the capacity of local actors to administer subproject design contracts.
 Activities contemplated in the sub-component include: 1) formal and non-formal
training of municipal government and mancomunidad officials in pre-investment contract
management, including drafting terms of reference, selection of consultants, supervision
and payments; 2) technical assistance for campesino and indigenous communities and
producer groups to ensure subproject designs contemplate local characteristics and stated
objectives; and 3) horizontal exchanges between local actors to disseminate good
practices.
 Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening subproject management capacities (US$1.47 million)

 The objective of this component is to ensure that investment subprojects are executed
according to contract specifications. It aims to enhance the capacity of local actors to
administer contracts under subprojects.
 Activities in the sub-component include: 1) formal and non-formal training of municipal
government and mancomunidad officials in contract management, including reviewing
terms of reference and specifications for works and goods, selection of consultants and
procurement of goods and works, subproject supervision and payment procedures in
coordination with FPS; 2) technical assistance for campesino and indigenous

communities and producer groups to monitor subproject implementation; and 3)
horizontal exchanges between local actors to disseminate good practices.
 This sub-component would be implemented in close coordination with FPS regional
offices, which would administer subproject financing and oversee subproject
implementation.
 Subcomponent 1.4: Strengthening operation and maintenance capacities (US$2.33
million)

 The objective of this sub-component is to help municipal governments, communities
and producer groups to design and implement O&M arrangements both for the
investments financed by the project and for the existing stock of municipal infrastructure.
Its implementation will be closely coordinated with the Productive Investments
component, which would require local actors to demonstrate capacity for O&M as a
condition for financing investment subprojects.
 The sub-component would include the following activities: 1) non-formal training in
O&M for municipal authorities, municipal and mancomunidad officials, and
communities and producer groups; 2) technical assistance for municipal governments in
investment maintenance financing and institutional arrangements for municipal
infrastructure (e.g. roads); 3) technical assistance for communities and producer groups in
O&M of community-level productive investments (e.g. irrigation); and 4) horizontal
exchanges between local actors to disseminate good practices.
 Subcomponent 2.5: Investment promotion (US$0.00 million)

 The objective of this subcomponent would be to assist municipal governments to
provide services--such as agricultural services, electrification, water and sanitation, gas
connections, etc.?which the project does not co finance but which may be necessary for
local development plans to achieve their own objectives.
 The sub-component may include financing for pre-investment studies, business plans,
and technical assistance for obtaining financing and implementing complex investments.
 Component 2: Productive Investments (US$38.96 million IDA, US$11.14 million total)

 The aim of this component is to provide support for the implementation of plans
prepared under component 1, including O&M requirements of the investments
themselves. The component would provide IDA co financing solely for eligible
investments that fall under the competencies of municipal governments as well as for
improving poor communities? access to productive assets. Other cofinanciers would
include municipal governments, prefectures and communities or producer groups, under
an agreed co financing matrix that takes into account the level of poverty of each
municipality. Prefectural-level investments, though included in the formulated plans,
would be financed solely by prefectures.
 The component?s main outputs are (i) pre-investment studies and (ii) investment
subprojects. All investments will include O&M activities and will require beneficiary
municipal governments or communities to demonstrate capacity to manage infrastructure.
 The component would be managed by the Social and Productive Investment Fund (FPS-
Fondo de Inversi?n Productiva y Social). Though details may vary once the Bank-

executed FPS study is finalized, FPS would manage the subproject cycle in coordination
with municipal governments (or their associations) and communities as follows:
 Table A4.4: Subproject Cycle
 Stage Output Responsibility
 IdentificationProject ideas Municipal governments (MGs)
 Pre-investment        Subproject designs       Disbursements and oversight: FPS
 Contract administration: MG
 Ex-ante evaluation Subproject approval FPS
 Procurement Subproject contracts Disbursements and oversight: FPS
 Contract administration: MG
 Supervision Physical advances and payments            Roles and responsibilities of GMs,
FPS and other actors to be determined
 Evaluation     Adjustments and preparation for operation GM, prefecture, VMD,
communities and producer groups
 O&MSustainable use            GM, community or producer group

 Subcomponent 2.1: Transport infrastructure (US$22.43 million)

 The sub-component would co finance pre-investment studies and investment
subprojects for transportation infrastructure. Eligible investments would include: (i)
upgrading and rehabilitation of communal and municipal roads; (ii) construction of
vehicular and pedestrian bridges; (iii) river and lake transport infrastructure, including
embarcaderos, pontones, etc.
 The sub-component will build on the successful experiences with spot improvement of
rural roads implemented by the Participatory Rural Investment Project, though it is
expected that the proportion of higher volume roads to be financed will increase as the
project responds to sub-regional scale and demand. Higher volume roads may require
technologically more sophisticated interventions. The sub-component will not finance
interventions close to or inside natural forests; interventions in protected areas or their
buffer zones will require express approval from protected area authorities and must be
included in their own investment plans.
 Subcomponent 2.2: Small-scale irrigation (US$9.99 million)

 The sub-component will co finance the construction, rehabilitation and improvement of
small irrigation works managed by communities or producer groups. Eligible investments
would include: (i) small reservoirs; (ii) irrigation canals; (iii) surface water collectors
(atajados); and (iv) small mechanized irrigation facilities. Irrigation subprojects will
include intensive technical assistance prior, during and after the construction of
infrastructure to ensure the application of agricultural innovations that add value to
production and adequate O&M. Feasibility studies will include business plans with clear
marketing strategies.
 Subcomponent 2.3 (4) Local business environment (US$1.82 million)

 The objective of this sub-component would be to facilitate linkages between agents in
production chains prioritized by local development plans. A range of investments is
under consideration, including: (i) trade and production fairs; (ii) price information

systems; and (iii) training and technical assistance for local public and private actors to
improve market opportunities. Eligible investments and eligible beneficiaries will be
determined upon completion of relevant preparation studies.
 Subcomponent 2.4: Access to productive assets for poor families (US$4.72 million)

 The objective of this sub-component is to improve the likelihood that poor communities
or producer groups can benefit from the implementation of local development plans. A
range of investments is under consideration, including natural resource management,
small agricultural infrastructure for production and storage, and small agro-processing
facilities. Eligible investments and eligible beneficiaries will be determined upon
completion of relevant studies.
 Component 3: Project Management (US$ 4.91 million IDA, US$ 8.24 million total)

 This component?s outputs are the efficient and effective coordination of the project and
an M&E system which can measure progress in achieving project objectives.
 The component will achieve this through the provision of TA, goods, equipment and
incremental operating costs which will support the establishment and operation of a
National Operations Unit (UON) within VMD and up to nine Territorial Operating Units
(UOT) in the departments of the Borrower. FPS operating costs for the Productive
Investments component will be covered through this component.
 The component will finance the setting up and operation of a management information
system, the implementation of monitoring, evaluation and learning arrangements, and the
completion of technical studies. The component will also ensure that effective fiduciary
arrangements are in place during implementation. The component has the following
subcomponents:
 Subcomponent 3.1: FPS administrative costs (US$2.97 million total)

 This subcomponent will finance personnel and operating costs incurred by FPS in the
administration of the Productive Investments component, following a methodology to be
established prior to appraisal and based on the findings of the Bank?s FPS study. FPS
will ensure it has the capacity to support implementation with a technically competent
team at both national and regional offices, in compliance with the Bank?s safeguard and
fiduciary requirements.
 Subcomponent 3.2: Project implementation and management (US$4.20 million total)

 This subcomponent aims to put in place an efficient and highly capable technical team
in the central and regional project offices. It will support the placement of technical staff
in the UON (project coordinator, investment specialist, business environment specialist,
institutional strengthening specialist, M&E specialist, communications specialist,
financial manager and an accountant) and the UOTs (territorial coordinator, investment
specialist, institutional strengthening specialist and an accountant). These staff members
will be selected, contracted and evaluated periodically by an independent, external human
resources agency. In addition, the component will finance: (i) internal training activities;
(ii) curricular design for training activities; (iii) management of competitions for
productive investment ideas.

 The subcomponent will ensure the establishment of a functional, transparent,
accountable and efficient financial management system for the project, including carrying
out of external and independent financial and procurement audits (including for FPS).
The former will be conducted annually and the latter in the prior to the mid-term review
and on the last year of project implementation.
 Subcomponent 3.3: Communication strategy (US$.08 million total)

 The objective of the sub-component will be to ensure transparency and informed
participation of the beneficiaries of the project. Specific activities to be executed will be
designed prior to appraisal and based on the communication strategy study.
 Subcomponent 3.4: Planning, monitoring and evaluation (US$.09 million total)

 The outcome of this subcomponent is the establishment of a functional, transparent,
participatory and efficient M&E system for the project. The efforts will be coordinated
through the M&E specialist stationed in the UON through, (i) a series of workshops for
local actors and technical staff in the UOTs; (ii) a performance feedback survey
conducted by the beneficiaries on project staff performance and overall project
performance; and (iii) an external and independent evaluation conducted at the time of
mid-term review and project completion to complement the in-house M&E.
 Subcomponent 3.5: Studies (US$.16 million total)

 The subcomponent will support technical studies relevant to project objectives and
activities during implementation. Exact themes will be determined during
implementation by the UON and UOTs but may include studies for widening the project
area or the list of eligible investment subprojects.
 Subcomponent 3.6: PPF (US$.73 million total)

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
20.     The project area encompasses 111 municipalities. There areas were selected
based on the criteria of high level of poverty as defined by IDH index, high level of rural
population, high level of indigenous population, strong productive potential based on, for
example, contribution to GDP and capacity to generate employment, and zero net
migration. The total population of selected 111 municipalities is 1.2 million amounting to
roughly 193,500 households. They represent about 14% of the total population of the
country. Eighty percent of them are rural dwellers of which 48 percent are women. The
project area contains 4,425 formally recognized indigenous comunidades campesinas in
Bolivia, specifically Quechua, Aymara, Guarani, Chiquitano, and Moje?o. Sixty-seven
percent of the population (and expected beneficiaries) in the project area are indigenous
people. Each territory and department (Prefecture) is represented in the project area.
About 65% of the population in the project area is indigenous. It is anticipated that the
project will serve 230,000 direct beneficiaries, or 38,600 households.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN)
   Ms Ruth Llanos (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment: The project is expected to have positive environmental impacts through
financing subprojects that promote sustainable natural resources management, watershed
protection, and soil conservation. As a result of subproject activities, the project is
expected to (i) conserve soil (ii) maintain or improve hydrological functions, and (iii)
help conserve high mountain ecosystems and their biodiversity.

 Given that the specific location and nature of potential subprojects has not yet been
determined, specific environmental impacts, location and magnitude cannot be
ascertained. The only possible adverse environmental impacts would be strictly
unintended; they could possibly include: (i) soil erosion; (ii) biodiversity loss; (iii)
deforestation; (iv) loss, degradation or conversion of natural habitats; (v) disrupting
hydrological dynamics; (vi) water pollution; and (vii) damage to watersheds.

 Social: The project is expected to have a positive impact on social inclusion by:

 ?     Promoting empowerment to improve conditions of small producers, farmer
communities, indigenous people, women and youth in the process of territorial planning
to identify investment opportunities.
 ?     Strengthening transparency by promoting mechanisms of disclosure of accounts
of municipal governments and project implementing entities such as mancomunidades
and farmer communities, for resources designated for institutional strengthening and
investment, as well as the development of social accountability instruments.
 ?     Increasing inclusive opportunities to access assets and infrastructure which
support production of families in the poorest areas within the project intervention area, as
well as improve equitable access of women, youth, and indigenous peoples to productive
services offered by public entities.
 ?     Promoting intercultural processes to facilitate the establishment of bridges
between participatory and economic development based in indigenous culture and

western cultures, to ensure social viability of projects and promotion of regional
consultation space.

 About 67 percent of the expected project beneficiaries are indigenous subsistence
farmers.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project is specifically designed to foster demand driven subprojects in the project
area that have favorable long-term socioeconomic and environmental impacts. The
subprojects go through a screening process to ensure maximum socioeconomic benefits
are accrued and any unintended negative environmental impacts are avoided or
minimized. Indirect or long-term negative impacts could result from unintended results
as described above.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
During project identification two alternative project approaches were considered and
rejected. First, consideration was given to doing a straight forward repeater project,
given the success of the first project, especially during the last 2 and a half years of
implementation. While the proposed project contains many of the elements of the first
PRI project, learnings from that project led the team to build in a territorial approach to
local development planning and implementation, centering on a group of municipalities
which shared a rural road network and other economic concerns. Second, consideration
was given to jettisoning project activities and financing mechanisms focused on the
municipal level of government and working primarily or exclusively through proposed
new regional entities. This approach was also rejected for several reasons: (i) there is so
far no articulated policy regarding the role of such regional entities; and (ii) rural
communities and individuals have greater access to local, municipal organizations and
thus efforts to ensure full participation are better centered at that level. Thus, it was
decided to base the proposed project on many aspects of the first PRI, but to add a focus
on territorial, multi-municipal planning in order to take advantage of the benefits of such
collaboration, while still maintaining implementation of project investments in the hands
of municipal organizations.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This project is a follow-on of the first Participatory Rural Investment Project which was
evaluated to have very successful environmental management plan and implementation.
Even though this project will utilize and update the EMP, an environmental assessment
(EA) is being developed as part of project preparation that includes identification of the
potential environmental impacts associated with project activities. Given that the exact
location and specific nature of subprojects to be developed under the project will be
determined only during project implementation, the EA evaluated the range of potential
types of subprojects - and the lands on which they would be implemented - that could be

supported through the project. Preliminary assessments confirm that the project area,
includes highland ecosystems that are ecologically fragile and prone to degradation.

 Based on the results of the EA, the project EMP - which takes the form of a framework
(EMF) - will include a screening process for identifying the potential impacts of proposed
subprojects and proposes specific measures to mitigate such impacts. In the evaluation of
the first project and planned for the EA and SA for this project, there has been and will be
ample consultation and stakeholder analysis in the preparation of the project which
included discussions regarding the potential environmental impacts and benefits
associated with the proposed project.

 The EMF will include the necessary procedures to avoid, minimize or mitigate the
potential negative environmental impacts listed above. The EMP will be mainstreamed
within the overall project rather than being a separate component. The environmental
impact review, prevention, and mitigation measures recommended by the EMP will be
incorporated into the criteria and procedures of the Operational Manual. The operational
rules, which will be finalized prior to disbursement of subproject financing under
components 2, will reflect the recommendations of the EMP and any subsequent
agreement between the Bank and the borrower.

 These operational rules will include (i) clear eligibility and prioritization criteria for the
types of subproject activities that can be financed; (ii) clear eligibility and prioritization
criteria for the types of lands on which those subprojects can be financed; (iii) review
procedures and specific responsibilities within FPS to ensure that all subproject contracts
are awarded, administered, and supervised in accordance with these criteria; and (iv)
environmental management procedures to ensure that projects are implemented and
maintained in accordance with environmental best practice. FPS, which will have
qualified environmental and social specialists on staff (component coordinator and
regional office coordinators), will be responsible for supervising overall compliance with
the Bank environmental safeguards and report compliance to VD. The eligibility criteria
for subprojects require, inter alia, (i) no clearing or conversion of forests or other natural
habitats to establish new agricultural systems, (ii) any agro-forestry or reforestation
activity can only use non-native species if they do not displace native species or natural
ecosystems, (iii) any small community works or infrastructure activities strictly adhere to
the 3-stage, 15-step EA evaluation process explained below, and (iv) selection criteria
will give greater weight to subproject proposals that would directly promote conservation
and restoration of degraded natural resources.
 The EMF will provide criteria to (i) screen subproject proposals by the type of activity
(including basic infrastructure) and the sensitivity of the proposed sites, (ii) identify key
potential adverse environmental impacts, (iii) ensure subprojects do not contribute to key
environmental problems currently faced in the project area, (iv) determine the
environmental legal and institutional requirements in Bolivia (including the minimum
requirements for institutional capacity), (v) provide measures to mitigate potential
adverse impacts, and (vi) carry out the process of public consultations. These criteria will
also include a list of activities that are not eligible for subproject financing. It will also
provide specific guidelines and questionnaires for the process of reviewing subproject

proposals. The EMF will also include measures to ensure consistency with the Natural
Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Forest Policies (OP 4.36). These
policies are triggered as the project has the potential to affect natural habitats (including
forests), and may support pest management activities as part of productive activities. As
such, project and site screening criteria will be defined and are included in the EMF
within the Operations Manual.

 The EMF provides a 15-step evaluation process in three stages: (i) preparation, (ii)
prefeasibility, and (iii) feasibility. All subprojects will go through the preparation and
prefeasibility stages. Based on the results of the prefeasibility screening, some
subprojects will have to complete the feasibility steps as well.

 Borrower capacity to plan and implement these measures is considered moderate to
high, based on previous and ongoing project experience.

 The borrower also conducted a comprehensive social assessment (SA) in 18 of the
municipalities covered by the proposed project. The main areas covered by the social
assessment include (i) social objectives, (ii) legal framework, (iii) stakeholder groups,
(iv) consultations, (v) key inputs to the project, (vi) social characteristics of the project
areas (indigenous groups, gender, potential risks, and impacts), and (vii) monitoring and
evaluation arrangements.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders involved in the project can be divided into those that are expected to benefit
or be affected directly by the project and those that may act as facilitators in the
implementation of the project.
 Stakeholders involved in the project can be divided into those that are expected to
benefit or be affected directly and indirectly by the project and those that may act as
facilitators in the implementation of the project. The project?s direct beneficiaries are
municipal governments and producer organizations such as community firms, OECAs,
farmer communities, SMEs etc., and indirect beneficiaries are associations of
municipalities and prefectures. Main stakeholders include the following actors.

 Direct Beneficiaries
 Territorial actors - farmer communities, indigenous communities, producer
organizations, SMEs, OECAs, community firms etc.
 Territorial organizations. These are the territory-based campesino and indigenous
communities. In the project area there about 4,425 such communities, 92 percent of
which have fewer than 500 inhabitants. The campesino communities combine various
indigenous and nonindigenous populations. Other communities include only indigenous
people, some of which have been able to have their land designated as Original
Communal Territories, which allows them to live on the land in accordance with their
culture and traditions and assume control of managing their natural resources. All of the
communities in the project area, depending on their form of organization, will participate
in the regional planning process and have their projects incorporated into the program

structure. Through the municipal governments they will be able to obtain cofinancing for
subprojects in transportation infrastructure, irrigation, and other productive investments.
The most vulnerable rural families will be able to participate in subprojects to increase
their productive assets.
 Economic organizations. A large segment of the project?s beneficiary population belong
not only to territorial organizations but also to productive and labor organizations related
to agriculture, livestock, forestry, artisan, and other activities. In many cases these
organizations are sectoral (for example, production of llama and alpaca products, logging,
cattle ranching, fishing, ecotourism, etc.) and they can be municipal, regional, or national
in scale. There are also many women?s organizations in the project area, such as the
artisan group ArteCampo in Guarayos and the agricultural producers group ASMUPROA
in Yacuiba. Other groups include both men and women. All the organizations are looking
for ways to improve and strengthen their production, access markets, and obtain technical
assistance and training. In general indigenous people participate in these organizations in
an individual capacity, although some organizations are exclusively indigenous.
Currently these organizations are not involved in regional or municipal development
plans. The project will promote their participation through public-private collaboration
mechanisms established at the regional level that will incorporate their proposals and
projects into such plans. Many of these proposals have to do with promoting productive
activities or creating a favorable environment for business, which is part of the purpose of
Component 2.
 Other actors. There are other kinds of civil society organizations in the project area
whose relevance to the social context and to the focus of the PDCR varies from one
region to another. One type of organization has to do with local economic development
planning, such as the Local Economic Promotion Directorates (DILPEs) or Local
Economic Development Committees (CODELs), which will be part of the regional
planning process. There are also Watch Committees (Comit?s de Vigilancia) in all the
municipalities, which will be important in mobilizing social control mechanisms to
monitor the mancomunidades and project management. In some municipalities and
regions the Catholic church and the evangelical church (World Vision) are actors in
promoting development and can be brought into strategic alliances to support similar
processes (for example, Cinti in Chuquisaca). Alliances can also be developed with some
donor agencies and NGOs that work in priority areas (such as German cooperation,
Dutch technical cooperation, Danish cooperation, CARITAS, CEJIS, and others).
 While most campesinos belong to their own local community organization and
economic organizations, they are also members of sociopolitical organizations that
usually are national in scope. One example is that of indigenous peoples organizations
such as the Assembly of Guaran? Peoples (APG) in the Chaco, the National Council of
Markas and Ayllus of Qullasuyu (CONAMAQ) in the highlands, the SIRABO of the
Cavima people of Beni, and others. Other organizations are not based on ethnicity, but
rather on unions and agricultural cooperatives affiliated with the United Labor
Confederation of Rural Workers (Confederaci?n Sindical Unica de Trabajadores
Campesinos de Bolivia or CSUTCB). These and other groups in the priority regions have
organizational structures at the local, subnational, and national levels. The local and
subnational levels are the most relevant ones for the PDCR and mechanisms will be
sought to facilitate their participation in the Territorial Councils that will be created.

 Key benefits to territorial actors in the project would include:
 Generate favorable conditions to activate the economic activities of productive actors,
such as small producers, farmer communities, indigenous and aboriginal peoples, through
sub-national public investments
 Increase assets of the poorest small producer families in the project intervention area
 Improve access of rural families to irrigation and transport infrastructure in the project
intervention area
 Improve the participation of local communities and families in the territorial
development planning process
 Provide incentives for the participation of youth and women in the process of planning
and in the implementation of projects

 Institutional Actors (municipal governments)
 Municipal governments. Municipal governments are the third tier of government in
Bolivia. Their main responsibility is to promote rural development. They are composed
of a regulatory body, a Municipal Council, and an executive branch headed by the mayor.
While there is some participation by women in municipal governments, they account for
only 19 percent of the 477 councilmembers in the 111 municipalities. The national
government transfers about 24 percent of its total budget to the municipal governments to
carry out their functions. The transfers are distributed in proportion to population. Since
1994 these transfers have been carried out in conjunction with a critical program of
training and technical assistance for the municipal governments (the first two phases of
the PDCR were one of the government?s most important instruments in providing these
services). While this helped create a foundation of institutional capacity at the local level,
rural municipalities continue to have serious weaknesses, mainly in (a) preinvestment, (b)
project management, (c) the focus on economic development, and (d) capacity for
operation and maintenance of civil works and infrastructure. Municipal governments will
be the beneficiaries of capacity building for preinvestment, management of productive
investment projects, and operation and maintenance of infrastructure under Component 1,
and will be the executing agencies for subprojects cofinanced under Component 2. Some
municipalities include Indigenous Districts that have their own Indigenous District
Development Plan (PDDI) or Indigenous Territorial Management Plan (PGTI), many of
which were developed with support from the two previous project (the Rural
Communities Development Project and the first PRI project). These plans should be
included in the municipal plans and in some cases resources should be transferred to the
submunicipal authority directly responsible for their administration (as in the case of the
Guarani people?s KAAMI and Izozo districts and others).
 Key benefits to municipalities within the project would include:
 Strengthen their capacity in conducting pre-investment activities and project
management in a sustainable manner
 Simplify procedures necessary for public investment to allow for more access to the
productive sector
 Increase the availability of resources oriented toward public productive investments
 Organize and orient public investment toward sustainable production with high impacts
 Develop and/or strengthen the management capacities at the inter-municipality level in
pre-investment activities and in the O&M of productive investments

 Indirect Beneficiaries

 Prefectures. The prefectures or governments of the nine departments will be partners in
the project in the sense that they will coexecute its components and will share resources
from their national fiscal transfers to help finance the institutional strengthening,
productive investment subprojects and management cost of the local offices.
 Key benefits to prefectures would include:
 Facilitate the use of mechanisms for investment co-financed with municipal
governments and private sector actors (farmer communities, indigenous communities,
producer organizations, SMEs, OECAs, community farmers, etc.)
 Strengthen the strategic focus of territorial planning from a integrated perspective
 Strengthen economies of scale in the generation and management of productive
investment projects
 Orient public investment to generate favorable conditions for the development of
economic potential and capacities of productive actors and communities

 Association of Municipalities (Mancomunidades). Mancomunidades are voluntary
associations created between groups of neighboring municipal governments, mainly to
strengthen local development efforts that are the responsibility of the municipal
government but which need to be implemented on a broader scale and linked to markets
to achieve the desired outcomes. There are 18 mancomunidades in the area covered by
the proposed project, 5 of which are classified as highly consolidated, 6 are in the process
of becoming consolidated, 4 are in the initial stages, and 3 are in crisis. In general the
mancomunidades are headed by a directorate composed of the mayors of the member
municipalities and an executive technical body usually consisting of a manager and
varying numbers of technical specialists depending on the size, degree of consolidation,
and number of projects or activities being carried out by the i. The mancomunidades will
be the preferred actors in the process of regional planning, which will help strengthen
their capacity and could channel the productive investment projects generated by these
plans in collaboration with the municipalities, into Component 2 of the proposed project.
Different mechanisms have been designed through which the mancomunidades will
participate in the project, depending on their level of consolidation.
 Key benefits to mancomunidades would be:
 Promote and strengthen their coordination role in productive initiatives by municipal
governments, as well as its role as facilitator of key sub-national public sector entities
such as municipalities and prefectures, at the regional level
 Promote, where they have the capacity, the responsibility to implement territorial
planning processes and inter-municipal projects

 The social consultation is being carried out in three phases: (1) consultations conducted
at the time of completion of the first PRI project, primarily with municipal officials and
member of the Comites de Vigilancia (October 2006); (2) consultations with
representatives of a range of social and community organizations to collect input for
project design (March 2007); and (3) additional interviews and consultations to be
conducted in the municipalities (June 2007). The consultation process is being

implemented in 6 departments and 17 representative municipalities selected for social
assessment (Cintis, Norte de Guarayos, Amazonia La Paz, Amazonia Beni, Chaco
Tarije?o and Carangas). The methodology used in the workshops has emphasized the
participation of women, youth and indigenous people. Likewise, the process has been
enhanced with secondary and primary data collected in each of the 6 departments, and
will be thoroughly described in the social assessment final report, which will also be
made available to the public.

 To strengthen the stakeholder participation the project also includes a communication
plan that will use appropriate local media to disseminate information in Spanish and
Quechua to promote participation in the project (and later to disseminate information on
implementation and results).



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/15/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/26/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/29/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/15/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/26/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/30/2007
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/15/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/26/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/29/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         No
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    No
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints No
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these         No
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include      No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?

  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the        Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the          Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                           Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr Mark A. Austin
Environmental Specialist:         Ms Gabriela Arcos
Social Development Specialist     Ms Ruth Llanos
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Reidar Kvam
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Ms Ethel Sennhauser
 Comments:

