Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/06/2007 
Report No.:  AC3135
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bolivia 
Project ID:  P101426 
Project Name:  Lake Titicaca Local Sustainable Development 
Task Team Leader:  Daniel A. Hoornweg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 29, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other industry (40%);Sanitation (20%);Other social services (15%);Water supply 
(15%);Solid waste management (10%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Rural non-farm income generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00
4.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project?s development objective is to contribute to local sustainable development in 
the Bolivian part of the Lake Titicaca watershed.  This will include: (i) facilitating local 
activities that support tourism development and cultural protection in the communities 
surrounding the Lake, and (ii) improving basic water and sanitation services.  
 
The Project will specifically support improvements in local tourism services and 
cultural heritage protection as indicated by a minimum 10% improvement over the 2007 
baseline geotourism survey (see Annex 3). The Project will also support the sustainable 
provision of basic services (water supply, wastewater collection and treatment, solid 
waste management) to 150,000 people (with improvements for 100,000 and new services 
for 50,000 beneficiaries).  
 
Other broader objectives such as, contributing to the protection of the Lake?s long-term 
water quality and ecological integrity, greater social inclusion and participation, 
improved quality of life, increased tourist arrivals, agreement on a ?shared vision? for the 
Page  2
Lake, will be supported and monitored but can not be fully attributed to the Project.  The 
Project?s contribution to local sustainable development is modest but provides an 
important starting point.  Follow-on and parallel activities will be identified during 
Project implementation, and integration with similar Peruvian efforts encouraged.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three main components: (1) Support to Tourism Development (and 
Cultural protection); (2) Basic Services; and (3) Institutional Strengthening and Project 
Management.  
 
Project components include:  
 
Component 1: Support to Tourism Development and Cultural Protection  
 
This component will support activities that promote quality of life, strengthen cultural 
identity, provide critical tourism infrastructure, and improve economic development for 
local communities living within the Lake Titicaca Basin.  Key investments include:  
 
1.1) 
Tourism Development Support:  The objective of this sub component is to 
enhance both current and potential tourism development in prioritized areas through 
relatively small-scale investments in: signage and accessibility infrastructure to facilitate 
both tourism reception and local ease of access; scenic byways and lookout facilities with 
public amenities; visitor interpretation centers; community-based initiatives such as, arts 
and crafts centers, organization and promotion of indigenous cultural events (music and 
dance), village and home-stay, camping facilities, gastronomy; improvement of existing 
tourism services; and development of new tourism products based on current local 
initiatives and market demand studies.  This subcomponent will assist both municipalities 
and communities around the Lake identified during Project preparation as having the 
need to improve their existing tourism development, as well as those that have the 
potential to embrace tourism as an agent of sustainable change.  While this sub 
component is demand-based and all eligible populations could access Project resources, 
the Project will encourage a phased geographic targeting of the Lake?s four prioritized 
tourism zones and their respective circuits, which is consistent with the Government?s 
overall tourism development strategy for the Lake?s region. Tourism studies for each of 
the four zones were carried out during preparation and priorities defined consensually for 
the region as part of the first phase of the Government?s comprehensive ?Visioning 
Exercise?.  
 
Eligible subprojects will sustain and enhance both current and potential cultural, social, 
economic and environmental assets to preserve the living character of the communities 
that surround the Lake. Financing will be provided through two categories of activities 
related to tourism: a) Municipal Investments; and b) Community subprojects that include 
projects identified in the four tourism zones and their key circuits. Community 
subprojects will be undertaken by the community with the support of an intermediary 
(NGO) or firms that will be hired to work with the community to design and implement 
new projects. The community component is consistent with the community consultation 
conducted during project preparation and will be refined as community groups are 
Page  3
facilitated by the contracted intermediary. These activities do not fall under local 
municipal jurisdiction. The Municipal tourism investment component is consistent with 
existing local legislation and Municipal planning and priorities.  
 
1.2) Cultural Heritage Program:    This component aims to protect the integrity of sacred 
sites, heritage monuments and the unique natural areas of Lake Titicaca.  Most of the 
sites and cultural monuments designated and listed as ?important national heritage? by 
the Vice-Ministry of Cultures are now at risk ?e.g. Isla del Sol, Isla de la Luna and 
Copacabana.  In addition to preservation of cultural heritage monuments in Isla del Sol, 
and Isla de la Luna, this component includes restoration of pre-Hispanic agricultural 
landscapes, restoration of pre-Hispanic trails and restoration of artistic and historic assets 
in colonial churches.  
 
1.3) Support to productive activities: 
Similar to the Bank Financed Rural Alliance 
Project, but focused only on activities related to tourism, this component will support 
small scale local economic development through grant financing of sub-projects. These 
could include handicrafts, textiles, cultural events that are linked to tourism activities 
around the Lake.  The relatively modest component would begin with strategic pilot 
activities and studies.  
 
1.4) Administrative Cost for FPS: This component will finance the administrative cost 
to oversee the financial and procurement aspects of the tourist infrastructure in 
component 1. FPS will provide assistance to the municipalities to implement the projects 
as part of the FPS?s cycle process from the pre-investment stage, execution, to the 
supervision of the project.  
 
Component 2: Basic Services  
 
This component will facilitate access to improved services and infrastructure in 
prioritized municipalities and communities within the Lake Basin through the Vice 
Ministry of Tourism and Basic Services. Proposed activities include:  
 
2.1) Community Water and Sanitation: The project will support small-scale water and 
sanitation infrastructure for the Lake?s rural communities.  Communities will be selected 
using criteria that include an evaluation of the current situation and current threats to 
water sources from pollution, demand from communities, readiness, commitment by 
municipalities to co-finance, geographical clustering, and potential benefits on critical 
tourist circuits. The intervention will be supported by specialized NGOs or firms hired by 
municipalities that will work with a cluster of communities. These will work closely with 
FPS and the municipalities to ensure that community concerns and demands are reflected 
in the design and construction and operation of facilities.  The project will also finance 
post-construction follow-up including training and on-the-job support with tailored 
training for the Water User?s Associations.  
 
2.2) 
Sewerage and Waste Water Treatment: The project will support the development 
of sanitation facilities for communities and extension and rehabilitation of existing 
sewerage networks. Five municipalities (Copacabana, Tiquina, Achacachi, Tiwanaku and 
Page  4
Viacha) are included in the project, (see below). All of the cities, with the exception of 
Viacha, are significant tourist zones and serviced populations can increase dramatically 
during peak tourist periods. For example, additional peak populations in Copacabana and 
Tiwanaku can exceed 20,000 people during festival periods, and providing adequate 
water, wastewater, and sanitation services are essential to improving tourist potential and 
enhancing the quality of life for residents.  
 
The wastewater component covers all five cities. The project will finance the 
improvement of the collection network to ensure 100% coverage. Currently, only 
Achacachi has semi-functional facultative wastewater lagoons. The project will finance 
low-cost and appropriate wastewater treatment systems. Potential treatment systems 
include larger and well-engineered lagoons, and use of post-treatment wetland polishing 
ponds to help remove nutrients.  
 
2.3)   Solid Waste: The project will finance solid waste investments in Tiwuanaku, 
Copacabana, and Achacachi. Viacha will use other sources of financing for its solid 
waste project. Proper solid waste management is also essential to reduce blockage of 
wastewater collection pipes which is now a major problem. A study is underway to 
consider the feasibility of multi-municipal landfills in Copacabana (Tito Yupanqui, and 
Tiquina) and Tiwanaku (Guaiqui and Taraco). The project will finance improvements in 
collection, street cleaning, transportation, recycling, and final disposal in sanitary 
landfills. The landfills will be designed for low-cost operation, relying mainly on manual 
labor and minimizing the use of heavy equipment during operations. Each environmental 
assessment that will be undertaken before solid waste activities occur will determine if 
any waste pickers are present and could potentially be impacted and if so, programs to 
assist them will be developed and implemented as part of the activity.  
 
2.4) 
Administrative Cost for FPS: This component will finance the administrative cost 
to oversee the financial and procurement aspects of the basic services in component 2. 
FPS will provide assistance to the municipalities to implement the projects as part of the 
FPS?s cycle process from the pre-investment stage, execution, to the supervision of the 
project.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management  
 
This component will enhance the land-use planning and management capacity of 
municipalities within the Lake Titicaca Basin through the regional and municipal 
strategic plans.  The component will also enhance the development and annual updating 
of technical and social data - the Lake?s water quality and natural habitat, as well as 
quality of life indicators for the communities surrounding the Lake.  This will be 
supported through the creation of an annual ?State of the Lake? Report.  
 
3.1) Capacity building for Viceministry of Tourism  Municipalities and Communities, 
Institutional strengthening for Prefecture, VM Culture, VM Basic Services and VM 
Hydrological Basins:   This component will support the following activities:  
 
Page  5
3.1.1) Institutional strengthening for Vice Ministry of Tourism: This component will 
support the development of targeted tourism studies that support a long-term program for 
tourism development in the Lake Titicaca Basin. This component also includes 
consulting services for a marketing strategy to promote Bolivia?s international tourism 
potential, training in communications, assistance in internet booking of guest houses, and 
technology for VMT.  
 
3.1.2) Institutional strengthening for Municipalities: The Project will support municipal 
strengthening through the development of strategic and land-use plans for all of the 
municipalities in the region.  These plans will establish strategic guidelines for medium 
and long-term sustainable development of the municipalities, in conjunction with the 
existing guidelines of the National Development Plan 2006-2010, the Tourism Sector 
Plan, and the Regional Strategic Vision.  
 
In addition, the project will finance technical assistance to ensure sustainable service 
provision. Only Viacha and Achacachi have water companies (EPSA); water services for 
the other municipalities are governed by a ?Water Committee.? Under the existing and 
proposed new water law, all municipalities are required to formally establish water 
companies. A key goal under the project is to put all water, wastewater, and solid waste 
services under a single company (EPSA or ENAPAS), and ensure that user fees cover at 
least O&M costs.  
 
3.1.3) Capacity building for communities: This component will finance assistance for 
local communities in project management. It will strengthen community organizations 
and producer organizations to participate in tourism development. The communities? 
existing social networks will be used and strengthened by focusing on specific 
community accepted activities such as tourism facilities development. An intermediary 
will be retained to facilitate community involvement in subproject identification and 
implementation by using participatory and intercultural methods.  
 
3.1.4) Institutional strengthening for Prefecture and Government Agencies:  The Project 
will support institutional capacity building and management strengthening for several of 
the entities involved with the execution of the Project, including the Prefecture and Vice 
Ministries of Basic Services, Culture and Hydrological Basin. At least two international 
agencies will assist with this capacity building: the National Geographic Society, NGS , 
and the International Joint Commission, IJC .  An advisory group on Lake Management, 
with representatives from Bolivia and relevant international experts is planned.  
 
3.2) Monitoring and Evaluation of the strategic vision, complementary studies and 
project management:  The project will support the following activities:  
 
3.2.1)  State of the Lake Report: Through a World Bank Netherlands Water Partnership 
Program Trust Fund, the Bank supported the development of a framework for Lake 
Titicaca?s first State of the Lake Report. The Report summarized all existing Lake data, 
including sources of contamination, habitat degradation and an additional water modeling 
exercise, also contracted through the trust fund, which shows impacts of current pollution 
Page  6
trends. The Vice Ministry of Tourism?s preparation team developed the Social State of 
the Lake section within this report that highlights the social conditions and quality of life 
indicators for the municipalities of the region.  The Project will continue to support this 
effort through the annual updating of both the technical and social data in the report.  The 
annual updating of this report will initially be executed by the Government of Bolivia.  
 
3.2.2) Social Communication Strategy: This SCS, which compliments the Project?s 
Social Assessment, will serve each component of the project (cross-components).  
Special emphasis will be placed on communication activities with indigenous peoples to 
increase their potential for participation in the project and to create a better context for 
communications which will increase the potential for the project?s overall acceptance. 
The SCS will include activities implemented and described under the project. The SCS 
will also address specific social, environmental and economic concerns as they may arise 
during project implementation (including translations into Aymara language).  
 
3.2.3) Project management: This component is particularly important given that this is 
the first time the Vice Ministry of Tourism executes a Bank financed Project. This 
component will enhance the management and execution of the Project, including standard 
operating costs, Project Coordinating Unit fees (PCU) and third party auditing.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Lake Titicaca is part of the TDPS hydrologic basin that includes the Desaguadero River, 
Lake Poopo, and Coipasa Salt Lake which comprises an extension of 140,000 km2. This 
system, which lies on the altiplano, spreads over parts of Peru, Bolivia and Chile. With an 
altitude of 3800 m and a drainage  area of approximately 58,000 km2, Lake Titicaca, 
plays a very important role in the large bi-national watershed.  
 
The Lake Titicaca region is characterized by rich tangible historical and cultural 
resources such as Tiwanaku?s archeological ruins and ceremonial monuments in 
Copacabana, Inca archeological ruins on Isla del Sol y la Luna, and intangible assets such 
as music, festivals, language, customs, and traditions of the Aymara and Quechua people.  
 
Despites the Lake?s unique natural history and preserved cultural integrity, pollution 
threatens the health of the Lake and the sustainability of the communities that depend on 
the Lake for their livelihoods and economic activities. Discharge from urban areas and 
mining activities are believed to be the two main causes of contamination to the Lake.  
Sewage discharge from urban centers in the basin has resulted in organic contamination 
of the lake.  The tropical situation of Lake Titicaca, the high levels of solar radiation and 
the high rate of evaporation make the system very vulnerable, particularly to pollution 
problems.  In contrast, the size of the water body helps to maintain pollution at acceptable 
levels, although there are some eutrophication problems close to the costal villages.  In 
addition, there are also problems related to heavy metal contamination, resulting from 
mining activities in the zone.   
 
Page  7
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Ms Ruth Llanos (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).   The project is designed to improve the 
environmental conditions in Lake Titicaca and the surrounding region.  The investments 
envisioned for regional master planning, monitoring and civil works will contribute to the 
overall improvement in the management and control of pollution levels in the lake.  They 
will also improve public awareness regarding environmental conditions in the region and 
community priorities for future management will be established.  The project will 
improve the scientific understanding through the State of the Lake reporting and will 
strengthen institutions whose mandate, among other things, will be to improve 
management of regional environmental problems.  
 
Civil works will be financed under the project but these works are expected to be of a 
small to medium scale.  Typical civil works investments could include small-scale water 
infrastructure, expansion of sewerage networks and waste-water treatment facilities, solid 
waste management and other sanitation or visitor infrastructure supporting tourism.  The 
physical footprints of these works are expected to be small and the operational phase 
impacts are expected to be moderate.  As currently designed, the project does not present 
any large-scale works of an unprecedented or irreversible nature.  The types of civil 
works investments being proposed have a relatively narrow range of impacts with known 
mitigation and management measures.  If these measures are properly implemented and 
monitored in accordance with agreed plans the impacts should not be significant.  For 
these reasons the project has been categorized as a category B for environmental risk 
purposes.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10).  According to the 2001 census data, 93.15% of the 
population was identified as Aymara. The project triggers the OP/BP 4.10 but does not 
Page  8
require a stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) because the project document itself 
is considered an IPP. On the basis of the social assessment and in consultation with the 
affected indigenous communities, the principles and elements of an Indigenous Peoples 
Plan (IPP) have been incorporated into the project design.  
 
During project preparation, the Bolivian government undertook a comprehensive socio-
cultural and organizational assessment as part of the development of a long term strategic 
vision for improvements to the Lake Titicaca watershed (Bolivian side). This consultation 
process included a numerous stakeholders including all of the 15 municipalities 
surrounding the Lake.  
 
Primary and secondary information sources were used in the social and cultural 
assessment.  Primary data was collected by Aymara professionals who acted as local 
facilitators and study focal points.  They undertook interviews with community leaders, 
municipal authorities such as mayors, council members, technical experts and 
representatives of producer associations and social organizations in the Lake region.  In 
addition to the consultation process, the Aymara professionals facilitated a cultural 
exchange process so that women and elderly residents were able to express their opinions 
and views of the project in their native language.  This process provided greater insight to 
the preparation team regarding social and cultural issues.  
 
Socio-cultural benefits and risks:   The population in the project area is about 324,400 
people, consisting of 1,028 communities and 95,000 families, from which 94% have 
unmet basic needs. The Human Development Index in the municipalities surrounding the 
Lake is 0.54 on average. According to the 2001 census data, 93.15% of the population 
was identified as Aymara. About 90% of municipal public officials of the Lake region are 
Aymara. It is noted that Aymara are the most entrepreneurial of the indigenous groups in 
Bolivia, they are owners of lake and road transportation, hotels and restaurants.  
 
It is expected that the project will have positive socio-cultural impacts through:  
 
?
Increasing opportunities in an inclusive manner: by promoting equal distribution 
of benefits; increasing employment opportunities; supporting and fostering productivity 
among small agricultural producers, artisans and other service providers; improving 
access to basic services such as water and sanitation in rural areas; and, establishing 
mechanisms for the participation of groups such as women and youth, which are usually 
excluded from development.  
 
?
Empowering communities: by promoting active participation of the local 
communities during the entire process, from the visioning exercise to the identification, 
formulation and implementation of projects and other investment opportunities. 
Consequently, it is expected that poor people will have more opportunities to have their 
demands met and needs satisfied, new and improved social organizations, and 
productivity increased to improve their income and quality of life.  
 
Page  9
?
Fostering transparency: by promoting a transparent management of resources 
through strengthening social organizations and other social control measures undertaken 
by communities and municipalities.  
 
?
Strengthening cultural identity: by recognizing and valuing local knowledge, 
customs and traditions of the Aymara culture; promoting gender equity actions to 
improve opportunities for Aymara women; respecting the knowledge of elderly people 
and promoting the participation of young people; strengthening traditional organizations 
for the adequate implementation of the projects and assuring that municipalities and other 
institutions will comply with the Project?s agreements.  
 
?
Promoting intercultural processes: by facilitating the establishment of exchange 
networks among different social and cultural groups and establishing exchange links 
between the different indigenous identities, visitors and tourists in the region.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  Although no specific land acquisition was 
identified during project preparation an involuntary resettlement and land acquisition 
framework was prepared.  Government agreed to follow the framework in any possible 
resettlement activities or land acquisition. The framework is consistent with Bank 
requirements and similar Bolivian investment projects.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12). The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has 
been prepared by the Project?s Coordinating Unit located at the Vice Ministry of 
Tourism. Future and potential resettlement planning and implementation will continue to 
be implemented by the PCU in coordination with Municipal governments for the Tourism 
Component, and with the Vice Ministry of Basic Services for the Basic Services 
Component.  
 
It is assumed that the activities under the Tourism and Basic Services components may 
not have an impact on people and property in terms of acquisition of land, houses and/or 
access to property.  However, in cases where there might be some impact, the preparation 
and implementation of potential resettlement plans will be carried before any civil works.  
 
The Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04),  While the project is situated in an area of 
environmental sensitivity it is not expected that any sub-project investment will have 
adverse impacts on critical natural habitats.  As part of the EA process natural habitats 
specifically listed as key wildlife areas (e.g. noted Ramsar sites for critical bird habitat) 
have been identified and project activities and communications are intended to contribute 
to their protection.  Screening procedures for sub-project selection will specifically screen 
out projects which have negative impacts on critical habitats and will not be eligible for 
financing.  
 
Cultural Property (OP/BP 4.11)  Some of the sub-project investments will be based on 
the cultural heritage of the region.  The Cultural Resources safeguards include oversight 
for ?living? culture as well as artifacts and tangible facilities.  The social assessment 
Page  10
included a review of the area?s cultural norms and their potential contribution to, and 
impact form, the Project.  The sub-project screening process will ensure that no sub-
projects are financed which negatively affect any known sites.  
 
Consultations conducted with key stakeholders, at the local level, and public authorities, 
revealed a pressing need to initiate a process of revaluing (Puesta en Valor) the important 
cultural patrimony assets comprised by monuments, sacred sites, museums and other 
expressions of culture found in the Lake Titicaca area. In many localities the 
encroachment of new construction represents a real threat to the integrity of the pre-
Hispanic monuments, trails and archaeological sites.  In other areas the lack of 
management and operational structures in place establish the risks of degradation. A list 
of priority 16 projects prepared by the Ministry of Cultures distributed in four types of 
interventions (i.e.Sacred Islands of the Lake Titicaca, Cultural (pre-Hispanic), Rural 
landscapes, Pre-Hispanic archeological trails, and Spanish colonial churches.  In addition, 
the project will incorporate the concept of Geotourism as a way to enhance visitor 
appreciation of the unique cultural manifestations and natural endowments of Lake 
Titicaca.  
 
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50),  As part of the International 
Waterways program a letter from the Country Director was sent to the Peruvian 
Government outlining the proposed Project?s components and objectives.  Lake Titicaca 
is shared between Peru and Bolivia.  A bi-national lake-management agency (ALT) 
exists, but is not always well-regarded, especially in Bolivia.  More than 80% of Lake 
Titicaca?s water originates in Peru, yet the most threatened smaller and shallower part of 
the Lake in the south is virtually fully enclosed by Bolivia.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the long run, attracting larger numbers of tourists and visitors to the area could put 
greater pressure on the existing natural resource assets.  Improperly managed tourism 
programs could lead to impacts on the aesthetic qualities of the region through generation 
of greater demands for sanitation and solid waste management services.  Regional land 
use planning should create opportunity for voicing stakeholder concerns and for making 
land use allocations within an overall land management framework. There is a risk in any 
land allocation and planning process that decision making could be captured by local 
elites promoting narrow interests.  In the long-term, investment decisions could be made 
which undermine sensible management.  However, these risks are expected to be 
minimized and offset by promotion of improved planning processes as well as improved 
analysis of specific project investments through EIA review procedures.  
 
The project is specifically designed to support the implementation of subprojects, based 
on the community?s demand, that will have favorable long term socio-economic and 
environmental impacts. These subprojects have the potential to be politically captured to 
improve governance in some municipalities.   
 
Page  11
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During Project identification it was detected that some of the participating municipalities 
would present governance issues, especially in Copacabana. The project?s social team 
undertook an institutional analysis of the 16 municipalities in the project?s area of 
intervention and  identified potentials and possible conflicts in the following areas: (i) 
within municipal governments; (ii) among potential beneficiaries; (iii) among stake 
holder?s expectations; and, (iv) lack of local experience in the preparation and 
implementation of tourism and productive subprojects.  Within this framework, main 
risks were identified as well as mitigation measures to strengthen local capacities. 
Mitigation measures include: providing support to the communities in the formulation 
and implementation of sub-projects, recovering traditional ways of community 
participation and social control, strengthening monitoring mechanisms, including social 
control and oversight that allows for accountability and appropriate development of 
subprojects.  
 
In spite of the previous mitigation measures, the main instrument for avoiding adverse 
impacts is the participation of key social actors in the envisioning exercise.  Through its 
participatory process among different stakeholders, social actors and representatives of 
the private sector, the envisioning exercise will define long term strategies for the Lake 
Titicaca region. In addition, the project is benefiting from the lessons learned from other 
projects such as the LIL Indigenous Peoples, Participatory Rural Investment Project and 
the Rural Alliances Project. With a similar territorial and local development approach, 
these projects have supported financing mechanisms for local governments and 
communities through direct transfer of resources.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental assessment process.  An environmental analysis (EA) was carried out for 
the project by independent consultants which summarizes the environmental context, 
available baseline information, and current environmental threats and risks in the project 
affected area.  The EA addresses the typical risks associated with civil works during the 
construction and operational phases of the project.  The analysis summarizes a range of 
possible mitigation measures appropriate to each type of impact.  In addition, the EA 
provides a detailed list of environmental management measures that each contractor is 
expected to adhere to with respect to such things as; disposal of debris, soil disposal, 
storage of fuels and other hazardous materials, contracting local labor, and guidelines for 
community involvement.  A more complete description of the EA, risks, institutional 
arrangements and possible mitigation measures is presented in Annex 10 -Safeguard 
Policy Issues.  
 
Environmental management framework.  While the types of investments planned are not 
expected to have significant impacts it is important to recognize that the project is located 
in an area of environmental sensitivity and great natural beauty.  It is very important for 
the project to carefully plan the selection of sites for any wastewater or landfills to be 
financed under the project.  For this reason, all sub-projects proposed for financing will 
Page  12
undergo environmental screening and environmental analysis where appropriate.  
Screening procedures will ensure that sensitive sites are avoided and that appropriate 
mitigation measures are undertaken for all sub-projects.  Best practice guidelines have 
been developed for all possible project investments. The project will ensure that all sub-
projects will have appropriate environmental licenses and for each project an 
environmental management plan conforming with best practice guidelines will be 
adopted by the project contractors.  
 
Because the specific infrastructure investments will not be identified prior to appraisal 
the project implementation team will be guided by an environmental framework (EMF).  
The EMF describes: the eligibility criteria for sub-project financing (including positive 
and negative criteria); the procedures for project screening; and identifies the types of 
environmental impact assessments required for specific project types such as wastewater 
treatment or landfills.  Where required, impact assessments will be consistent with 
national regulations, FPS environmental guidelines as well as with World Bank policy.  
The environmental screening and review of sub-project proposals under each component 
will be carried out by respective agencies. The unit will be staffed with qualified 
environmental specialists who will have resources to carry out review of site proposals 
and field visits where necessary.   
 
Comprehensive social and cultural assessment process.  
 
During project preparation, the government of Bolivia conducted a comprehensive 
socio-cultural and organizational assessment as part of development of a long term 
strategic vision. This consultation process engaged different stakeholders of all 16 
municipalities surrounding the Lake. The main areas covered by the social assessment 
include: (i) social objectives; (ii) legal framework, (iii) stakeholder groups; (iv) 
community consultations; (v) key inputs to the project; and (vi) identification of social 
characteristics of the project areas (indigenous groups, gender, potential risks, and 
impacts).  Given the socio-cultural characteristics of the region, the historic levels of 
tension in the region, and the level of mistrust among residents caused by perceived lack 
of commitment and accountability of the central government, prefecture and 
municipalities, a socio-cultural and organizational assessment was undertaken.  
 
Primary and secondary information sources were used in the social and cultural 
assessment. The collection of primary data was assisted by a team of young professional 
Aymaras that collaborated as local facilitators or focal points. The team undertook 
interviews with community leaders, municipal authorities such as mayors, council 
members, technical experts and representatives of producers associations and social 
organizations in the Lake region. In addition to the consultation process, the Aymara staff 
interpreted the debates which included women and elderly people reflecting their 
opinions and views of the project in their native language.  This process provided greater 
insights on local expectations and informed the preparation team regarding social and 
cultural issues.   
 
Page  13
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Lake Titicaca region is home to a range of social groups including local villagers, 
entrepreneurs and foreigners. These social groups are diverse and, historically, the land 
allocation and natural resource management often led to conflicts.  Given the 
international trans-boundary nature of the Lake there are also significant international 
interests that will need to be considered. The project seeks to develop and improve 
mechanisms for stakeholder participation through a range of initiatives, including: a 
comprehensive envisioning exercise; social impact assessment; promotion of land use 
planning; dissemination of credible technical information through the annual State of the 
Lake report.  
 
In addition to the broad community participation, consultation and envisioning exercise 
involved about 3,737 individuals who represented indigenous communities, public 
officials, NGOs, and private sector actors. These initiatives were also assisted by private 
consultant firms who visited more than 300 communities and held meetings with more 
than 500 indigenous authorities. It is anticipated that the project will also provide 
opportunity for public review of specific project proposals. The Environmental 
Management Framework has been discussed with project proponents. Opportunities to 
comment on the overall approach were provided to concerned stakeholders at several 
meetings. (Details of meetings are in the project files.)  
 
The social consultation process was conducted in three phases. In addition to the broad 
community participation, consultation and envisioning exercise involved about 3,737 
individuals who represented indigenous communities, public officials, NGOs, and private 
sector actors. These initiatives were also assisted by private consultant firms who visited 
more than 300 communities and held meetings with more than 500 indigenous authorities 
The workshops focused on the following topics: i) an analysis of the national context and 
situation; ii) a reflection on the importance of participation, the division of roles and 
stakeholder ownership in all project phases; iii) an assessment of local natural and 
cultural resources; iv) review of  intervention opportunities: tourism, basic sanitation and 
environment, land use planning and productive development.  
 
The three phases of consultation process were supported by a team of Aymara 
facilitators. These tended to have a better insight about local particularities, and provided 
support for the identification of sources and gathering of key information, and also helped 
to build local population's trust in the process of project development.  
 
Project?s Beneficiaries:  
 
Territorial actors: The direct beneficiaries of the project are the communities of 
peasants, farmers, indigenous organizations, local firms, etc.  
 
The total population of the project?s area of intervention is about 324,400 distributed in 
1,028 communities.  Since about 93.15% of the population claims to be Aymara, the 
Page  14
project triggers the OP/BP 4.10 but does not require a stand-alone Indigenous Peoples 
Plan (IPP) as the project document itself is considered an IPP. The remaining 6.85 
percent of expected beneficiaries are non indigenous (primarily mestizo).  
 
Within these diverse communities, there are comunidades originarias, which consist of 
groups of families whose ancestors settled in the area before the Spanish conquest. They 
have their own history, language, beliefs, customs, and cultural organization in 
connection with their traditional socio-spatial and cultural settlement patterns. These 
communities were not under the hacienda regimen. There is also comunidades ex-
hacienda, that settled in former hacienda land as a result of the agrarian reform in 1953. 
These have lost their socio-cultural references and they have both individual and 
collective land titling. The comunidad campesina is the basic unit of social organization 
in rural areas, and consists of campesino families nucleated or dispersed, that share a 
common territory with diverse cultural origins, not subject to the same socio-cultural 
identity.  
 
Economic organizations: In the Project area of intervention most family units are 
organized around different productive activities such as: crafts transport based activities 
(buses and boats), merchants, hotels, restaurants, tourism agencies and guides. These 
private activities are part of the local development strategy and for many families 
represent their only income source.  Formation of associations of local producers stem 
from the need to produce, transform and commercialize a range of traditional products in 
an organized manner and to trade these in national and international markets. The 2000 
Law of National Dialogue recognizes the range of organizations and associations of small 
urban and rural producers, as critical economic development agents for poverty 
reduction. The better organized productive sectors are dairy producers, agriculture, 
handcrafts and fishery. There are community cooperatives of artisans in the different 
municipalities that are managed and operated by women of all ages.  
 
Expected social benefits of the Project include: (i) promoting the participation of women 
and youth in the planning and implementation process of sub-projects; (ii) improving 
access to basic services in the Project?s area of intervention; (iii) employment 
opportunities which will improve household?s income through sub-projects in the 
productive activities and tourism sectors; (iv) fostering long term sustainable 
development thorough the provision of public and collective goods.  
 
Private actors: Other beneficiaries include tourism operators and tourism companies at 
the national, departmental and local level. In general, tourism operators have worked 
without local organizations, and have employed members of the communities as low-
wage labor which often caused resentment among local residents.  
 
Institutional actors: Other direct beneficiaries of the project are the Municipal 
Governments led by Ayamara who benefit from the new Law of Community 
Associations and Indigenous Peoples, this law allows them to participate in the elections 
without the auspices of political parties, and the Mancomunidad del Lago. The main 
responsibility of Municipal administrations is to promote rural and urban development 
Page  15
municipalities? structure are composed of regular body, a Municipal Council, and an 
executive branch headed by the Mayor. The national government transfers about 24 
percent of its total budget to the municipal governments to carry out their functions. The 
Federal transfers are distributed in proportion to municipal population.  The Project will 
facilitate access to improved public services and infrastructure in selected municipalities 
and communities within the Lake region through Basic Community Services, Sewerage 
and Waste Water Treatment, Solid Waste Management, Institutional Strengthening for 
Municipalities and Service Committees, and Community Education. Municipalities 
continue to have serious weaknesses, mainly in pre investment, project management, 
focus on economic developments, and improving capacity for operation and maintenance 
of civil works.  The Project?s Institutional Strengthening component will enhance the 
land-use planning and management capacity of the municipalities within the Lake 
Titicaca Basin through: i) regional and municipal strategic plans; ii) Municipal 
Strengthening through Land-use Plans; iii) Capacity Building and Technical Assistance; 
iv) Project management; v) State of the Lake Reporting (Social and Technical), and vi) 
Social Communication Strategy.  
 
Key stakeholders include: Vice Ministry of Tourism, Vice Ministry of Cultures through 
its Cultural Patrimony Department and National Archeological Unit, Municipal 
governments, La Paz Prefecture, the Mancomunidad del Lago, and municipalities 
bordering Lake Titicaca. The project will strengthen their capacities for planning and 
implementation of projects in the tourism sector, preservation management of heritage 
and natural sites and monuments, increase the availability of resources for the provision 
of public services, strengthen coordination among myriad institutions and improve their 
administrative and management capacities. In the case of La Paz Prefecture, expected 
benefits include improved channeling of public investment for the provision of public 
services and infrastructure.  
 
Indirect beneficiaries include foundations and NGOs working on social, environmental 
and economic development issues. Some of the NGOs identified are: Plan International, 
CIPCA, PROSUKO, ANED, PRODEM, INTERVIDA and other individual consultants 
and local professionals.  
 
Disclosure of Information  
 
Disclosure of the Environmental Analysis, the Resettlement Framework and the Social 
Analysis has been done by the Vice Ministry of Tourism through the PCU and it is 
available at: http://lago.titikaka.googlepages.com.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/04/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/04/2007 
 
Page  16
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/09/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/04/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/04/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/09/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/04/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/04/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/09/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
Yes 
Page  17
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel A. Hoornweg 
11/02/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
11/02/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ruth Llanos 
11/02/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna Wellenstein 
11/05/2007 
Comments:   
