Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3149 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/11/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bolivia 
Project ID: P101084 
Project Name: Enhancing Human Capital of Children and Youth 
Task Team Leader: Manuel Salazar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To increase the effectiveness of the Mi Primer Empleo Digno program and enhance its capacity 
to improve employability of the poor young population, the Project would support the program 
by developing mechanisms to identify the most vulnerable youths, address market needs 
regarding trained youths, and enhance Government capacity to manage and monitor the program. 
The project is also expected to support government in defining a mid-term youth development 
strategy.  
 
The proposed project is aimed at strengthening the recently launched social protection network 
by supporting the implementation, scaling up, and improving effectiveness of two key 
interventions ?the Zero Malnutrition Program aimed at improving nutritional status in rural 
areas, and the Mi Primer Empleo Digno program seeking to increase labor market opportunities 
for youth in urban areas. The project development objectives will be achieved through: (i) 
increasing demand of pregnant women and mothers with children under two living in the poorest 
rural municipalities for basic health services needed to reduce chronic malnutrition; and (ii) 
improving the effectiveness of the Mi Primer Empleo Digno for increasing employability of 
youth. The proposed project also aims at improving management of the social protection network 
Page  2
by enhancing government institutional capacity and developing appropriate instruments and 
mechanisms to better monitoring, coordination, following up and evaluation..  
 
To contribute to reduce chronic malnutrition, the project will provide technical assistance and 
funds to support the ZMP by implementing and carrying out a conditional cash transfer program. 
Transfers to families are expected to be an effective incentive for families to (a) increase the 
proportion of pregnant women and children younger than 2 living in the poorest municipalities 
who have access to basic health service providers and to an appropriate maternal and infant 
health referral system, and regular monitor of children?s growth and development, (b) improve 
household?s feeding, hygiene, and child care practices; and (c) raise food consumption of 
beneficiary households.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1 ? Conditional Cash Transfers to reduce chronic malnutrition (Estimated total cost 
US$12 million; IDA funds US$7.5 million; counterpart funds: US$4.5). This component will 
complement the ZMP through designing, implementing, and scaling up a conditioned monetary 
benefit to families with children less than 2 living in the municipalities with the highest levels of 
nutritional vulnerability. The objective of this intervention is (i) to create an incentive for very 
poor families to invest in the human capital of their young children through adequate health and 
nutritional care and to provide an income support to improve consumption; and (ii) provide a 
monetary support to families to increase their household food consumption. To achieve this 
objectives, the program will pay transfers to families subject to the utilization of basic health 
services to prevent chronic malnutrition among children younger than 2, including periodical 
ante- and post-natal check-ups, regular monitoring of children?s height and weight, and pertinent 
counseling about feeding practices, exclusive breastfeeding, hygiene practices and knowledge 
about illness?s alerts. The conditional cash transfer program will benefit about 45,000 families 
living in the most vulnerable 52 municipalities.  
 
Component 2 ? Improving the effectiveness of the Skills Training Program for Low Income 
Unemployed Youth in Urban Areas - The proposed project aims at increasing effectiveness of 
the PED Program and provide technical assistance to formulate a mid-term youth development 
strategy in Bolivia..  The PED Program seeks to improve employability of low income youth 
through increasing their knowledge, skills and behavior and offering a labor market experience. 
Given the estimated capacity of private firms to offer jobs to the labor force trained by the 
program, the Government has set a conservative target for the PED Program and expects that the 
program will benefit about 20,000 youths in four years.  
 
Component 3 - Institutional strengthening of the RPS - This component has the purpose of 
enhancing the GOB?s capacity to design and strengthen management, coordination, and 
monitoring of the RPS. This component will help the government to improve planning and 
policy making of the RPS, and define, test and implement mechanisms for better coordination 
and monitoring program implementation and progress.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 1 will implement a conditional cash transfer program in the poorest 52 
municipalities targeted by the Zero Malnutrition Program listed in the table below:  
Page  3
Chuquisaca: Porosa, Azurduy,Tarvita,Zuda?es, 
Presto,Mojocoya,Icla,Tomina,Sopachuy,Tarabuco,Yamparaez,San Lucas,Incahuasi,Culpina  
 
La Paz: Santiago de Callapa,Ayata,Sapahaqui,Curva,Chacarilla,  
 
Cochabamba:Ayopaya, Morochata, Arque, Tacopaya, Sicaya, Tapacari, Vila Vila, Bolivar  
 
Oruro:El Chorro, Belen de Andamarca  
 
Tarija:  Yunchara  
 
Santa Cruz: Gutierrez, Moro Moro, Pucara  
 
Beni: Exaltacion, Loreto, Puero Siles  
 
Pando:  Santa Rosa del Abuna  
 
Potosi: Tinquipaya, Urmiri, Chayanta, Betanzos, Tacobamba,  Colquechaca, Ravelo, Pocoata, 
Ocurri, San Pedro de Buena Vista, Toro Toro, Villa de Sacaca, Caripuyo, Arampampa, and 
Acasio.  
 
Component 2 will focused on supporting the Ministry of Labor to enhance its institutional 
capacity to manage, coordinate, and monitor the Mi Primer Empleo Digno program, a youth 
training intervention to be implemented in the main cities of the country.  
 
Component 3 is institutional support to the head quarters of the Ministry of Development 
Planning and UDAP in La Paz.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Enhancing Human Capital of Children and Youth Project is expected to trigger the 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.10) policy. As part of project preparation a social assessment will be 
carried out and an indigenous people plan will be prepared in consultation with indigenous 
communities. Results from the IPP will inform project preparation and will be included in the 
project?s manual of operation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr William F. Waters (LCSHS-DPT) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
There will be a social assessment prepared before appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/03/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/03/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The related stadies and social assesment will be completed by January 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Salazar 
09/11/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
