INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 1, 2006
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Bolivia                       Project ID: P102479
Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Decentralized Electricity for Universal Access
Task Team Leader: Dana Rysankova
Estimated Appraisal Date: NA           Estimated Board Date: NA
Managing Unit: LAC-FPSI                Lending Instrument: GPOBA grant
Sector: Renewable energy (100%)
Theme: Off-Grid rural electrification
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):Project (estimated); Project Co-financing.
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source (US$m): 6.013 (GPOBA)                      e
Environmental Category: TBD
Simplified Processing          Simple []             Repeater []
Is this a transferred project  Yes [ x]               No
B. Project Objectives
The project seeks to implement Medium Term Service Contracts for Solar Home Systems,
developed under the Bank's Decentralized Infrastructure for Rural Transformation Project, in 9
departments of Bolivia.
The Project's objectives are to
(a) Extend electricity access to over 9,000 poor Bolivian households, micro-enterprises
and social uses in remote and dispersed rural areas (benefiting some 50,000 Bolivian
citizens in these areas)
(b) Develop and consolidate a mechanism for electrification of remote and dispersed
households using a new form of public-private partnership (PPP) with innovative, output-
based "mediurm-term service contracts" for the provision of electricity with decentralized,
renewable technologies under the Government's new Universal Access Policy.
The specific outputs are:
(1) Installation of at least 9,000 solar home systems (SHS) for dispersed rural
households, schools, clinics and micro and small enterprises (MSEs)



(2) Development of dissemination program for small PV systems for lighting for the
poorest households (below 4OWp)
(3) Provision of sustainable service (maintenance visits, training, market development
activities) by the SHS providers
(4) Consolidation of the output-based, medium-term service contracts between
government and private sector service providers as the key mechanism for the
Government's electrification program for remote and dispersed households under the
new Universal Access Policy.
C. Project Description
The project will implement the following three components:
(1)   OBA MSCs subsidies for SHS systems: US$5.4 million
The project will finance a subsidy program for Solar Home System, in the rural areas of the 9
departments of Bolivia, under two sub-components:
(a)   Medium Term Service Contracts (MSCs). Under the specific framework of a new type of
contract between the provider and the government - the MSC-, the project will fund subsidies to
private providers for the sale, installation, and after-sale services of solar systems to: (1) poor
households, (2) micro-enterprises, schools and clinics, for social and productive purposes. A
wide range of sizes (3OWp-500Wp) for the SHS will be provided, depending on the need and
capacity to pay of each consumer.
(b)   Pico PV.   This subcomponent will develop a pilot project to facilitate market
development for small PV systems or "solar lanterns" (10-15Wp) by providing TA and a small
subsidy (c. US$10-30) for participating companies which are proven to meet project quality
criteria, including: minimum specifications, sales representatives in rural areas, guarantee,
acceptance of broken systems for recycling, and instructions for usage to consumers.
(2)   Technical Assistance: US$0.37 million
To the maximum extent possible, the project will use the information and documents developed
under IDTR funding, so that only limited amount is needed for technical assistance (TA). TA
will be used to complete the three following steps necessary for project implementation: (i)
update the market survey of 2002 and carry out consultations with indigenous peoples, in order
to identify the exact target areas; - the preliminary areas have already been selected - establish a
baseline for the new areas and to identify indigenous peoples needs, (ii) adapt the documents to
the new project areas, new Government priorities and introduce lessons learnt from the first
transaction, and (iii) complement the new road show and monitoring and evaluation activities, as
needed. The budget for the TA will be complemented by funds from the government - IDTR
credit (see Partnerships section).
(3)   Project supervision: US$0.24 million
The supervision costs will finance the work of the TTL, the technical specialists, the fiduciary
and safeguards staff for the supervision of the three implementation stages of the project: (1)
preparation of the GPOBA commitment package, (2) GPOBA Technical Assistance, and (3)
GPOBA subsidies.



D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The project will be implemented in all nine departments in Bolivia. The preliminary target areas
have been selected (Annex 1), all in isolated rural areas, with high percentage of indigenous
peoples from dispersed households and high incidence of poverty. The final target areas will be
confirmed once the consultations with indigenous peoples and a market survey is completed.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The Vice Ministry of Electricity and Alternative Energy has ample capacity for the application of
safeguard policies given the experience accumulated in the IDTR project, for which an
environmental assessment as well as an indigenous people development framework were
developed.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Bjorn-S6ren Gigler, Consultant. He was responsible for coordinating the Social Assessment and
the IPDF of the Bolivia IDTR project.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)  I  Yes    I   No    ITBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                  x
The project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts. This assessment draws
on the Environmental Assessment carried out for the IDTR project which concluded that the
SHS component is unlikely to have adverse environmental effects. The project will apply the
Environmental Framework established and successfully tested for the IDTR project. Given that
the solar home systems are installed in user homes, the impacts do not vary from site to site and
therefore no new environmental analysis is needed.
The project consists exclusively in the installation of solar home systems, with the only
potential environmental impact through the disposal of batteries and components. Mitigation
measures will be introduced in the contracts with the private providers and monitored by
Technical Monitoring Office to be established at the Ministry. In addition, the project is expected
to have a positive environmental impact due to the reduction of C02 emissions. The
consultations with indigenous peoples and other main stakeholders (i.e municipalities,
Prefecturas, micro-businesses etc.) will disseminate the main findings from the existing
environmental plan.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                     x
NA.
The solar home systems are installed in the homes of the beneficiaries, and are therefore not
in any way impacting the Natural Habitats.



Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)     Yes       No       TBD
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            x
NA
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       x
NA
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        x     F
NA
Indi enous Peo les (OP/BP 4.10)                        x
The main project beneficiaries will be rural low-income communities, in majority
indigenous. The project will extend electricity access to approximately 9,000 rural, low-income
households, micro-enterprises, schools and clinics in remote and dispersed rural areas.
The project is replicating Medium Term Service Contracts developed and implemented under
the Decentralized Infrastructure for the Rural Transformation Project (IDTR). Therefore, the
project preparation and implementation will benefit from the Indigenous Peoples Development
Framework developed for the IDTR project. The current project, however, will extend its
coverage to new project areas in all 9 departments of the country, with different ethnic,
economic, social and cultural profile. Therefore, the project will carry out consultations with
indigenous peoples in the new project area and update the existing IPDF in order to reflect the
expanded reach of the project. Based on the consultation process, the communities will
participate actively in project implementation to ensure that the project effectively responds to
the real needs of indigenous communities and to enhance the financial and social sustainability
of the investment.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           x
The project will not finance activities that may lead to physical or economic displacement.
Therefore OP/BP 4.12 is not applicable.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                      x
N/A.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                x
N/A.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                          x    |
N/A.



III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared: The project is GPOBA grant that does not require a QER
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
ISDS: December 2006
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
October - December 2006
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:             Name R                /                  Date
Dana Rysainkov~-'       t
Approved by:                                 --
Regional Safeguards          Name                                      Date
Coordinator:                  Reidar K                               11/01/06
Comments:
Sector Manager:              Name                                ]     Date
tusan Goldmark      &     (    /        A&/
Comments:                                                           t I






