Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2668 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/09/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bolivia 
Project ID: P101426 
Project Name: Lake Titicaca Local Sustainable Development 
Task Team Leader: Daniel A. Hoornweg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 18, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other industry (40%);Sewerage (35%);Solid waste management (20%);Adult 
literacy/non-formal education (5%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Rural non-farm income generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to improve the quality of life of the basin's residents 
through local economic development opportunities such as tourism, provision of critical 
infrastructure services, and protection of the Lake's long term water quality and ecological 
vitality.  The project would achieve this by: (i) facilitating increased tourist arrivals by 5% in the 
Mancomunidad ; (ii) providing a XXX tonne reduction in total organic loading to the Lake from 
the Bolivia side, (iii) providing solid waste facilities to YYY people; and, (iv) protecting or 
rehabilitating ZZZ hectares of shoreline habitat.  
 
A
key aspect of the project is to highlight long-term trends that may be threatening the Lake 
and, where practicable, protect against these trends.  The project will provide increased 
opportunities for economic and social development through tourism expansion and local 
business development.  Infrastructure works related to sanitation, as well as institutional capacity 
building supported through the project, will lead to greater environmental sustainability of the 
Lake.  
 
Page  2
Environmental sustainability of the Lake is key to sustainable economic development for the 
local population.  Environmental sustainability through necessary infrastructure and institutional 
interventions is a prerequisite for long-term economic development from increased tourism 
activities around the Lake.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project's IDA component is proposed as $20 million. With little effort the pre-identification 
mission identified at least $60 million in much-needed investments - the needs around the Lake 
are considerable. The needs are especially high for infrastructure, including wastewater 
treatment, water supply, solid waste collection, transportation and disposal, and improvements to 
roads and ports.  
 
Several stakeholders expressed concern that a five year $20 million project intervention is far 
too limited to have appreciable long term impacts.  Given that the needed investments greatly 
surpass this loan amount, complimentary interventions from other donors, and action from the 
Peruvian government is also critical to ensure the long-term sustainability of any program that 
addresses the needs of the Lake. An Adaptable Program Loan, APL will signal the Bank's broad 
engagement to counterparts, and better facilitate prioritization of interventions, and address the 
immediate investment needs while also addressing medium-term needs within a larger program.  
The APL 'program' would mesh with the Vice Ministry of Tourism's 'vision' exercise.  The 
agreed-to vision would form the basis of a Lake Titicaca Local Sustainable Development 
Strategy.  
 
Goals of the strategy would include:  
 
(1) Create a shared and relevant vision of Lake Titicaca's challenges and opportunities.   The 
Project will support the Government's comprehensive 'Visioning Exercise' that will define and 
prioritize the needs and develop a long-term strategy for the region. This program would provide 
stakeholders (domestic and international) an opportunity to discuss their long term vision for the 
altiplano.  This program is likely to progress in phases, with Phase 1 being conducted during 
project preparation (with a social and institutional risk assessment).  During project 
implementation, Phase 2 would facilitate an iterative process to obtain a broad consensus on 
development in the altiplano (largely based on existing studies).  The Social Assessment would 
conclude with a communication campaign for the altiplano.  
 
(2) Encourage the Government of Peru's participation in the Lake Titicaca Local Sustainable 
Development Plan.  The first APL would provide a comprehensive consensus document on local 
sustainable development that could act as the ongoing management plan for the Lake.  Peru's 
involvement is critical.  
 
(3)  Begin a long-term enhancement of local quality of life for people living in the TDPS Basin.  
Poverty levels have stubbornly remained at 1976 levels - therefore 'slow-and-steady' 
improvement based on relevant local economic development, broad based local support, and 
locally applicable interventions is most likely to succeed.  The local community needs to be an 
explicit component of local sustainable development, their strong support needs to be mobilized.  
 
Page  3
The project is considering the following components:  
 
(1)  Tradable Pollution Permits:  Tradable pollution permitting is more typically launched in 
affluent jurisdictions, e.g. NOx reduction in the US, or with complex operating oversight, e.g. 
reducing GHG emissions through the Clean Development Mechanism under the Kyoto Protocol.  
There may however be merit in launching a pollution reduction program through tradable 
permits in the Lake Titicaca Basin since this may increase Peru-Bolivia cooperation, strengthen 
public support and action, and provide a mechanism for contiguous municipalities to directly 
benefit from reduced pollution loading.  With assistance from the Bank's Output Based Aid 
(OBA) program, project preparation will evaluate the merits of establishing a mechanism to 
'trade' and reduce pollution loads on the Lake. Likely pollutants are oxygen demand, and 
possibly nitrates. Probable 'traders' will be the contiguous municipalities and possibly industry.  
This component would be designed for easy replication in Peru.  Preliminary discussions with 
the European Space Agency have been held; a remote sensing program for Lake monitoring is 
being proposed.  This would facilitate the monitoring and objective allocation of available 
output-based funds.  
 
(2) Community Development Fund: This component will support activities that promote quality 
of life improvements and economic development for local communities.  This Fund would 
finance small-scale business and community activities related to local tourism and culture.  The 
component might also include micro-credit since the altiplano has appreciably less credit 
facilities than the rest of Bolivia.  The mechanics of the Fund will be finalized during preparation 
but a board of advisors is envisaged, with government and civil society and possible international 
representatives.  
 
(3)  Critical Tourism Infrastructure and Plans:  Potential activities to be financed under this 
component include: (i) roads and footpaths around archeological and other tourist sites; (ii) 
signposting at tourist sites; (iii) public rest areas and bathrooms; (iv) interpretation centers; (v) 
community artisan development; (vi) cultural/religious festivals, and; (vii) master plans and 
operating plans for Tihuanacu and Salar de Uyuni, with small-scale critical investments.  This 
component will review the altiplano's top five to ten tourist sites and identify critical needs.  
 
(4) Municipal Infrastructure Development: This component will build and rehabilitate 
infrastructure that will improve the quality of life for the communities surrounding the Lake and 
enhance water quality.  Through the Vice Ministry of Tourism, key municipalities will be 
identified and projects will be designed to protect the environment as well as develop the local 
economy and tourism in a sustainable manner. Proposed works and activities include: (i) the 
expansion of wastewater treatment plants and sewerage networks in the municipalities of 
Copacabana and Achacachi; (ii) a regional landfill for the 17 municipalities that surround the 
Lake; (iii) management of Cohana Bay contamination; (iv) construction of latrines and in-house 
sanitation facilities for communities in sensitive areas, and; (v) technical assistance and studies, 
designs, and possible down-stream improvements that will improve the performance of El Alto's 
Puchucollo wastewater treatment plant.  
 
(5) Technical Assistance and Capacity Building: This component will expand the capacity of 
key agencies such as the Vice Ministry of Tourism, the Prefectura of La Paz, and participating 
Page  4
municipalities.  Assistance would also be provided to the bi-national Autonomous Authority of 
Lake Titicaca (ALT), which is currently focused on flood protection and irrigation activities of 
the Lake, to include broader monitoring of trends related to the Lake's water quality and fish 
stock.The component will help related agencies to assess the impacts of urbanization, tourism 
and climate change on the Lake through studies and monitoring that establishes baseline data.  
An annual reporting process on the state of the Lake will be developed.  This component will 
build the capacity of the critical government institutions that impact the Lake, e.g. the Prefecture 
and Vice Ministry of Tourism.  This component will also finance broader studies such as a Lake 
Titicaca basin environmental management study, and an industrial wastewater control study.  At 
least two international agencies will assist with this capacity building: the National Geographic 
Society, NGS , and the International Joint Commission, IJC .  An advisory group on Lake 
management, with representatives from Bolivia and relevant international experts is planned.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in the Bolivian municipalities contiguous to Lake Titicaca.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The existing institutional capacity for environmental and social management is being assessed 
during project preparation. A comprehensive social assessment and community consultation is 
being supported during project preparation. Based on the findings of these studies, 
recommendations will be incorporated into the project design to ensure that sufficient safeguard 
manaagement capacity is available.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Stefania Blotta Abakerli Baptista (LCSSO) 
Mr David Tuchschneider (LCSAR) 
Ms Ruth Llanos (LCSSO) 
Mr Renan Alberto Poveda (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EA will be prepared for any proposed infrastructure works. A broad Strategic 
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be completed during project implementation 
(with the first phase completed during project preparation).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
To be determined during project preparation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project will provide support to important and deteriorating cultural resources. No 
negative impacts to resources are envisaged.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project is specifically designed to benefit all residents adjacent to the lake, most of 
whom are indigenous peoples. Interventions will be tailored and appropriate for all residents.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
To be determined during project preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Lake Titicaca is joint Peru-Bolivia jurisdiction. Peru is being consulted during project 
preparation, and ideally will be involved in a similar lake protection effort.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/18/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As part of project preparation a social and cultural assessment will be completed. The 
strategic social assessment will be carried out in three phases: (1) a rapid evaluation of the 
area context and key stakeholders (complete by May 2007); (2) an in-depth analysis of 
stakeholder needs, perceptions, and understanding of risks (prior to construction of any 
infrastructure - before October 2007), and; (3) an ongoing participatory monitoring and 
evaluation of benefits accruing from the program during implementation (annually during 
program implementation - first report, May 2008).  
 
Similarly a strategic environmental assessment will form a basis of the project and be 
presented annually as part of 'State of the Lake' report. The initial baseline report will be 
prepared before project appraisal. As part of the strategic environmental assessment, detailed 
environmental assessment (with environmental management plans) will be completed prior 
to construction of activities such as wastewater treatment facilities and landfills. These 
reports will be available at appraisal for activities to be financed in APL1 and will be 
consistent with Bolivian and World Bank requirements.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel A. Hoornweg 
02/08/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
02/08/2007 
Comments:   
