Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC2919
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project ID:  P102170 
Project Name:  Urban Infrastructure Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Vesna Francic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.65
0.65 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objectives of the additional financing would remain the same as for the 
original project.  The objectives of the proposed project are threefold: (i) improve the 
availability, quality and reliability of basic municipal services and, in particular, water 
supply and sanitation; (ii) strengthen the ability of cantonal and municipal governments 
to improve management and institutional capacity for infrastructure development through 
Urban Management Development Plans; and (iii) where possible, foster deeper social 
cohesion through improvements in overall living conditions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional funding will provide continued funding across all components of the 
UISD Project.  More specifically-the additional finance will cover remaining needs for 
Mostar under component 2.  It will support completion and the full implementation of the 
Urban Management Development Plan for Mostar focused on improvement of the 
efficiency and administration of service delivery. Additional finance will also support 
rehabilitation investment needs for three utilities from Group C, i.e. Srebrenica, Stolac 
and Vares.  The funds would cover rehabilitation of small scale (under 10,000 
inhabitants) water supply and sanitation facilities (approximately US$1 million allocated 
to 3 Group C utilities).  Specific investments include rehabilitation of the water intake 
structure and main supply pipeline, rehabilitation of the settling tank and filter units, 
Page  2
rehabilitation of the water supply network, rehabilitation of the telemetric system at the 
pumping station at the main water source, provision of a sewerage network-cleaning 
vehicle with sludge pump, equipment, water-flow meter, household meters and materials 
for repair and maintenance of the primary distribution network.  
 
Component 1.  Institutional Strengthening  
 
This component is financing provision of and training on financial management for 
institutional strengthening and capacity building; drafting of annual Business Plans for 
each Utility; training on preparing Urban Management Development Plans; a study of the 
institutional capacity and role/responsibility of the different levels of Government; and 
other appropriate capacity building.  
 
Component 2.  Urban Management Development Plans and Investments*  
 
This component is financing preparation of Urban Management Development Plans for 
selected areas that would identify priorities to improve operations and maintenance and 
maximize investment benefits.  The Urban Management Development Plans would 
analyze the present levels of operational efficiency; detail the past levels of maintenance; 
identify those physical assets that need to be rehabilitated; and determine components in 
the existing systems to meet the demands of service.  
 
The component is also financing investments in selected service sectors based on the 
conclusions of the strategic planning process. The urban management component targets: 
Banja Luka, Livno, Mostar, Sarajevo, Tuzla and Srebrenica.  
 
Component 3.  Investments for Improved Efficiency  
 
This component finances least-cost priority investments based on system improvements, 
lowering energy usage and related investments to water supply and sanitation utilities.  
 
Because of the vast differences in institutional capacity and financial performances in 
the water supply and sanitation utilities, the utilities would be grouped in three categories.  
Group A, selected up front, would consist of three utilities that have had their financial, 
institutional, technical, environmental and social capacities for project implementation 
evaluated during project preparation by the Bank and deemed to be acceptable.  These 
three Utilities would be expected to become financially viable and cover all their 
operating and maintenance costs by 2008.  Group A utilities are located in Banja Luka, 
Lukavac and Posusje.  
 
Group B was planned to be selected during the first year of project implementation.  
Group B Utilities would have the same preparation work undertaken by Group A, but 
would be expected to reach financial viability and cover all operation and maintenance 
costs, by 2009.  Group B utility identified to date is Cazin.  
 
Group C would target areas lacking social cohesion or badly affected during the postwar 
period. For financial, social and economic reasons, it is unreasonable to assume that these 
Utilities could reach financial viability during project implementation.  As a result, Group 
C
has been provided with small amounts of IDA credit in addition to grant financing that 
the Bank will seek to attract from other donors.  Group C utilities are Stolac, Srebrenica 
and Vares.  
 
Component 4.  Engineering Services  
 
This component is financing planning and design; engineering for the preparation of 
final designs and bidding documents; and assistance with procurement and supervision of 
construction for investments.  
Page  3
Component 5.  Project Implementation  
 
This component is financing implementation of the project; incremental operating costs 
related to all relevant expenses, salaries, audits; guidance and training for Utilities and 
local governments on project implementation; and a stakeholder education campaign on 
linkages between improved service and willingness to pay.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Mostar is situated in the southern part of the country. Area of 1,175 km2 with population 
of 105,357 inhabitants.  Stolac, Srebrenica and Vares are strong candidates for supporting 
sub-projects. The salient characteristics are municipal infrastructure systems (water 
supply, sewage management, and municipal waste disposal) that are currently highly 
inefficient, and have been prioritized in terms of their need for repair and rehabilitation, 
and whose current condition presents a significant risk to public health and safety as well 
as the environment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Karin Shepardson (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Upon the expression of interest by the Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations 
(MFTER), the responsible agency for the UISD Project, of an interest in additional 
financing, the project team met with the ECA Regional Safeguard Team.  Since the 
works to be covered by the additional financing would follow from those of the original 
project, it was agreed that the same framework approach would be carried over. Since 
investments are not known a priori safeguard issues for each potential subcomponent 
would be identified during its EA preparation, in accordance with the scoping procedures 
outlined in the Framework document.  
Page  4
Prior to appraisal, the project team will prepare an ISDS, and the MFTER will issue an 
Environmental Framework Policy (EFP) similar to the one prepared for the initial project 
but as necessary will be updated by the Borrower to reflect the current conditions, 
strengthen any weaknesses, and/or clarify any ambiguities of the current EFP. Any 
modifications to the EFP would be subject to World Bank approval. The EFP will serve 
as a guide for the preparation of site specific EAs/EMPs.  Following non-objection by the 
Bank of the draft EFP, the EFP will be publicly consulted and disclosed, including 
disclosure at the INFOShop, before appraisal, and disclosed in the local language.  The 
final EFP will include documentation on the consultation/disclosure process. The 
Borrower updated Environmental Framework Policy prepared for the original project to 
reflect the current conditions and sent the draft EFP to the Bank for review. The Bank 
reviewed the draft and provided no-objection, and accordingly the EFP would be publicly 
disclosed before appraisal.  
 
After project effectiveness consultants will prepare site specific EAs/EMPs on the basis 
of the EFP.  The consultation/disclosure of these documents will take place respectively 
on a site-specific basis as well as include disclosure at the INFOShop.  The EAs/EMPs 
will be prepared and presented to the Bank for non-objection before the disbursement of 
any funds for site rehabilitation works.  
 
The project would not affect natural habitats.  No dams are in the project scope.  No 
resettlement nor land acquisition is required, as all sub-projects to be financed from the 
Additional financing include no new construction, but only rehabilitation of existing 
works.  Mitigation measures likely to be included in the EMPs during construction would 
include requirements in scope of work for  minimization of dust and noise and assurance 
of access rights of citizens to sources of employment and utilities.  
 
As provided by OP/BP/GP 7.50 the original project qualified for exemption to the 
requirement of notification of riparian states, and exemption was granted by the Office of 
the ECA VP April 19, 2004.  The investments to be supported by the additional financing 
would target the same river basins.  Following review by LEGEC it has been determined 
that the exemption from the notification of riparians is still valid for the current project 
for the reasons indicated below:  
 
(a) 
the project scope is unchanged, it just involves additional financing, and  
 
(b) 
the B-H legal framework is unchanged, no new treaties or agreements regarding 
common or international waterways have been entered into.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESEP includes an assessment of borrower capacity and recommends supplementing 
this with project specific procedures to strengthen the capacity... The borrower has a well 
functioning PMU at the central level and PITs at the local level.  The PMU has a very 
capable Project Head, Procurement and Financial Head in place. Overall progress in 
project implementation is proceeding well in both Entities. Implementation of water 
component is underway in Banja Luka, Posusje and Lukavac, Group A utilities.  Project 
implementation under urban component is proceeding well. Urban management plans 
were prepared and public consultations held in Tuzla and Banja Luka. Monitoring roles 
have been assumed by officials at various levels.  Activities to date have been judged 
satisfactory during World Bank supervision for the implementation of the UISD Project, 
and the same procedures and mechanisms will be used for the UISDAF Project.  The 
roles and responsibilities are defined in the Framework Document.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic relation in BiH  
 
Ministry of Physical Planning and Environment in FBiH  
 
Ministry of Physical Planning, Urbanism, Civil Engineering and Ecology in RS.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  6
credit/loan? 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Vesna Francic 
04/04/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
04/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
04/04/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
04/16/2007 
Comments:   
