Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2848
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project ID:  P101641 
Project Name:  Forest Additional Financing Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jessica Mott 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (57%);General public administration sector (24%);Information 
technology (19%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Environmental 
policies and institutions (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S);Corporate 
governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.35 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.43
1.43 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Additional Credit would continue have the same objective as the original project, 
i.e., to assist the Borrower in the implementation of  reforms in forest organization and 
management, both at the Entity and canton level.  The additional financing would 
continue to involve both the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and 
Republika Srpska (RS) entity governments.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional credit would help meet a financing gap with a focus on the first 
two components of the original project:   
 
-Accelerating the implementation of new legal, institutional and economic frameworks; 
and.  
 
-Strengthening the technical capacity for sustainable forest management (through the 
development of a Forest Management Information System and implementation of a State 
Forest Inventory).  
 
Page  2
More specifically, under the component to accelerate the implementation of new legal, 
institutional, and economic frameworks, the additional financing would provide training, 
consultancies, and associated support for:  
 
(a) 
 institutional strengthening and improved communications including: (i) 
harmonizing the enterprise structure and the legal framework; (ii) human resource 
management skills; and (iii) communication and public relations skills and programs;  
 
(b) 
support to improving corporate governance and implement the entity Corporate 
Governance Action Plans, including (i) defining roles and competencies of organizational 
levels, (ii) improving physical asset management, (ii) improving strategic planning and 
budgeting processes, (iv) improving annual reporting processes, (v) developing internal 
and external audit committees, and (vi) developing professional standards of behavior;.  
 
(c) 
Support the improvement of tactical and strategic forest planning including (i) 
strategic (long-term) planning for enterprises, (ii) business management planning, (iii) 
operational forest management planning, (iv) specialized training programs in 
international marketing, international conventions, and (v) development of entity-level 
strategic planning;  
 
(d) 
Support the expansion of alternative forest revenues including (i) expanded 
management of non-timber forest products, and (ii) improved management of forest areas 
for tourism, recreation and hunting;  
 
(e) 
Support the ongoing efforts to certify productive forest land including (i) 
instituting management requirements for meeting international good practice forest 
stewardship standards, (ii) completion of the national standards setting process, (iii) 
developing chain of custody procedures and technology, and (iv) developing other skills 
needed to achieve the forest certification agenda.  
 
Under the Strengthening Technical Capacity component the additional financing would  
 
(a) 
Support the Forest Management Information System (FMIS) by providing 
training, workshops, consultancies, software, and information technology (IT) equipment 
by: (i) in the FBiH, support to imporve cantonal and entity level IT capacity by 
developing a geographic information system (including design, installation, data layers, 
and user skills in editing and viewing), and integrating existing cantonal Business 
Management Information Systems, and (ii) in the RS, support to modernize the existing 
Business Management Information System and move toward incorporating forest 
management functionality by building skills in using the existing system, Geographical 
Position System tools and mapping functions, and other information technology tools;  
 
(b) 
Complete the State Forest Inventory (SFI) by providing support for field surveys 
on sample plots totaling 3406 tracts (representing 80% of the total forest area), imagery 
acquisition and interpretation, mapping, software, servers, vehicles, analysis, training, 
and dissemination.  This will build on the accomplishments of the FDCP which has tested 
data collection, data processing, and statistical design methodologies; has completed 
sample plots covering almost 14% of the total forest area and will complete an additional 
6% of the total forest area; and developed a field manual, training program, a mechanism 
for handling forests under land mines, bidding documents, and cost estimates for the full 
inventory.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover the entire country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert Kirmse (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Like the original project, the additional financing wwould strengthen BiH's institutional 
framework for sustainable forest management.  More specifically, both the original 
project and the additional financing are harnessing the potential of forests to reduce 
poverty in a sustainable way, integrate forests effectively into sustainable economic 
development, and protect vital local and global environmental services and values of 
forests. There are no other applicable safeguard policies.  Like the original project, no 
environmental assessment is required.The only works would be for forest field surveys 
and imagery needed for the SFI. The project does not include any construction works or 
other forestry works. The other expenditures would be for goods (mostly IT related), 
training, consultancies, and incremental operating costs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
See above item II 1.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
See above item II 1.  Under the original project  the entity governments have already 
demonstrated good capacity to plan and implement project activities consistent with the 
forest safeguard policy, and to use the project itself to strengthen their capacity to 
implement non-project financed activities in accord with the forest safeguard policy.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The action plans and other outputs under the component for accelerating the 
implementation of the legal, institutional, and economic framework were developed in a 
participatory manner, involving all key stakeholders, and they will also be implemented 
in a consultative manner. The additional financing wopuld strengthen strategic 
communication skills.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not required   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  5
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jessica Mott 
03/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert Kirmse 
03/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
03/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
03/21/2007 
Comments:   
