Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2727 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project ID: P101641 
Project Name: Forest Additional Financing Project 
Task Team Leader: Jessica Mott 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (57%);General public administration sector (24%);Information 
technology (19%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Environmental 
policies and institutions (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S);Corporate 
governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.35 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.43 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1.43 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Forest Additional Financing Forest Project (FAFP) would continue have the same objective 
as the original Forest Conservation and Development Project (FCDP), i.e., to assist with the 
implementation of legislated reforms in forest organization and management, both at the entity 
and canton level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional credit would help meet the financing gap associated with the completion 
of the first two FCDP components:  
 
-
Accelerating the implementation of new legal, institutional and economic frameworks; 
and.  
 
-
Strengthening the Technical Capacity for Sustainable Forest Management (through the 
development of a Forest Management Information System and implementation of a Bosnia-wide 
forest inventory).  
Page  2
More specifically, under the component to accelerate framework implementation FAFP would 
provide training, consultancies, and associated support to:  
 
(a) 
support institutional strengthening and improved communications including (i) 
harmonizing the enterprise structure and the legal framework; (ii) human resource management 
skills; and (iii) communication and public relations skills and programs;  
 
(b) 
support to improving corporate governance and implement the entity Corporate 
Governance Action Plans, including (i) defining roles and competencies of organizational levels, 
(ii) improving physical asset management, (ii) improving strategic planning and budgeting 
processes, (iv) improving annual reporting processes, (v) developing internal and external audit 
committees, and (vi) developing standards of behavior;.  
 
(c) 
Support the improvement of tactical and strategic forest planning including (i) strategic 
(long-term) planning for enterprises, (ii) business management planning, (iii) operational forest 
management planning, (iv) specialized training programs in international marketing, 
international conventions, and (v) development of entity-level strategic plans;  
 
(d) 
Support the expansion of alternative forest revenues including (i) expanded management 
of non-timber forest products, and (ii) improved management of forest areas for tourism, 
recreation and hunting;  
 
(e) 
Support the ongoing efforts to certify productive forest land including (i) management 
requirements for meeting international good practice forest stewardship standards, (ii) 
completion of the national standards setting process, (iii) chain of custody procedures and 
technology, and (iv) other skills needed to achieve the forest certification agenda.  
 
Under the Strengthening Technical Capacity component FAPF would  
 
(a) 
Support the Forest Management Information System (FMIS) by providing training, 
workshops, consultancies, software, and information technology (IT) equipment, (i) in the FBiH, 
to support cantonal and entity level IT capacity by developing a geographic information system 
(including design, installation, data layers, and user skills in editing and viewing), and 
integrating existing cantonal Business Management Information Systems, and (ii) in the RS, to 
support the modernization of the existing Business Management Information System and move 
toward incorporating forest management functionality by building skills in using the existing 
system, Geographical Position System tools and mapping functions, and other information 
technology tools;  
 
(b) 
Complete the State Forest Inventory (SFI) by providing support for field surveys on 
sample plots totaling 3406 tracts (representing 80% of the total forest area), imagery acquisition 
and interpretation, mapping, software, servers, two vehicles, analysis, training, and 
dissemination.  This will build on the accomplishments of the FDCP which has tested data 
collection, data processing, and statistical design methodologies; has completed sample plots 
covering almost 14% of the total forest area and will complete an additional 6% of the total 
forest area; and developed a field manual, training program, a mechanism for handling forests 
under land mines, bidding documents, and cost estimates for the full inventory.  
 
The FAFP does not need to continue support for the FCDP component on biodiversity 
conservation, since that agenda will be addressed under the proposed GEF financed Forest and 
Mountain Protected Areas Project.  
 
Page  3
Project management will continue in accordance with the FDCP design.  These include all 
contracting, financial management, and monitoring being handled by a Project Implementation 
Unit (PIU) in each entity, which each operate with contracted Director, Financial Management 
Specialist, Procurement Specialist, and Translator under the respective entity Ministries of 
Agriculture, Water Resources, and Forestry.  These PIUs have developed effective arrangements 
with each other to share and coordinate the project workload.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will cover the entire country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Like the FCDP, FAFP is consistent with the Forests safeguard policy (OP 4.36) since it will 
strengthen BiH?s institutional framework for sustainable forest management.  More specifically, 
both FCDP and FAFP are harnessing the potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable 
way, integrate forests effectively into sustainable economic development, and protect vital local 
and global environmental services and values of forests.  There are no other applicable safeguard 
policies.  Like the FCDP, the FAFP would be rated as environmental assessment category was 
?C?, i.e., no environmental assessment required.  The only works would be for forest field 
surveys and imagery needed for the SFI.  The project does not include any construction works or 
other forestry works.  The other project expenditures would be for goods (mostly IT related), 
training, consultancies, and incremental operating costs.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert Kirmse (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Like the earlier Forest Conservation and Development Project, the Forest Additional 
Financing Project will strengthen BiH's institutional framework for sustainable forest 
management.  More specifically, both FCDP and FAFP are harnessing the potential of forests to 
reduce poverty in a sustainable way, integrate forests effectively iinto sustainable economic 
development, and protect vital local and global environmental services and values of forests. 
There are no other applicable safeguard policies.  Like the FCDP, no environmental assessment 
required.  The only works would be for forest field surveys and imagery needed for the SFI.The 
project does not include any construction works or other forestry works.  The other expenditures 
would be for goods (mostly IT related), training, consultancies, and incremental operating costs.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/14/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard-related studies required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jessica Mott 
02/09/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
02/15/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
