Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2442 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/15/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID: P100792 
Project Name: ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE AND SAFETY PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 19, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 1, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 75.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
100.00
185.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to reduce user costs, in terms of time and 
money, on priority sections of the primary and secondary road network, to introduce innovation 
in the implementation of contract maintenance on a pilot basis, and to improve the institutional 
framework, planning, management and implementation of road safety activities throughout 
Bosnia and Herzegovina.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project cost and components. The total project cost is provisionally estimated at US$215 million, 
comprising US$30 million from the World Bank credit, about US$75 million from EBRD in 
parallel financing, Euro 80 million (US$100 million) from the European Investment Bank in 
parallel financing, and US$10 million in total from the Entity Governments.  The preparation 
costs are to be borne from the clients own funds, and implementation will be undertaken by the 
existing Project Implementation Teams within the respective Road Directorates.  The proposed 
main components are as follows:  
Page  2
a) 
Road Rehabilitation/Reconstruction and Upgrading Component: The first component will 
involve the rehabilitation, reconstruction or limited upgrading of selected priority sections of the 
primary, secondary and local road networks in both Entities.  All priority sections, excepting the 
local roads, would be amongst the highest priorities, in terms of the expected economic internal 
rate of return, identified in the Program Analysis conducted by both Road Directorates on the 
primary and secondary networks. Estimated total cost: US$25 million from project, US$200 
million, approx. in total.  
 
b) 
Output Based/Performance based Maintenance Component: The second component 
involves the introduction on a pilot basis of output or performance based maintenance contracts 
in a limited number of pilot regions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  This initiative follows the 
introduction of these approaches in an early Bank project in Serbia, where early indications 
suggest significant improvements in allocative efficiency. Estimated total cost: US$10 million.  
 
c) 
Road Safety Component: The project will also be one of the first in the Bank to receive 
an award from the new Global Road Safety Trust Fund to undertake both a Road Safety 
Management Capacity Review (based on the recommendations of recently published Transport 
Note 1), to define the component.  This may also facilitate the availability of some additional 
grant financing during implementation (tbc). Estimated total cost: US$5 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Countrywide   
 
E.  Borrow
er’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower will develop and enforce an Environmental Management Plan to mitigate 
identified risks related to the civil works in the project and raise contractor awareness of 
environmental issues.  Through this project, the capacity of the implementing agencies will be 
further strengthened, building on the success of the Road Management and Safety Project, to 
identify, monitor and manage safeguard issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASEG) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to include the rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing road 
infrastructure.  There is not expected to be any landtake outside the existing 'right of way'. 
Environmental impacts are expected to be site-specific, and irreversible, The project has, 
accordingly, been categorised at Category B, and the borrower will be responsible for producing 
a
EA, consistent with Bank Guidelines for this category of project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
A
decision on whether this is triggered is to be confirmed after the specific road sections 
have been selected.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
A
decision on whether this is triggered is to be confirmed after the specific road sections 
have been selected.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
A
decision on whether this is triggered is to be confirmed after the specific road sections 
have been selected.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Necessary safeguard related studies will be initiated in the autumn of 2006, and will be are 
expected to be completed by end March 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
11/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/15/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
09/05/2006 
Comments:  Content reviewed and cleared. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
