Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/08/2006 
Report No.:  AC2599
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID:  P103703 
Project Name:  COMMUNITY DEV SUPPLMT 
Task Team Leader:  Maniza B. Naqvi 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (20%);Roads and highways (20%);Water supply 
(20%);Sewerage (20%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Conflict prevention and post-
conflict reconstruction (S);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Government requested additional financing for the CDP through the supplemental 
credit of US$5.0 million IDA. Additional financing is expected to further strengthen the 
results and outcomes achieved under the original CDP which is due to close on December 
31, 2006.  The project would continue to finance investments focused on the 
improvement of the quality of basic infrastructure and services in poor communities 
within low-income municipalities, while seeking to strengthen the institutional and 
financial capacity to manage such services over the long-term.  The project would 
continue to have the same three components as in the original credit (1) Performance 
Based Grants; (2) Institutional Capacity Building; and (3) Project Implementation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed operation would provide grants as a mechanism to target non revenue 
generating investments to low-income municipalities and their poor communities with a 
focus on improving service delivery, cost recovery, the financial management capacity of 
local governments; and public accountability/community participation. The supplemental 
credit will finance a subset of the same municipalities which participated in the CDP 
Page  2
(poorest municipalities). Requests for community investment financing were made in the 
past one year period by participating municipalities and could not be financed under the 
original credit due to limited availability of financing.  The supplemental credit would 
finance the pipeline of subprojects that were unable to be financed under the existing 
CDP credit. This pipeline of projects would be selected for the supplemental credit 
financing in coordination and cooperation with the Regional Development Agencies.  
 
Component 1-Performance Based Grant Agreements:  
 
The proposed operation would provide grants as a mechanism to target non revenue 
generating investments to low-income municipalities and their poor communities with a 
focus on improving service delivery, cost recovery, the financial management capacity of 
local governments; and public accountability/community participation. The supplemental 
credit will finance a subset of the same municipalities which participated in the CDP 
(poorest municipalities). These requests for community investment financing were made 
in the past one year period by participating municipalities and could not be financed 
under the original credit due to limited availability of financing.  The supplemental credit 
would finance the pipeline of subprojects that were unable to be financed under the 
existing CDP credit. This pipeline of projects would be selected for the supplemental 
credit financing in coordination and cooperation with the Regional Development 
Agencies of municipalities whose Board members are the local communities.  
 
Component 2-Institutional Capacity Building:  
 
The project would increase the capacity of municipalities to improve service delivery 
through technical assistance and training. Capacity for municipalities would be developed 
in the areas of participatory inclusive procedures such as citizens score cards. This 
component will be implemented in close partnership with the World Bank Institute.  
 
Component 3-Project Implementation:  
 
The project implementation arrangements would remain the same as for the CDP. In the 
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBH) the project would continue to be 
implemented through ODRAZ Foundation while in Republika Srpska (RS) it would 
continue to be implemented by the Development Employment Fund (DEF).  The project 
partners would continue to be the poorest municipal governments in BiH and citizens and 
the identification of projects to be financed will be done in cooperation with five regional 
development agencies.  
 
The Fiduciary arrangements have performed well under the project and are rated as 
Satisfactory. The two foundations ODRAZ and DEF were responsible for the financial 
management and procurement under the project and for supervising and monitoring all 
activities financed under the project. Both Foundations were audited annually--and audit 
reports were submitted to the Bank. The project is under the supervision of Bank's FMS.  
To ensure that project safeguards were met the Bank reviewed 100 percent of projects 
financed by IDA for social and for procurement clearances.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented nationally through ODRAZ Foundation in the FBH and 
DEF in the RS in partnership with a subset of the 88 municipalities involved in the 
original project. These municipalities are located in both entities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maniza B. Naqvi (ECSHD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is a supplemental credit for additional financing for an ongoing operation 
under which environmental issues have not arise.  However, an environmental screening 
process is in place for each project appraisal.  
 
None of the activities financed under the project are expected to have an adverse 
environmental impact.  Nevertheless, appropriate environmental aspects will be 
considered when assessing financing of rural roads and other infrastructure proposals.  
The Operations Manuals for both RS and Federation include the environmental and social 
screening process.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives were considered for the original project.  The current project is additional 
financing to scale up the activities under the original project.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower's capacity to implement the project is high. The project supports 
reconstruction and rehabilitation work, and the procedures for identifying, appraising, 
implementing and monitoring of such work are laid out in the operations manuals.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are: beneficiaries; non-governmental organizations; local and 
central governments; and other donors and agencies. The procedures for identifying, 
appraising, implementing and monitoring of such work are laid out in the operations 
manual.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/08/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/08/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/08/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Operations Manuals for both RS and federation include the envrionmental and social 
screening process which will be used when assessing financing of rural roads and other 
infrastructure projects.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  5
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maniza B. Naqvi 
11/08/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maniza B. Naqvi 
11/08/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
 
Comments:   
