Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/05/2006 
Report No.:  AC2196
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID:  P090666 
Project Name:  Energy Community of South East Europe (ECSEE) APL3-Bosnia and 
Herzegovina Project 
Task Team Leader:  Iftikhar Khalil 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Regulation and competition policy (P);State 
enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
36.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.10 
 
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 67.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
104.50 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
44.90 
 Financing 
Gap 
14.10
235.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The countries of South East Europe (SEE) have recognized that energy supply security 
and reliability can be enhanced by regional cooperation.  In 2002, to pave the way for an 
efficient regional response to the emerging supply constraints and supply security 
concerns, the Governments of SEE and the European Commission (EC) signed in Athens, 
Greece, a Memorandum of Understanding on the Regional Energy Market in South East 
Europe and its Integration into the European Union Internal Energy Market.  This 
document is referred to as the Athens Memorandum 2002, and the signatories formally 
expressed their commitment to the Energy Community of South East Europe (ECSEE).  
In December 8, 2003, a more detailed version of the memorandum was signed which is 
referred to as the Athens Memorandum 2003, and supersedes the 2002 document.  
Following negotiations that began in July 2004, the Treaty establishing the Energy 
Community (the Treaty) was signed on October 25, 2005 which formalizes the 
arrangements under the Athens Memorandum.  
Page  2
ECSEE’s principal objectives are to:  
 
-
Create a stable regulatory and market framework capable of attracting investment 
in gas networks and power systems so that all states in the region have access to the 
stable and continuous energy supply that is essential for economic development and 
social stability;  
 
-
Establish integrated regional markets in South East Europe, closely linked tothe 
internal energy market of the European Union, and complying with the rules applicable 
within the European Union;  
 
-
Enhance the energy security of South East Europe and the European Union by 
providing incentives to connect the Balkans to Caspian and North African gas reserves; 
and  
 
-
Improve the environmental situation in relation to energy in the region.  
 
The Member States are committing themselves under ECSEE inter alia to:  
 
-
Implement the EC Directives 2003/54 (electricity) and 2003/55 (gas) of the 
European Parliament and of the Council, June 26, 2003, in full but with a delayed 
schedule for market liberalization compared to the schedule applicable to EU Member 
States;  
 
-
Progressively align their environmental standards to a high common level, 
including the requirement that all generating plants starting to operate after the entry into 
force of the ECSEE Treaty comply with EC standards; and  
 
-
All Regional Members are also expected to endeavor to accede to the Kyoto 
Protocol.  
 
The World Bank’s ECSEE-APL Program Loan approved by the Board in January 2005, 
allows tailored financial support to be provided to the regional member countries and 
Kosovo to enable them to develop their power systems and meet the regional market 
integration targets under the Athens Process.  
 
The objective of the project is to facilitate BiH’s participation in ECSEE through 
investments to maintain domestic electricity generation, improve safety and environment 
compliance at generating facilities, enhance revenue realization and communication 
capabilities of the distribution network, and upgrade the capability of the BiH 
Independent System Operator.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of:  
 
(i) 
Investments for:  
 
-
Repairs to address leakages at the hydropower dams of Rama, Trebinje II, 
Visegrad, Grabovica and Salakovac;  
 
-
Augmentation of spillway capacity at the Bocac dam;  
 
-
Rehabilitation, replacement or enlargement (one case only) of supporting 
equipment at the hydropower stations of Capljina, Rama, Visegrad, Bocac, Grabovica, 
Salakovac and Jablanica;  
Page  3
-
Rehabilitation of auxiliary equipment at the thermal power stations of Ugljevik 
and Gacko;  
 
-
Rehabilitation of technical monitoring systems at the hydropower stations of 
Visegrad, Bocac, Jablanica (including for the Kukovi landslide), Grabovica and 
Salakovac, and the Ugljevik thermal power station;  
 
-
Rehabilitation of environmental protection systems at the thermal power stations 
of Ugljevik, Gacko, Kakanj and Tuzla;  
 
-
Rehabilitation of the distribution systems of EPHZHB, EPRS and EPBiH; Supply 
and installation of distribution Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems 
(SCADAs) for EPHZHB, EPRS and EPBiH;  
 
-
Establishment of a market operation system for the ISO; and  
 
-
Provision of hardware and software to improve the financial management 
information systems of the Elektroprivredas.  
 
(ii) 
Technical assistance for:  
 
-
Implementation activities (including studies to confirm design of rehabilitation 
measures, and assistance in procurement and supervision); and  
 
-
Design for reduction of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions at TPP 
Kakanj.  
 
The project will enhance the ability of BiH to effectively participate in the regional 
market by:  
 
-
Investments in safety and environmental upgrades at critical power plants.  
 
-
Metering and other investments to enhance revenue realization and 
communication capabilities associated with the distribution networks.  
 
-
Upgrading the capability of the BiH Independent System Operator by installinga 
system for electricity market operation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in various locations all over BiH.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The ECSEE program’s overall environmental impact is positive.  ECSEE accelerates the 
introduction of EU-compatible environmental legislation and standards in the SEE 
region.  Two specific requirements are particularly noteworthy:  (a) new generation 
plants starting to operate after the Treaty is in effect have to comply with the relevant EC 
standards, except where specific derogations have been provided; and (b) all Regional 
Members are expected to accede to the Kyoto Protocol within one year of the Treaty’s 
effectiveness.  The APL program is a potential source of assistance to assist countries in 
meeting these requirements, for example through financing the rehabilitation and 
upgrading of power generation facilities to improve their operational and environmental 
performance.  
 
The physical components of the project consist mainly of replacement of existing 
equipment in the existing locations.  No land acquisition is expected.  The environmental 
investments would make environmental improvements and the investments at dams 
would improve safety.  
 
For the dam safety components, the Elektroprivredas have undertaken studies to identify 
and cost the works required.  International Consultants will be hired to: (i) investigate the 
problem and review the proposed solutions; (ii) prepare recommendations of the works to 
be carried out; (iii) prepare the bidding documents, assist in bid evaluation and contract 
award, and assist in supervision of the works.  The Consultants will review and evaluate 
the owner’s operation and maintenance procedures, including a review of the existing 
dam safety plans, and will provide assistance in upgrading them as necessary.  Should 
significant and complex remedial works be necessary for a high-hazard dam, an 
independent review of the design and construction activities will be undertaken.  
 
An Environmental Category B has been assigned to the project.  Accordingly, 
Environmental Management Plans for the investments that would be made have been 
prepared, discussed at public meetings, and furnished to the Association.  
Page  5
Environmental issues to be addressed at the construction stage include: noise from 
machine operation, harmful impacts of electric fields on workers, possible fires, dust 
from old equipment and construction works, suspended materials in water, slag and 
slagging water, rock wool waste, packaging waste, metal waste, old oil, and removal of 
vegetation during construction of a road for maintenance of a slag and ash depot.  
 
Environmental issues to be addressed at the operations stage include: dust emissions, 
mud from waste water treatment, poor values of pH, sulfates and suspended matter in 
waterways, reservoirs and mud disposal sites, and leakage of ash.  
 
Full details are given in the Environmental Management Plans.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The investments under the project are primarily for rehabilitation of existing plants and 
facilities to improve environmental and safety aspects and efficiency.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Management Plans have been developed by the Elektroprivredas in 
accordance with Bank guidelines.  
 
Substantial institutional capacity to implement the
 Bank’s safeguard policies has been 
developed by the Elektroprivredas through the implementation of previous projects.  
 
The Bank’s standard environmental requirements will apply to the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Elektroprivredas have carried out public consultations in the preparation of the 
EMPs, and the EMPs will have been disclosed in BiH prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Iftikhar Khalil 
04/04/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
04/04/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/05/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
04/05/2006 
Comments:   
