Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2630 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project ID: P101213 
Project Name: Agriculture and Rural Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Rita E. Cestti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%);Forestry (15%);Central government administration (15%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural markets (S);Rural non-farm income 
generation (S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
21.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
6.00
11.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina to improve the capacity 
of its institutions serving agriculture, food, forestry and rural development to provide critical 
support services and deliver efficient support programs, thereby contributing to enhancing 
productivity and competitiveness of the agriculture and forestry sectors and their contribution to 
economic growth and poverty reduction.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will be financed under a specific investment loan (SIL) of US$21 million equivalent, 
and will consist of the following components:  
 
Component A: Agriculture Information and Institutional Capacity Building  
 
Page  2
(i) 
Improving agriculture information systems for strategic planning, policy making and 
monitoring, by supporting the carrying out of an agricultural census; setting up of farm, animal 
identification and client registers; and provision of market information.  
 
(ii) 
Strengthening veterinary, food safety and phyto-sanitary services as well as inspectorates, 
by further developing the capacity of state-level institutions, namely, the State Veterinary Office, 
the State Phyto-sanitary Office and the Food Safety Agency, to harmonize and enforce uniform 
veterinary and phyto-sanitary regulations, standards and controls, so they are fully compatible 
with the EU directives on food hygiene, inspection and certification. This will also include the 
establishment and accreditation of veterinary and plant health reference laboratories, based on 
detailed business plans, implementing EU-required methodologies for testing according to ISO 
and respecting international conventions; as well as modernization of inspectorate process using 
a
risk-based assessment ssytem.  
 
(iii) 
Strengthening agricultural advisory services, aiming to capitalize on recent institutional 
improvements, by providing training and technical assistance to existing extension staff at Entity 
and sub-Entity levels, improving linkages between agriculture institutions, testing new 
innovative extension methods including participatory and feedback mechanisms, and introducing 
methods of systematic monitoring and evaluation of extension and research services and their 
impacts.  
 
(iv) 
Supporting further public administration reform, by establishing and/or building needed 
capabilities (provision of training and equipment) and improving management information at the 
state and entity levels to deliver on the expectations of soon-to-be formulated Agriculture and 
Rural Development Strategy.  
 
Component B: Enhanced Agriculture and Rural Development Support Program  
 
The 2005 budgets of the two entities included about US$10 million (FBiH) and US$25 million 
(RS) for agriculture support programs, and the figures are set to increase in the next few years. 
At present, most of the agriculture subsidies/incentives are linked to specific agricultural 
products, with milk subsidies absorbing a large share of total subsidies.  The current pattern of 
production subsidies creates uncertainty by not providing consistent signals to farmers.  The 
project will provide capacity building and operational support to entity ministries to review and 
make the necessary adjustments of the existing incentive funds by shifting the current support to 
agriculture from product-linked subsidies, premiums and interest subsidies towards support 
measures common in EU agricultural policies (e.g., income support, producer groups and 
marketing support and productivity-enhancing support measures), aiming to target ?productive? 
(and poor but potentially ?quite productive?) farmers and move the ?non-productive? ones to 
non-farm employment and/or social protection programs. In addition, the project will support 
development of capabilities to improve control of the distribution of funds for agriculture 
subsidies. The project will also provide incremental funds to be disbursed by the entity ministries 
as rural development grants for specific objectives, e.g., rural infrastructure, early retirement, off-
farm activities, environmental set-aside, etc.  
 
Component D: Management, Coordination and Monitoring  
 
Page  3
This component would aim to build capacity within the Entity-level Ministries of Agriculture to 
implement the proposed project activities, and within the State Ministry of Foreign Trade and 
Economic Relations to coordinate, monitor and evaluate the proposed project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The following safeguard policies may apply: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and 
Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12.  OP 4.12 is being triggered because of some possibilities of 
land acquisition for some type of rural infrastructure. OP/BP 4.01 is being triggered because the 
project will support rehabilitation of buildings and construction/rehabilitation of rural 
infrastructure associated with components 1 and 3 and disposal of laboratory waste associated 
with component 1.  
 
The borrower has demonstrated through previous World Bank projects the ability to address 
both safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Rita E. Cestti (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project would finance a range of  rural infrastructure investments, which are likely to 
include: upgrade of water networks, rehabilitation of rural roads, expansion of electricity 
networks, etc. In addition, the project will finance rehabilitation of buildings associated with 
components 1 and disposal of laboratory waste associated with component 2.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
A
review will be undertaken at a later stage as part of the EMF to determine the impact of the 
project on pesticide use.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
A
preparatory study will be carried out to assess whether the rural investment component will 
trigger the involuntary resettlement policy or will involve land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
A
review will be undertaken at a later stage as part of the EMF to determine the impact of the 
project in rehabilitating rural infrasturcture.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/05/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since physical investments will be processed on a rolling basis, it is proposed to prepare a 
tailored Environmental Management (and Social )Process Framework.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rita E. Cestti 
01/10/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
01/16/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
