Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2558 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/30/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID: P103703 
Project Name: COMMUNITY DEV SUPPLMT 
Task Team Leader: Maniza B. Naqvi 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 7, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (20%);Roads and highways (20%);Water supply 
(20%);Sewerage (20%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Conflict prevention and post-
conflict reconstruction (S);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Government requested additional financing for the CDP through the supplemental loan of 
US$5.0 million IDA. Additional financing is expected to further strengthen the results and 
outcomes achieved under the original CDP which is due to close on December 31, 2006.  The 
project would continue to finance investments focused on the improvement of the quality of 
basic infrastructure and services in poor communities within low-income municipalities, while 
seeking to strengthen the institutional and financial capacity to manage such services over the 
long-term.  The project would continue to have the same three components as in the original loan 
(1) Performance Based Grants; (2) Institutional Capacity Building; and (3) Project 
Implementation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation would provide grants as a mechanism to target non revenue generating 
investments to low-income municipalities and their poor communities with a focus on improving 
service delivery, cost recovery, the financial management capacity of local governments; and 
Page  2
public accountability/community participation. The supplemental loan will finance a subset of 
the same municipalities which participated in the CDP (poorest municipalities). Requests for 
community investment financing were made in the past one year period by participating 
municipalities and could not be financed under the original loan due to limited availability of 
financing.  The supplemental loan would finance the pipeline of subprojects that were unable to 
be financed under the existing CDP loan. This pipeline of projects would be selected for the 
supplemental loan financing in coordination and cooperation with the Regional Development 
Agencies.  
 
Component 1-Performance Based Grant Agreements:  
 
The proposed operation would provide grants as a mechanism to target non revenue generating 
investments to low-income municipalities and their poor communities with a focus on improving 
service delivery, cost recovery, the financial management capacity of local governments; and 
public accountability/community participation. The supplemental loan will finance a subset of 
the same municipalities which participated in the CDP (poorest municipalities). These requests 
for community investment financing were made in the past one year period by participating 
municipalities and could not be financed under the original loan due to limited availability of 
financing.  The supplemental loan would finance the pipeline of subprojects that were unable to 
be financed under the existing CDP loan. This pipeline of projects would be selected for the 
supplemental loan financing in coordination and cooperation with the Regional Development 
Agencies of municipalities whose Board members are the local communities.  
 
Component 2-Institutional Capacity Building:  
 
The project would increase the capacity of municipalities to improve service delivery through 
technical assistance and training. Capacity for municipalities would be developed in the areas of 
participatory inclusive procedures such as citizens score cards. This component will be 
implemented in close partnership with the World Bank Institute.  
 
Component 3-Project Implementation:  
 
The project implementation arrangements would remain the same as for the CDP. In the 
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBH) the project would continue to be implemented 
through ODRAZ Foundation while in Republika Srpska (RS) it would continue to be 
implemented by the Development Employment Fund (DEF).  The project partners would 
continue to be the poorest municipal governments in BiH and citizens and the identification of 
projects to be financed will be done in cooperation with five regional development agencies.  
 
The Fiduciary arrangements have performed well under the project and are rated as 
Satisfactory. The two foundations ODRAZ and DEF were responsible for the financial 
management and procurement under the project and for supervising and monitoring all activities 
financed under the project. Both Foundations were audited annually--and audit reports were 
submitted to the Bank. The project is under the supervision of Bank's FMS.  To ensure that 
project safeguards were met the Bank reviewed 100 percent of projects financed by IDA for 
social and for procurement clearances.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The project will be implemented nationally through  ODRAZ Foundation in the FBH and DEF in 
the RS in partnership with a subset of the 88 municipalities involved in the original project. 
These municipalities are located in both entities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project is a supplemental loan for additional financing for a financing gap.  The Borrower's 
capacity to implement the project is high.  
 
The project supports reconstruction and rehabilitation work the procedures for identifying, 
appraising, implementing and monitoring of such work are laid out in the operations manuals.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maniza B. Naqvi (ECSHD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/07/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project is an FI category and will not require safeguard related studies. The project 
implementation duration is 18 months of additional financing for an ongoing operation under 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
which environmental issues have not arise. However, an environmental screening process is 
in place for each project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maniza B. Naqvi 
10/24/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
10/24/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
10/24/2006 
Comments:   
