                                                                                                                                                                                                           43699


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 05/18/2007                                        Report No.: AC2915
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Bosnia and Herzegovina                  Project ID: P101213
                                                                                                            Project Name: Agriculture and Rural Development Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Rita E. Cestti
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2007         Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: ECSSD                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                          Authorized
                                                                                                                                                             Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (65%);Agricultural extension and
                                                                                                            research (20%);Central government administration (15%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Other
                                                                                                            rural development (S);Rural markets (S);Rural non-farm income generation (S)

                                              Public                                                        IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):             21.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                     9.18
                                                    Authorized                                                      SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA)                   6.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          15.18
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                            Simple []             Repeater []
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)             Yes [ ]      No [X]

                                                                        Public                              2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The Project Development Objective is to assist BiH to strengthen the capacity of its
                                                                                                            State-level and Entity-level institutions to deliver more efficient and effective agricultural
                                                                                                            services and support programs as well as to make a substantial contribution to an
                                                                                                            acceleration of BiH's eligibility to access support under the European Union Instrument
                                                                                                            for Pre-Accession Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD).

                                                                              Authorized                    3. Project Description
                                                                                                            Component A: Agricultural Information and Institutional Capacity Building (Total Cost:
                                                                                                             12.83 million, IDA 6.70 million, SIDA 1.70 million, GoBiH 4.42 million).

                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                             This component will support the Entity-level Ministries of Agriculture as well as the
                                                                                                            various State-level agencies serving both Entities to fulfill their respective mandates as
                                                                                                  Public    planning and policy making institutions. A key objective is the harmonization of the
                                                                                                            various activities and functions at the level of both Entities to facilitate the consolidation
                                                                                                            of State-level systems as and when such opportunity arises. This Component will provide
                                                                                                            assistance through the following four sub-components:

 (i) Sub-component A.1. Improving agriculture and rural sector information systems, by
providing long term national consultants at the Entity-level and information technology
hardware and software at State, Entity and municipal level to support an EU Instrument
for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA) financed program for the development of the BiH's
agriculture information structure, based on standardized and EU harmonized methods, to
support sectoral policy and decision making processes. This component will include the
establishment of a secure Wide Area Network for agriculture and rural development
payment information transfer.

 (ii) Sub-component A.2. Strengthening state veterinary, food safety and phytosanitary
services, by further developing the Veterinary Office of BiH (VO), the Administration of
BiH for the Protection of Plant Health (APPH) and the Food Safety Agency of BiH
(FSA), with a view to harmonize and enforce uniform and EU compatible veterinary,
phytosanitary and food safety regulations, standards and controls and animal
identification, movement control and traceability systems. Project inputs will include
technical assistance (TA) and staff capacity building, database development, critical risk
analysis and disease epidemiology studies, development of targeted laboratory services
including Genetic Modified Organisms (GMO) testing, and inspection service,
infrastructure, IT, sampling equipment and transportation resources. Project support in
these areas will be complemented by TA financed by the EU and focused primarily on
institutional capacity building, risk management, laboratory service restructuring and
regulatory reform.

 (iii) Sub-component A.3. Strengthening inspectorate capacity, by strengthening the
Entity-level inspectorate capacity for EU compliant food safety, plant health and animal
health inspection. Under the oversight of MoFTER, its agencies and the FSA, SPS
inspectors would be trained to apply BiH's new food safety, plant health and animal
health laws and regulations and to adopt web-based information and reporting systems.
Government-owned buildings would be upgraded to provide up to 6 Regional Inspection
Centers in each Entity to accommodate core inspection capacities, with each Center
having its own intranet and vehicle pool together with IT service managers. In the FBiH,
similar support would be provided to Canton Inspectorates.

 (iv) Sub-component A.4. Strengthening agricultural extension services, through the
development of pluralistic, participatory, market-driven and results-oriented extension
programs at the Entity-level; the establishment of Extension Departments for policy and
budgetary control and contracting of existing agencies or institutions to develop
extension strategies and manage extension delivery; and the provision of incremental
funding for the extension service delivery, including contracted services. Project inputs
will include national and international TA and staff capacity building, office and IT
equipment, vehicles and co-financing for extension service delivery and its monitoring.

 Component B: Enhanced Agriculture and Rural Development Support Program (Total
Cost: 12.94 million, IDA 8.82 million, SIDA 2.74 million, GoBiH 2.18 million)

 The 2006 budgets of the two Entities included about 13.4 million for the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and 18.6 million for the Republika Srpska (RS) for
agricultural support programs, and these figures are set to increase in the next few years.
At present, most of the assistance concerns market support measures linked to specific
agricultural products, with milk and tobacco payments absorbing a large share of total
subsidies. The impacts of the agriculture support programs are undermined by weak
systems for the targeting and administrating of incentives and grants. This Component
will provide assistance to address these constraints through the following three sub-
components:

 (i) Sub-component B.1. Strengthening rural development program planning and
coordination, by supporting the establishment of a Rural Development Coordination Unit
within the Sector for Agriculture, Food, Forestry and Rural Development under MoFTER
for playing an effective role in liaising with the EU on agriculture and rural development
policies and programs in BiH and in decision-making coordination. Project inputs will
include payment system infrastructure including minor civil works, office and computing
systems, IT equipment and supporting software, secure communications systems,
equipment, furniture, vehicles, and staff capacity building.

 (ii) Sub-component B.2. Strengthening the systems for providing rural development
payments, by building a harmonized, efficient, transparent, and by Project-end, EU
IPARD compliant rural development support program and Entity-level farm and
entitlement registries and paying systems including State-level data coordination and
reporting systems and a secure communications system. This sub-component will provide
needed investments and TA for: (a) strengthening the Entity-level Ministry Departments
responsible for rural development grant administration; (b) progressively developing and
introducing an EU IPARD compliant administration and fiduciary system for agriculture
and rural development payments; and (c) support the preparation of an operational
manual for rural development grants program.

 (iii) Sub-component B.3. Increasing investment grants for target objectives and areas, by
providing incremental funds (totaling about 3.1 million for each Entity) to be disbursed
by Entity-level Ministries as grants for specific objectives, including encouraging
innovation, community/collective action and income diversification. Investment priorities
and counterpart contributions will be guided by the national agriculture and rural
development framework presently being developed with TA from the EU.

 Component C: Project Coordination, Administration and Monitoring (Total Cost: 1.04
million, IDA 0.83 million, GoBiH 0.2 million)

 This component will build capacity within FBiH MoAWMF and RS MoAFWM and
within the SAFFRD under MoFTER to coordinate, administrate, monitor and evaluate
the Project. It will support the establishment of the Project Coordination Units (PCUs)
within MoFTER, FBiH MoAWMF and RS MoAFWM. Project support will include:
salaries and fees of PCU staff and specialized expertise, office equipment, furniture,

vehicle, fiduciary training, financial and environmental audits, and incremental
operational costs.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Rural space countrywide.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Rita E. Cestti (LCSEN)
   Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The overall environmental impact of the Project is expected to be limited. Activities
under Component A that are expected to have environmental implications include the
rehabilitation and/or refurbishing of laboratory facility and disposal of laboratory waste.
Another Project activity, which could have some environmental impacts, is strengthening
of agriculture extension services, if the strengthened extension services promote use of
pesticide use. Under Component B (Enhanced Agricultural and Rural Development
Support Program), the Project will finance rural development grants for target rural
development measures. Both the rural development measures and rural development
grants will be guided by the unified Rural Development Plan currently under preparation.
Beneficiaries for the rural development grants will include farmers, agro-business and
cooperatives registered in each Entity's farm register or client register, which
establishment will be supported by the Project.

 Procedures and rules for the allocation of grants will be set forth in each Entity Rural
Development Operational Manual, which will be prepared during the first year of Project
implementation and will be submitted for Bank's approval. The range of eligible
investments to be supported by the Bank has not been identified yet, but is expected to
consist of on-farm improvements that will be within the boundaries of existing farms.

These activities will not require land acquisition or involuntary resettlement.
Furthermore, the Project will support investments that qualify for Environmental
Categories B and C, which are not expected to result in changes in land use.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and the accompanying
Environmental Management Plan, which considers the status of the pest management
operational policy, has been prepared and adopted by the Recipient. The Environmental
Management Plan is an integral part of the Operational Manual for the Project. The EMF
identifies mitigation measures to address environmental impacts of activities under
Component A, and proposes recommendations for identifying and addressing potential
environmental impacts that could result from possible on-farm investments to be
supported by the rural development grants under Component B. Compliance with the
EMF will ensure that the overall Project does not cause adverse consequences for the
environment.

 Rural development measures to be supported under Component B (Enhanced
Agricultural and Rural Development Support Program) will not entail land acquisition or
involuntary resettlement.

 The EMF also identifies institutional responsibilities for its implementation and presents
public consultation and disclosure activities. Since the Project will move away from a
stand-alone Project Implementation Units, the EMF calls for the strengthening of the
capacity of the Project implementing institutions, namely, MoFTER, FBiH MoWMF and
RS MoAFWM and for conducting independent environmental audits on an annual basis.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are State-level and Entity-level institutions as well as agriculture
producers, agro-processing firms in both Entity, agriculture associations and other NGOs.

 During project preparation, focus groups were held with key project stakeholders,
namely, agricultural producers, agricultural associations, representatives of regional
development agencies, representatives from the chambers of commerce and other
nongovernmental organizations in RS and FBiH. Participants expressed differing
perspectives on the extent to which certain organizations represent agricultural producers'
interests and the degree of cooperation. In both Entities, one of the conclusions from the

focus groups was the difficulty for the government in determining appropriate
interlocutors among the various associations, given the lack of a unified voice or
representational mechanisms. The Project will support a rural forum/network as a means
to foster dialogue between the government and the various producer associations on
agriculture and rural development issues.

 Public consultations of the Draft EMF took place in Sarajevo and Banja Luka between
April 16/17, 2007. The outline of the EMF was posted in the web-site of the Entity-level
Ministries of Agriculture.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     04/18/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 04/16/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  04/18/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Pest Management Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     04/18/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 04/16/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  04/18/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The EMF considers the relevance of the pest management operational policy and
identifies measures to mitigate possible environmental impacts associated with the
strengthening of extension services in case they encourage the increased use of
pesticides.



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)            No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the            Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                       Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                      No

  If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or N/A
  SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
  project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                              Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                  Ms Rita E. Cestti                            04/24/2007
Environmental Specialist:          Ms Rita E. Cestti                            04/24/2007
Social Development Specialist      Ms Paula F. Lytle                            04/24/2007
Additional Environmental and/or    Mr Aleksandar Nacev                          04/24/2007
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Ronald N. Hoffer
 Comments: Project delegated to TTL.
Sector Manager:                    Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead                     04/24/2007
 Comments:

