Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2714 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/01/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Botswana 
Project ID: P102368 
Project Name: Botswana Integrated Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: Supee Teravaninthorn 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (60%);General transportation sector (20%);Aviation 
(10%);Railways (10%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
68.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Given the sector vision, the development objective of the project is to assist the Government of 
Botswana to take the first bold step in revamping/ modernizing its entire transport system.   It 
aims to start with enhancing its system efficiency in order to eventually take up the challenge of 
its ambitious vision by positioning itself to be the feeder hub for South Africa.  The proposed 
project aims to provide the necessary capacity building and the infrastructure improvement 
which will, in turn, increase its competitive edge required for opening up the opportunity for 
export diversification.  It would open up employment opportunity in non-state sector, balance the 
income distribution to benefit the disadvantaged group of population, improve the poverty 
indicators in line with the (Millennium Development Goals) MDGs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project seeks to achieve the above mentioned sector development objectives, over a period 
of 7-10 years, through two-prong investment approach: (a) major technical assistance focusing 
on capacity building and institutional strengthening; and (b) physical improvements through 
implementation of the selected civil works components.  As the proposed operation will be the 
Page  2
first lending to Botswana after 20 years hiatus, there is a need for several technical 
improvements.  This is reflected in the rather substantive capacity building and Technical 
Assistant (TA) component.  Among the major TA activities are the preparation of a series of 
studies to identify roles of transport sector in the Regional Integration Vision of Botswana; the 
National Multimodal Transport Master Plan inclusive of Gaborone and Francistown; the 
intermodel (road-rail) planning to effectively transform the north-south corridor of the country 
(A1 corridor) an international corridor of southern Africa.  The physical investment/civil work 
component aim to introduce, on a pilot scale, the performance-based asset management contracts 
on about 800km of primary road network close to Gaborone area around the southeastern part of 
the country.  This is the first step to the public-private participation in infrastructure (PPI) in the 
transport sector.  It will also include the feasibility study for the infrastructure improvement of a 
few urban road sections in Gaborone and its peripheral areas that are already heavily congested.  
The diagram below shows the conceptual framework and scope of the proposed project:   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The physical investment component of the project will support the roads sub-sector 
(rehabilitation and maintenance). The investments will be done on primary road networks 
administered by the Ministry of Transport and Work (civil works), and a few urban roads 
administered by the Local Government (feasibility study).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The country's legislation and regulatory framework for environmental protection includes the 
Environmental Act (2005), the technical Guidelines for Planning and Environmental Impacts 
Assessment of Road Infrastructure (2001); the regulations and technical guidelines for 
Environmental Impact Assessment (2006). The framework for land acquisition and 
compensation includes the Tribal Land Act (1968), and the Compensation Guidelines (revised 
2004), which specifically requires the preparation of a separate document called a Compensation 
Report along with the EIA, in cases of involuntary land acquisition.  A gap analysis of the 
country systems against the World Bank policies on environmental protection and involuntary 
resettlement indicates that it is robust and appropriate for the nature and scope of the project's 
activities.  Furthermore, these laws and regulations are fully enforced by an independent agency, 
the Department of Environmental Affairs, which is part of the Ministry of Environment, 
Wildlife, and Tourism. The issue of encroachment and management of the road reserves is 
regulated by the Section 101 of the Road Traffic Act, and its enforcement by the Departments of 
Road is secured through clear judicial procedures.  
 
The Department of Roads (DR) is one of the lead governmental agencies who use EAs as 
decision-making tools, and implement EMPs as part of project preparation and civil works 
execution.  The DR had also recruited an environmental expert in 2006 to ensure that in-house 
capacity is maintained.  A strategic plan to strengthen both environmental and social 
management in the country is being pursued by the Government under the technical guidance of 
the Department of Environmental Affairs.  The main issue noted by the Department of 
Environmental Affair is the small pool of environmental and social management specialist in 
country, and the relative lack of capacity of national consultants to carry out proper 
environmental impact assessments.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Some of the proposed physical works may potentially have negative environmental impacts.  
An ESMF will be prepared according to national and Bank guidelines.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The ESMF will identify any affected natural habitats, if any.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The ESMF will identify any potential for affecting physical cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
review of the country laws and regulations for land acquisition and compensation was 
conducted by the project team during project identification. Their main findings were that the 
country system was very much consistent with World Bank policy and well adapted to the scope 
of the proposed project activities.  A resettlement policy  framework presenting the country 
system and describing how it will be applied and monitored during project execution will be 
prepared and disclosed in-country and at InfoShop prior to project appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/03/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The resettlement policy framework (RPF) for implementing and monitoring the country 
system policy and procedures on land acquisition and compensation will be prepared and 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
disclosed prior to project appraisal.  The Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to project Appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
02/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/22/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/22/2007 
Comments:   
