Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2871 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P086341 
Project Name: BR GEF Rio Grande do Sul Biodiversity 
Task Team Leader: Michael G. Carroll 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 6, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
2.10
6.10 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to advance the conservation and restoration of 
biodiversity in the state's  
 
grassland ecosystem through integrating biodiversity conservation within the productive 
landscape. The Project objective will be achieved through:  
 
a) Promoting actions that assist farmers restore and maintain priority areas for biodiversity 
conservation, where ecosystem fragility and threats to biodiversity occur;  
 
b)
Conserving biodiversity by strengthening the implementation of public policies that enhance 
the development of improved management systems and production practices, including creating 
awareness and building capacity; and  
 
c)Securing the functions, dynamics and evolution of threatened ecosystems and endemic 
species.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project would be funded through a GEF grant with co-financing from the Rio 
Grande do Sul State Government. Given the geographic and conceptual overlap and similarities 
the project would complement the RS Integrated Regional Development project currently under 
preparation. The planned project duration is 5 years and the total cost is projected to be US$ 11.1 
million of which US$ 5.0 million would be financed from the GEF and the remaining US$ 6.1 
million would be financed by the RS State Government. The funding from the Government will 
be $ 4.0 from the biodiversity Conservation Fund (medidas compensatorias) as financial 
contribution, $2.1 million from the partially blended IBRD financed RS Integrated Regional 
Development project. The proposed project is broadly coordinated by the Secretary of Planning 
and Management of the State in close cooperation with three other key biodiversity institutions, 
the RS Zoobotanical Foundation (FZB), the RS Rural Technical Assistance Agency (EMATER), 
and the State Foundation for Environmental Protection (FEPAM). The Project would consist of 
four components:  
 
Component 1: Sectoral Integration and Sustainable Use  
 
With an estimated contribution 40% of total cost, this component is designed to incorporate 
biodiversity protection into the main productive sectors of Rio Grande do Sul's economy and to 
ensure sustainability of interventions by integrating them with broader community development 
of local communities living in areas of relevance for biodiversity conservation while investing in 
securing protection of conservation units in the Pampas. In particular, this component would 
establish a set of Conservation Practices that could be used to ensure productive systems 
optimize their contributions to sustaining both biodiversity conservation and community 
development. These practices could include reducing the introduction of exotic wild species; 
directly supporting regeneration of native vegetation and natural ecosystems; encouraging 
targeted use of agrochemicals and integrated pest management approaches; and targeting the use 
of natural resources management within rural households. Other project interventions would 
include a series of ?on-the-ground? instruments (demonstration areas, TA and extension services, 
and small pilot areas) to promote the adoption of more biodiversity friendly practices and 
production systems.  These would be complemented with support to public agencies involved in 
extension (training of extensionist on biodiversity mainstreaming), adaptive research (testing and 
dissemination of new practices), and licensing and regulation (studies on improved policies, 
incentives, and procedures and criteria for licensing).  
 
The component is composed of three main sub-components, a) preparing and implementing 
conservation practices and experiences; b) implementing subprojects of biodiversity 
conservation and use; and c) improving the infrastructure of conservation units by using 
resources of the biodiversity Conservation Fund (medidas compensatorias). In the first sub-
component there are 28 demonstration units about use and conservation of biodiversity, these are 
associated to income generation and integrated for the dissemination with the rural producers, 
among these are proposed capybara raising, natural grasslands management, agro-forestal 
systems, ecological agriculture, etc.. In the second sub-component the projects seek to promote 
and implement productive activities which are compatible with the sustainable use and 
conservation of the native biodiversity with a target of 2,000 rural properties within the 
municipalities defined by the project. There are already 19 practices identified in this stage. In 
the third sub-component the funds will be determined by the government to improve 
conservation capacity of established conservation units in the Pampas.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Threat Reduction  
 
With an estimated contribution of 35% of total costs, this component would provide the basis 
for removing the causes of biodiversity loss and specific threats to ecosystems in the state's 
productive areas. It would do this by promoting both activities that reduce ecosystem fragility 
and activities that reduce specific threats to certain species (including species that are endemic, 
rare, threatened with extinction and of economic, medicinal or scientific interest) located in areas 
surrounding Conservation Units, and other refuges for such species. This component would also 
remove threats by actively disseminating information to different segments of society about the 
relevance of biodiversity conservation to their livelihoods. Activities under this component 
involve actions to remove causes of biodiversity loss and the specific threats to the ecosystems 
and natural communities occurring in the productive areas of the state, this would be 
accomplished through the preparation and implementation of actions plans with a focus in 
education and dissemination of biodiversity conservation.  
 
The component is has two sub-components: a) protection and conservation of threatened 
species and areas to promote corrective measures in areas with reduced environmental quality, 
and b) education and dissemination to respond to a lack of biodiversity information. Activity 
areas and priority demands were determined by ecosystem fragility, presence of threatened 
species, vicinities of conservation units, etc. Each activity will be included in a monitoring 
system. The first sub-component would elaborate and implement 7 action plans in areas or 
species identified. In the second sub-component environmental education will be developed as a 
cross-cutting theme to create awareness about biodiversity and its conservation. Financial 
resources from the Biodiversity Conservation Fund are also expected to contribute in this 
component.  
 
Component 3:  Biodiversity Management  
 
With an estimated contribution of 15% of total costs, this component would produce actions 
and instruments, including research and knowledge generation, to enable improved biodiversity 
management.  This includes the generation of knowledge in important biodiversity areas, the 
dissemination of the concept of environmental services, the management of alien exotic species 
and the preparation of management tools, specifically the implementation of a biodiversity-based 
GIS.  Futhermore, activities under this component include definition of a monitoring system, 
preparation of the economic-ecological zoning, development of strategies for private land 
stewardship initiatives and incentives for using practices of biodiversity conservation. It would 
integrate its work with actions being developed through other State Government projects, such as 
the Geographic Information System and the environmental monitoring network and would 
consist of two sub-components aimed at a) generating information for biodiversity conservation 
through production and dissemination of knowledge (rapid ecological assessments and corridor 
strategies to consolidate the State System of Conservation Units and elaboration of models for 
economic valuing of biodiversity management) and b) developing and facilitating tools for 
biodiversity management through implementation of actions for conservation (GIS-based 
monitoring, zoning and improvement of the environmental licensing, and the certification system 
for biodiversity products).  
 
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management  
Page  4
With an estimated contribution of 10% of total Project costs, this component would strengthen 
institutions and provide appropriate training for operational and managerial staff in the various 
state agencies to ensure proper project implementation and to guarantee sustainability of the 
project?s impacts after the end of implementation. This component would work at the macro-
level to reduce the problems of lack of resources in the public sector connected to biodiversity 
and would be divided into two components: a) Institutional Strengthening, mainly to increase the 
capacity of each institution to consider biodiversity conservation within its activities; and b) 
Project Management, which includes the set of actions needed for coordination of the project?s 
activities, including establishing the Project Unit with staff and operational procedures and 
developing and implementing a system that allows monitoring evaluation and follow-up.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil (southern state)   
 
E.  Borro
wer’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutions from the government of RS involved in this project are the institutions in charge 
of environmental and biodiversity management in the State. Brazilian laws and the State laws 
regarding environmental management are sound and practices in the State are adequate as 
experienced in the RS Rural and the recently completed Environmental Assessment of the Rio 
Grande do Sul Integrated Regional Development Project. The Secretary of the Environment 
(SEMA) is an integral part of the project implementation team.  Activities especially in 
component 1 to be implemented by EMATER in rural properties will be supported by SEMA. 
SEMA has proposed to create a special agreement for environmental licensing of project 
activities when working with natural resources.  As part of project preparation a comprehensive 
Operational Manual will be drafted, including a specific section on environmental screening of 
project activities as well as institutional arrangements for implementation of the Environmental 
Assessment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Angel Alberto Yanosky (LCSAR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Screening of project activities as well as institutional arrangements for 
implementation of the EA and EMP will be included in a comprehensive Operational Manual.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Subject to EA?s confirmation, it is expected that no natural habitats-related mitigation 
activities would be required.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
n/a   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Since the PCN was drafted government endorsement for GEF funding reduced the size of the 
grant therefore forcing the state to reduce the project area.  Most likely project activities will be 
limited to extensive grazing areas where no use of chemicals is practiced or envisages. As such 
and subject to revision at pre-appraisal we think OP4.09 will not be triggered.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
n/a   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The project preparation team is currently undertaking an assessment of indigenous 
population in the new project area.  Based on current information we do not envisage that the 
project would trigger OP. 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
This matter was discussed with SAT at PCN stage.  We do not expect that restrictions in 
access    to resources will be a project issue.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
n/a   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
n/a   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
n/a   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/10/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/20/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TBD.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael G. Carroll 
10/31/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
