Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/17/2007 
Report No.:  AC2966
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P006553 
Project Name:  BR - INTEGRATED WATER MANAGEMENT IN METROPOLITAN 
SAO PAULO 
Task Team Leader:  Martin P. Gambrill 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 31, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 11, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Pollution management and environmental 
health (P);Land administration and management (P);Access to urban services and 
housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
129.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
152.80
152.80 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objectives of the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program are (i) to protect and 
maintain the quality and reliability of MRSPs water resources and potable water sources; 
(ii) to improve the quality of life of the poor populations residing in key targeted urban 
river basins in MRSP; and (iii) to strengthen institutional capacity and improve 
metropolitan management and coordination in MRSP in water resources management, 
water pollution control, land-use policy and basic service provision.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Mananciais Horizontal APL Program is designed to respond to the land-use, water 
resources, environmental and social challenges described above by providing a vehicle 
which brings together State and municipal government interventions designed to reverse 
the deterioration in the headwaters (manancial) water bodies, improve land-use planning 
and control, increase the living conditions of the peri-urban poor residing in the reservoir 
basins, and strengthen and consolidate metropolitan institutional capacity in these fields. 
Page  2
It will do so by building on the experience and the lessons learned from the predecessor 
Bank-financed Guarapiranga Program.  
 
The strategy adopted for the design of the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program and the 
content of its components considered the following design aspects: (i) the need for an 
integrated approach involving a number of public entities from both the State and 
municipal governments in the metropolitan region, as well as involving the Alto Tiete 
river basin committee and its respective sub-basin committees; (ii) the importance of 
institutional capacity building, of the refining of public policies, and of overarching 
coordination, in order to deal with metropolitan wide challenges; (iii) the prioritization of 
investments in basic urban environmental infrastructure such as water supply and 
wastewater systems, and the management of drainage and solid waste; (iv) the 
urbanization of informal/irregular settlements and slums in MRSP s key river basins; and 
(v) the importance of investments in water quality monitoring and evaluation, in research 
and diagnoses of tropical reservoir behavior and other key questions addressed by the 
Program, and in improving the technology and processes in water treatment plants.  
 
The interventions under the respective components of the Program, described in more 
detail in Annex 4 of the PAD, were identified by adopting the following analytical 
methodology: the current land-use patterns in the two mostly highly urbanized reservoir 
basins, Guarapiranga and Billings (where three-quarters of the Program s resources will 
be invested), were mapped and loaded into a land-use/water quality computer-based 
mathematical model (MQUAL 2.0). This model was then used to identify the major 
pollution sources in the two reservoirs. There was a very strong correlation identified 
between the highly urbanized areas of the basins, in general, and pollution load and 
between the informal and densely occupied areas of the basin, more specifically, and the 
pollution rates. The mapping also identified the pockets of poverty in these two basins 
and established their correlation with pollution loads. This mapping and modeling 
exercise of land-use, pollution loads and poverty rates was then used as a basis to identify 
and prioritize the types of physical intervention to be undertaken in the two basins: water 
supply; wastewater collection and treatment; solid waste management and disposal; 
drainage; urban upgrading; social inclusion interventions; and leisure areas and parks.  
 
As identified under the mapping and modeling exercise, the Program will undertake 
physical interventions in urban environmental infrastructure and urban upgrading with a 
prioritization of activities in those MRSP river basins that are already heavily urbanized 
and degraded (Guarapiranga and Billings), as well as initiating actions in those basins 
that are further from the city center but also witnessing similar pressure of informal 
urbanization (in order to help them get  - ahead of the curve-  with regard to land-use 
planning and water pollution control and thus not become the Guarapiranga and Billings 
of the next generation) - namely, the Alto Tiete-Cabeceiras, the Juqueri-Cantareira, and 
the Alto and Baixo Cotia basins. Under the leadership of GESP, the Program will also 
support strategic activities to promote the sustainability of the interventions as well as to 
promote metropolitan wide management and coordination, including:  
 
Page  3
The Horizontal APL has been organized into four components: (i) Institutional Capacity 
Building; (ii) Urban Integration; (iii) Environmental Protection and Recovery; and (iv) 
Integrated Water Supply and Sanitation - the last component incorporates activities 
related to a broader concept of integrated water supply and sanitation, as described in the 
recently-approved Federal WSS Law (11.445/2007), namely: water supply, sanitation, 
drainage, and solid waste management. A summary of the Program s costs by component 
is given in the following table; a more detailed description of the components and their 
activities is presented in Annex 4.  
 
Table 1 - Program Costs by Component  
 
1. 
Component 1 - Institutional Capacity Building (US$ 32.93 million total, 
US$12.63 million loan). To achieve the objectives of the Mananciais Horizontal APL 
Program and to ensure its long term sustainability, an Institutional Capacity Building 
component has been designed to support GESP and the other executing agencies by 
strengthening their institutional capacity and promoting improved metropolitan 
management and coordination with regard to the key metropolitan challenges of water 
resources management, water pollution control, land-use policy, and basic service 
provision. The component will support the following activities: (i) improved integrated 
land-use and water resources management; (ii) environmental and water quality 
monitoring; (iii) environmental education and social outreach; and (iv) Program 
management, monitoring, evaluation and dissemination.  
 
2. 
Component 2 - Urban Integration (US$ 102.23 million total, US$ 12.54 million 
loan). The component s objectives are to improve the standards and layouts of urban 
occupation in the targeted basins and improve the quality of life of the residents of these 
basins, especially the low-income communities living in informal settlements. 
Component 2 will support the following activities: (i) Urbanization of slums and irregular 
settlements; (ii) Recuperation of high-risk and degraded areas; (iii) Involuntary 
resettlement; (iv) Preparation  of housing plans; (v) Environmental and urban layout 
standardization of settlements; and (vi) Socio-environmental supervision for urban 
upgrading and housing interventions.  
 
3. 
Component 3 - Environmental Protection and Recovery (US$ 24.83 million total, 
US$ 17.65 million loan). The component s objectives are to protect and recover natural 
habitats and environmentally sensitive and degraded areas in the sub-basins with a view 
to improving environmental quality. Component 3 will support the following activities: 
(i) Revegetation and reforestation; (ii) Urbanization of public areas with creation of green 
and leisure spaces for common use; (iii) Establishment of environmentally protected 
areas; (iv) Rehabilitation and protection of reservoirs and water production systems; and 
(iv) Control of the transportation of hazardous substances in the region.  
 
4. 
Component 4 - Integrated Water Supply and Sanitation (US$ 115.56 million total, 
US$ 84.90 million loan). The component s objectives are to reverse the main factors that 
contribute to the pollution of the reservoirs and to provide integrated WSS services to the 
poor. Component 4 will support the following activities: (i) Wastewater management 
Page  4
improvements; (ii) Water supply system improvements; and (iii) Solid waste 
management improvements..  
 
The proposed Mananciais Horizontal APL Program will be implemented as a series of 
loans under a Horizontal APL umbrella program, implemented over a six-year period. 
The participants under the Horizontal APL will be: the State Government of Sao Paulo 
(GESP); the State Water Utility (SABESP); and the municipal governments of Sao Paulo 
(PMSP), Sao Bernardo do Campo (PMSBC) and Guarulhos (PMG). PMSP will be a co-
financier of the APL, while the remaining participants will all be borrowers under four 
individual Specific Investment Loans.  The Program s borrowers, and the co-financer, 
will not each be undertaking all of the activities listed above under the four Program 
components. Nor will each of the activities be carried out in all of the sub-basins of the 
MRSP. The table in Annex 4 presents the component activities and shows which 
executing agency will be undertaking them in which sub-basins.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The areas of intervention of the Program are the reservoirs/sub-basins located within the 
Sao Paulo Metropolitan Region, in the Alto Tiete river basin, that are used for providing 
public water supply to the city, namely: Billings, Guarapiranga, Alto Tiete-Cabeceiras, 
Juqueri-Cantareira and Alto and Baixo Cotia. The entire surface area of the Alto Tiete 
basin - 5985 km2 - virtually coincides with the physical limits of the Sao Paulo 
Metropolitan Region; it is a heavily urbanized river basin, comprising 35 municipalities 
containing 17.7 million people.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed Program has received an Environmental Category A rating in accordance 
with the corresponding safeguard policies. The Mananciais Horizontal APL Program 
triggers the following safeguards: OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment); OP 4.04 
(Natural Habitats); OP 11.03 (Protection of Physical Cultural Resources), OP 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlements); and OP 4.37 (Safety of Dams). These policies are addressed 
in detail in the Program s Environmental Assessment Report.  The following are 
highlights of the items addressed in the EIA report under each of the safeguards.  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) A regional strategic environmental assessment 
was prepared by the Borrower in conjunction with the State Secretariat for the 
Environment. The infrastructure interventions will generate temporary negative 
environmental impacts during their respective construction periods, even in those cases 
where the interventions are intended to mitigate existing areas of degradation and risk. It 
will therefore be necessary to adhere to the appropriate criteria and procedures contained 
in the EIA report s Environmental Manual for Construction. The environmental impacts 
of the Program works interventions are duly described in the EIA report and summarized 
in Annex 10 for each executing agency. The list includes a group of activities, studies and 
programs to mitigate, attenuate and/or counteract the negative impacts caused by the 
implementation of the civil works, as well as highlighting the expected positive effects of 
the interventions. These activities are also presented in the respective annexes of the EIA 
report itself and in the Environmental Management Plans of each executing agency.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) Category 1 and Permanent Preservation Areas (APPs) are 
located along the banks of the reservoirs and the watercourses which are targeted under 
the Program. These contain a number of stretches which have been degraded by irregular 
urban occupation, including poorly-constructed dwellings. They also contain a number of 
conservation areas as well as other areas that could be recuperated. The interventions in 
these areas will focus on relocating families, and subsequent environmental and 
landscape recuperation of the degraded area in question. In the case of partially degraded 
areas or those that are still preserved, the strategy will be to protect and preserve them 
with actions to recuperate and establish a number of parks (including linear parks on the 
banks of the Billings Reservoir).  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for 
guiding the involuntary resettlement to be carried out under the Program has been 
prepared in accordance with Bank guidelines and safeguards. The Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs) for each Program intervention that entails resettlement will be prepared 
together with the engineering designs during Program implementation. Each RAP will be 
sent to the Bank for review and clearance before the associated civil works contract is 
signed.  
 
Page  6
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37) The Mananciais Horizontal APL Program foresees 
dredging/desilting works in three of the reservoirs currently used as part of MRSP s water 
supply system, namely the Isolina Superior and Isolina Inferior reservoirs in the Cotia 
system, and the Paiva Castro reservoir in the Cantareira system. These dredging/desilting 
works are programmed to take place only after the second year of Program 
implementation. The reservoirs are formed by small dams in two of the cases (Isolina 
Superior and Isolina Inferior), and by a large dam in the other case (Paiva Castro, which 
is 22 meters high). During the preparation of the engineering designs for the 
dredging/desilting interventions for the Paiva Castro dam, the need for an evaluation of 
the security of the dam will also be analyzed by the Bank in conformity with OP 4.37.  
 
Protection of Physical Cultural Resources (OP 11.03) The Program will include 
construction and excavation activities to expand and replace infrastructure, therefore the 
SEA included screening for any known cultural property in the Program area and 
incorporated chance find  procedures in the event that culturally significant resources are 
discovered during implementation. In addition, Brazil has a well-developed legislative 
and normative framework, which is under the oversight of the National Institute for 
Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Main positive environmental long term impacts expected from the Program:  
 
-
To maintain operational control of the reservoirs. The main positive environmental 
impact expected is the maintenance of the operational control of the potable water 
reservoirs, by countering the further deterioration of the present water quality of the 
reservoirs and thus ensuring the continued use of the waters as potable supplies for the 
residents of the Sao Paulo Metropolitan Region (MRSP). By way of example, the chart in 
Annex 10 illustrates the expected results of the Program interventions designed to 
preserve and improve the water quality of the Guarapiranga reservoir by controlling the 
phosphorus loads entering it. The non-execution of the Guarapiranga Program would 
almost certainly have led to a substantially more deleterious situation with regards to 
water quality than exists today; to not implement the Mananciais Program would allow 
for the continued deterioration of water quality of Guarapiranga and MRSP s other 
mananciais and associated reservoirs.  
 
-
To improve the water quality of the watercourses that contribute significantly to 
impairing the quality of the reservoirs. Extending the coverage of the wastewater 
collection system in the Guarapiranga and Billings catchments  areas will result in 
improved water quality in the watercourses which flow to the respective reservoirs. The 
Program activities to contribute to this goal include: (i) slum and irregular settlements 
urbanization which will contribute decisively to improving the water quality in these 
watercourses by tying these informal areas into the wastewater, drainage and solid waste 
infrastructure; (ii) urbanization and the resettlement of families living in homes at risk 
from landslides and flooding will also contribute to improving the quality of the urban 
and social occupation in the headwaters basins, and hence the quality of the surrounding 
Page  7
water bodies; (iii) recuperation of degraded areas will contribute to improving water 
quality and to reducing the transportation of sediments and the consequent silting-up of 
the watercourses and thence the reservoirs themselves.  
 
-
To control irregular occupation of the reservoir areas and improve urban land use. The 
Program will achieve this through activities including: (i) the implementation of urban 
parks and the recovery of degraded areas which will help to discourage new irregular 
land occupations, enhance orderly land occupation, and afford better leisure facilities for 
the population; (ii) the implementation of new public spaces and leisure areas which will 
also substantially improve the opportunities for recreation and leisure activities in the 
urbanized slums, the irregular settlements, and along the banks of the reservoirs; ( (iii) 
actions targeted at institutional strengthening, technical and technological capacity-
building and management training, together with improved environmental monitoring 
and inspection, as well as the monitoring of land use and occupation, will contribute to 
better management of the human occupation of the basin, focused especially on 
increasing the control of irregular occupation; and (iv) environmental and sanitary 
promotion campaigns will contribute to awareness building within the communities with 
regard to appropriate land-use development, the importance of connecting to sewer 
systems, appropriate community behavior with regard to solid waste disposal and the use 
of drainage and sewer systems, etc.  
 
The Program will directly benefit approximately 10,000 families with slum 
urbanization, over 18,000 families with interventions to improve urban-environmental 
infrastructure in other low-income settlements, 1,350 families with new housing units, 
over 52,000 families with activities for recuperating high-risk and degraded areas, and 
more than 74,000 inhabitants will receive improved WSS services. In addition, the 
Program will indirectly benefit a wider population residing in the Alto Tiete basin with 
improved waster supply quality and improved environmental conditions of the region s 
water resources.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Among the pressing problems facing MRSP, the region s water supply and demand 
balance is a critical issue for the city s competitiveness and economic growth. MRSP s 
extremely low per capita water availability is comparable to that prevailing in the driest 
areas of the Brazilian Northeast. Half of the city s potable supply is imported from 
neighboring river systems, which is contentious given the demands of other conurbations 
vying for the same water. The remainder comes from headwater-reservoir systems ( 
mananciais ) within MRSP itself. The Guarapiranga and Billings reservoirs make crucial 
contributions, together providing potable water for some 28 percent of MRSP s 
population (or some 5.4 million people). Recent forecasts for the metropolitan region 
indicate that by 2010 there is serious risk of demand outstripping supply ? with such 
projections assuming that MRSP s currently operational mananciais (Guarapiranga, 
Billings and other systems) will remain fully utilized or further expanded. Should 
Guarapiranga and Billings be lost as raw water bodies for the city supply, the next-
nearest sources to replace them are at great distance and could only be brought to MRSP 
Page  8
at multi-billion Real costs, and with considerable environmental impact concerns for the 
development and transmission of these alternative water supplies.  
 
During program preparation, two main evaluations were carried out. The economic 
analysis explored the benefits of the intervention on the water bodies by estimating the 
opportunity cost of the water sources. To determine the net incremental costs and 
benefits, with  and  without  Program scenarios were constructed. In the  without program  
scenario, increasing operation costs related to the use of additional chemical reagents, and 
to the development of alternative potable sources in the future (including their 
incremental operational costs for electricity, chemicals, etc), were compared with the  
with program  scenario which involves considerable investment costs in the first five 
years but lower operational costs.  
 
In addition, an evaluation and comparison of the data of the areas in the basin that 
contribute the most for phosphorus load to the water bodies, plus data of population 
density and poverty in these areas, assisted the program team in better defining the main 
areas and types of interventions that would cause major positive impacts on the quality of 
water of the reservoirs and the watercourses that feed them, as well as positive impacts on 
the quality of life of the basins  resident population.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrowers  capacity to handle safeguard issues is generally good. The State 
Secretariat for Water and Energy (SSE) is leading the preparation of the regional strategic 
environmental assessment, the social assessment and the resettlement policy framework 
for the Program, and doing so in close collaboration with the State Secretariat for the 
Environment and the State Secretariat for Housing. All three secretariats, as well as the 
State Water Company, have considerable experience with World Bank, IDB, JBIC and 
other financers for programs which include environmental and resettlement issues. These 
three secretariats were responsible for the implementation of the Bank-financed 
Guarapiranga program from 1992-2000, with a total cost of US$ 400 million, which 
successfully implemented similar environmental and resettlement activities in the 
Guarapiranga sub-basin.  
 
The proposed activities to be implemented under the Program have been developed 
during preparation to the conceptual level of design. During Program implementation the 
respective interventions will be detailed to the level of preliminary engineering design for 
the civil works interventions and to the levels of final terms of reference for the 
consultancies assignments.  
 
Regarding safeguard policies, an EIA report was prepared, the approach to the 
environmental analysis therefore includes for the undertaking of: (i) an analysis of the 
overall environmental results/impacts anticipated to be attained by the Program s 
interventions; and (ii) a specific environmental analysis of each proposed activity. The 
impact analysis and environmental management plan (EMP) are similarly presented: 
Page  9
firstly, by considering the general impacts of the Program and, secondly, by reviewing 
the specific impacts of each activity.  
 
The environmental assessment undertaken during Program preparation was designed to 
comply with the Bank s environmental and related safeguard policies. These overarching 
and more preliminary analyses will be complemented by the requisite environmental 
impact studies that are an obligatory requirement for applying for environmental licenses, 
in accordance with the environmental legislation of the State of S?o Paulo. In line with 
the strategy developed for Program execution, the environmental impact studies will be 
undertaken during implementation in parallel with, and as an integral part of, the 
preparation of the preliminary engineering designs of the respective interventions.  
 
The corresponding individual environmental impact assessment (EIA) reports will be 
submitted to the Bank for analysis and approval. The  preliminary ,  installation  and  
operational  environmental licenses related to each of the civil works interventions will 
also be submitted to the Bank. Submission to the Bank of the preliminary license for a 
particular intervention will be a condition for the bidding of the corresponding works, and 
submission of the installation license a condition for signature of the associated works 
contract. These implementation conditions will be presented in the respective loan 
agreements. 
 
Besides the EIA report, the borrower also prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework 
and a Social Assessment.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework developed for the Program was designed to guide  
the resettlement process for the families living in risk-prone areas that will be targeted 
with investments under the Program. Activities under Component 2 of the Program 
(Urban Integration) will involve the resettlement of approximately 1,350 families.  
Precise resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be developed in consultation with area 
residents and in conjunction with the technical process of planning the urban 
improvements in each slum and irregular settlement.  Each RAP will be sent to the Bank 
for approval prior to the signature of the corresponding slums upgrading works contract. 
The RPF presents the Program activities generating resettlement and the distribution of 
responsibilities with respect to the resettlement activities.  
 
The RPF also includes (i) principles and objectives governing resettlement preparation 
and implementation; (ii) a description of the process for preparing and approving 
resettlement action plans; (iii) resettlement alternatives to be offered with close attention 
to vulnerable families; (iv) eligibility criteria for defining various categories of displaced 
people; (v) legal framework; (vi) method of valuing assets; (vii) organizational 
procedures for delivery of entitlements; (viii) grievance redress mechanism; (ix) a 
description of arrangements for funding resettlement; (x) a description of mechanisms for 
consultations; and (xi) arrangements for monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Page  10
The Borrower has the capacity to implement safeguard-related issues and the Program 
has the technical assistance and other resources needed to implement appropriate 
mitigatory measures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Besides the state and municipal government entities directly involved in the execution of 
the Program (GESP, SABESP, SSE, SMA, SH/CDHU, PMSBC, PMG, PMSP), the 
social assessment also identified a number of key stakeholders that will participate in the 
Program s implementation, including environmental and social NGOs, and community 
and other associations.  
 
During preparation, a number of consultations and discussions were carried out with the 
Alto Tiete basin committee and agency, and with the basin sub-committees of the 
Juqueri-Cantareira, Tiete-Cabeceiras, Cotia-Guarapiranga, Billings-Tamanduate - and 
Pinheiros-Pirapora sub-basins - including consultation on the terms of reference for the 
EIA. The committee and the subcommittees are composed of representatives of state and 
municipal governments, civil society and academia, amongst others. In addition, a 
number of municipal and local entities and organizations were involved in these 
discussions/consultations. A next round of consultations, following the dissemination of 
the EIA report, was undertaken in June 2007, following the Pre-Appraisal mission. The 
Program design and objectives were endorsed during these consultations.  
 
During preparation and implementation of the engineering designs, especially those 
related to the urbanization of slums and irregular settlements and to the provision of WSS 
and related services, a considerable amount of social participation and feedback is 
anticipated, as was the case during implementation of the Guarapiranga Program. In 
addition, the proposed Program includes for the social overview of civil works 
interventions, as well as for the undertaking of public opinion surveys to register and 
mitigate any unsatisfactory aspects of the Program s interventions.  
 
Component 1 of the Program includes complementary activities that will contribute to 
the strengthening of communication and social participation, including: (i) capacity 
building events for environmental agents; (ii) workshops for community participation; 
(iii) development of educational videos and radio programs and the carrying out of 
environmental education programs for stakeholders; (iv) preparation of environmental 
and social diagnosis for awareness building; (v) the carrying out beneficiary surveys; (vi) 
support to community mobilization, social outreach and other During preparation and 
implementation of the project design, especially the ones related to slum urbanization, 
urban recovery and IWSS activities, the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program included a 
considerable social participation, as was carried out during the Guarapiranga Program.  In 
addition, the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program included the social supervision of 
works after conclusion by carrying out community surveys to improve any unsatisfactory 
results.  
 
Page  11
The distribution of responsibilities concerning the Program s environmental and 
resettlement activities among the different participating institutions is presented in the 
Tables below.  
 
Table 2 -  Distribution of responsibilities among participating institutions for Program s 
environmental activities  
 
Table 3 - Resettlement Activities - Distribution of responsibilities   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
08/23/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/21/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
Yes 
Page  12
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  13
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Martin P. Gambrill 
08/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes 
08/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
09/14/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
08/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr David N. Sislen 
08/27/2007 
Comments:   
