Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3039 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P106702 
Project Name: Integrated Solid Waste Management and Carbon Finance Project 
Task Team Leader: Chandra Shekhar Sinha 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s main objective is to scale-up public and private investments in municipal solid 
waste management treatment and disposal, while ensuring financial and technical viability of 
these projects and reducing their environmental and social impacts. Furthermore, the project will 
mainstream carbon finance in the waste management sector by blending it to the financing 
provided to the sector. The longer term goal is to create models and tools to attract private sector 
participation in final disposal and treatment of municipal solid waste, including carbon finance, 
which can be replicated elsewhere in the country.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is expected to be delivered in separate but integrated components:  
 
Component 1: Infrastructure Investments in Solid Waste Disposal and Treatment  
 
This component will focus on infrastructure investments to improve final waste disposal and 
treatment within comprehensive solid waste management strategies, and to reduce the negative 
environmental and health impacts. The project will assist the cities in the preparation of projects 
and institutional arrangements for private sector investment and operation of landfills. Carbon 
finance opportunities will be assessed and integrated into the solutions. The component is 
Page  2
divided into three sub-components, but contractual arrangements with the private sector might 
include activities in one or more of these sub-components (e.g. one contract to close an existing 
dump and open and operate a sanitary landfill): (i) development and operation of sanitary 
landfills; (ii) closing of open dumps and management of environmental impacts; and, (iii) 
development of alternative waste treatment facilities.  
 
Component 2: Carbon Finance Projects  
 
This component is closely linked to the investments in Component 1 and focuses on exploring 
opportunities for scaling-
up
carbon finance in the solid waste sector. The World Bank’s Carbon 
Finance Unit will help finance the identification and preparation of projects and recuperate the 
investments through the emission reductions sold in the market. This project and individual 
municipal investments might benefit from the Bank’s strategy to bundle and sell carbon 
emissions in the Brazilian market through an auction process (this represents the best alternative 
for a public entity to sell public assets). The Spanish Carbon Fund (SCF) has offered an option at 
this auction to purchase a share of the CERs sold in the market. The auction will guarantee a 
minimum price to pre-finance preparation costs for each municipality. More details on the 
carbon finance aspects of the project are detailed in Annex 1 of the Project Concept Note.  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance and Institutional Strengthening Component  
 
This component is focused on developing an integrated approach to solid waste management at 
the national, state and local level. Regulatory, financial and technical guidelines will be 
developed to enable and encourage private investment to help develop the sector. The component 
is divided into three subcomponents:  
 
(i) 
Comprehensive Strategies for Solid Waste Management. Draw lessons from preparation 
and investments in sub-projects financed under Components1 and 2 and address environmental 
and social issues, develop financial, institutional and regulatory models and incentives for private 
sector participation in service delivery and carbon finance. During project preparation, the 
structure and scope of this component will be discussed with relevant stakeholders, among 
others: Ministerio das Cidades, Ministerio do Meio Ambiente,  Associação Brasileira de 
Empresas Públicas e Resíduos Especiais (ABRELPE), Compromisso Empresarial para 
Reciclagem (CEMPRE).  
 
(ii) 
Technical assistance and strengthening Caixa Econômica Federal’s capacity to invest in 
solid waste and carbon finance projects in Brazil. An important objective of the project 
collaborate to strengthen the institutional capacity of CEF in managing credits and designing 
appropriate lending products for public and private investments in the waste sector and blending 
these with carbon finance projects. Through the project, CEF is expected to play the role of both, 
(i) a financial intermediary for on-lending the IBRD resources to the private and public sector for 
financing the investments described in Component 1 and (ii) an intermediary for delivering 
carbon finance to eligible projects that generate carbon credits as described in Component 2.  
 
(iii) 
Project Management. This component will ensure that a proper management and 
supervision structure is in place to monitor project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The beneficiary municipalities have not yet been selected, though 23 municipalities of 15 states 
and four major regions of Brazil have been identified. The final selection process will be based 
on feasibility studies carried out during project preparation and implementation. Individual 
Environmental Assessments and Resettlement Action Plans (in affected project areas) will be 
devised accordingly.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower, Caixa Econômica Federal (CEF), has experience with Bank safeguards policies 
and routinely undertakes environmental and social assessments as part if its financing process. 
Further equivalence and acceptability analysis of Brazil’s current regulatory framework and 
CEF’s capacity to adhere to and implement Bank’s safeguards policies will be conducted during 
project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSUW) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The main environmental impacts related to solid waste final treatment and disposal can be 
summarized as: (i) health and environmental impacts of accumulated uncollected waste and 
clandestine disposal sites; (ii) health and environmental impacts of solid waste facilities, 
including transfer, composting and landfill facilities; (iii) air emissions from waste collection and 
transfer vehicles.  
 
According to Brazilian Legislation, Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA), 
Environmental Licensing, and appropriate environmental siting investigations will be required 
for all investments in new facilities to avoid, minimize and mitigate potential environmental and 
social impacts. Furthermore, the project will develop strategies to mitigate and prevent long-term 
impacts during operation and closing phases and develop comprehensive strategies to minimize 
waste streams and maximize cost-effective recycling and composting activities.  
 
The project will provide guidance on public participation in siting, facility design, 
operational aspects of solid waste service delivery, and addresses special issues related to waste 
picking and recycling communities.  
 
The scope of the overall Environmental Assessment and required documentation (i.e. 
Environmental Management Plan or Environmental Management Framework) will depend on 
whether, by appraisal, the team has identified the participating municipalities, as well as the sites 
and initial technical designs for facilities to be supported under the project. In addition to an 
overall Environmental Assessment, each sub-project will entail a separate Environmental 
Assessment focused on project-specific issues within the context of the specific legal and 
operational framework.  
 
Environmental Category: FI 
–
Financial Intermediary. It is understood that each su
b
-
project 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
will require attention to safeguard issues at a level equivalent to a Category “A” project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
An important aspect of siting analysis is to prevent impacts on natural habitats and 
ecosystems. The project is unlikely to trigger the policy, however natural habitats issues will be 
screened as part of the Environmental Assessment process and, if necessary, appropriate 
measures will be designed to prevent and reduce potential impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although resettlement will be avoided and minimized in siting facilities, the development of 
new sanitary landfills, transfer stations, recycling facilities and composting plants might require 
land acquisition and might impact property values of surrounding populations.  
 
The closing of existing open dumps and controlled landfills will likely affect population 
currently living and working on these landfills. The physical and economic displacement of these 
people will be addressed through comprehensive socio-economic integration strategies.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared to address potential resettlement issues 
identified projects. For specific sites and project interventions known at the time of appraisal, 
individual Resettlement Action Plans will be devised accordingly.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
1. Addressing gaps 
–
build CEF’s institutional capacity and develop tools and instruments 
to address social and environmental safeguard issues in solid waste management projects: 
January 2008  
 
2. Preparation of Environmental and Social Management Framework: January 2008  
 
3. Preparation of Resettlement Policy Framework: January 2008  
 
(a). 
For specific sites and project interventions known at the time of appraisal, 
individual Resettlement Action Plans will be devised.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Chandra Shekhar Sinha 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
