Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/17/2007 
Report No.:  AC2990
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P094199 
Project Name:  Rio Grande do Sul Integrated Municipal Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jennifer J. Sara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 26, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (50%);Roads and highways 
(25%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (25%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Municipal governance and institution building 
(P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
40.00
40.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program objective is to strengthen the capacity of the municipalities of Bage, 
Pelotas, Rio Grande, Santa Maria and Uruguaiana to provide selected infrastructure 
services and employment opportunities for their population. In addition, the 
municipalities will have benefited from improved partnerships and enhanced capacity 
strengthening by working together on common development priorities.   
 
3. Project Description 
Each of the five projects making up PDMI will have the same three components: (a) 
municipal strengthening, (b) local economic development and (c) territorial 
improvements. A common set of result indicators will be implemented across the five 
municipalities, although the specific investment plans and activities are customized to 
meet the respective development plans of each municipality. On overview description of 
each component is provided below:  
 
Component 1: Municipal Strengthening: this component will focus on improving the 
capacity of the municipal government in fiscal management, strategic planning and 
Page  2
budgeting, project management (including safeguard aspects), delivery of selected 
infrastructure services, promote income generation and cross-municipal partnerships and 
knowledge exchange. No physical infrastructure investments are proposed under this 
component, except for some in-situ improvements in office space and equipment.  
 
Component 2: Income and Employment Generation: this component would support 
initiatives to generate employment and income in both urban and rural areas. Special 
emphasis is given to direct project interventions to benefit the poor (such as facilitating 
access to micro-credit), but support will also be provided to address key obstacles to the 
overall business environment of the municipality and to some of the potentially more 
productive sectors. The possible environmental and social impacts of this component are 
related to the construction and enhancement of physical space for street vendors in 
Pelotas, strengthening of productivity of small businesses in existing clusters in all 5 
municipalities, and the establishment of business incubators in Santa Maria and Pelotas.  
 
Component 3: Territorial Improvements: will assist the municipalities improve their 
ability to provide priority  infrastructure services to the population in an efficient and 
sustainable manner within the framework of a longer term development strategy. The 
following infrastructure investments are included in this component: (i) rehabilitation or 
pavement of existing streets in urban areas and rural roads and small bridges, plus the 
provision for maintenance services; (ii) water supply in urban and rural areas, and 
sanitation systems, drainage systems and treatment and final disposal of solid waste in 
urban areas; (iii) urban upgrading, housing and social improvements in poor 
neighborhoods of three municipalities associated with the rehabilitation of 
environmentally protected and flood prone areas.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The PDMI will be implemented in the 5 municipalities located in the southern region of 
the State, which is poorer than the northern part. While it contains 25% of the population, 
it accounts for only 19% of the GNP. The per capita income disparity between the south 
and north is even more striking at 6,787 Reais versus 10,257 Reais (source FEE 
2004).The five project municipalities cover an area of over 17,000 km2 (6% of the state?s 
total area), and have a total population of about 1,000,000 (9.5% of the state population), 
of which over 95% is urban. About 25% of the population is estimated to live below the 
poverty line. Together, the 5 municipalities produce 10.8% of the state?s GDP.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Soraya Simao Melgaco (LCSSD) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The program is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts in the long-
run, since it aims at rehabilitating environmentally degraded areas and improving the 
quality of sanitation services, drainage, public transport and non-motorized transport 
systems.  
 
The proposed works under the transport sub-projects will follow the alignment of 
existing roads and right-of-ways and alternatives will be sought to prevent potential 
impacts, especially to avoid involuntary resettlements. The sub-projects will incorporate 
strategies to increase safety and incentives to reduce air pollution. Several municipal 
projects will also address population at risk living in flood plains and along the shoreline 
of urban lakes and rivers. The recovery of these environmental protection areas will 
improve environmental sustainability and the quality of life of the affected population.  
 
The main direct impacts are expected to occur during construction and cause localized 
negative environmental impacts, such as noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disruption. 
Additional negative impacts during construction will occur due to haulage and final 
disposal of materials. Most of these impacts can be mitigated by proper design and the 
correct application of the environmental and social manuals which form part of the 
overall PDMI Operational Manual.  
 
An environmental screening and analysis was undertaken during preparation for all 
investments that will be financed during the first 18 months of the program. Municipal 
governments were involved in the screening of proposed investments. Given the 
interrelation between the social end environmental aspects, both dimensions were 
integrated into a comprehensive approach and municipal teams consisting of 
environmental staff and social workers were trained to do the environmental screening of 
project investments and assess the needs for further environmental assessments. Also as 
part of project preparation, the preparation unit developed an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework to address potential short-term and long-term negative impacts.  
Page  4
In addition, specific studies were contracted to prepare environmental assessments of 
the largest interventions in the municipalities, and included: (i) the environmental 
rehabilitation and social integration of informal settlement at Henrique Pancada in Rio 
Grande; (ii) the environmental rehabilitation and social integration of informal 
settlements in the flood plain of the Arroio Cadena in Santa Maria, (iii) the construction 
of a water drainage system in Uruguaiana, (iv) improvements to the water and sanitation 
system in Bag?, and (v) assessment of the integrated management of solid waste in 
Uruguaiana, focusing on final disposal alternatives. These studies included proposed 
measures to prevent, minimize and mitigate potential environmental and social impacts. 
During the first 18 months of project implementation, a detailed strategy will be prepared 
in the municipalities of Santa Maria and Rio Grande for the resettlement and socio-
economic integration of the affected population living in environmental protected and 
risky areas which are subject to project intervention. The detailed assessment, as well as 
the resettlement plan and environmental and social management plans for these projects 
will be subject to Bank prior review.  
 
During project preparation, the screening of the different project sites confirmed that no 
indigenous people are living in the project are and a letter was received from FUNAI, 
confirming the non-existence of indigenous groups in the 5 municipalities.  
 
In Bag? and Pelotas, existing dams will be used for the supply of water systems which 
will be expanded with project support. Preliminary screening was done on the dams and 
an evaluation of the safety of these dams has been contracted, with TOR approved by the 
Bank. Approval by the Bank of the final report of the specialized consultants will be a 
condition for contracting the works The final recommendations to improve dam safety 
will be included in the project as part of the financing plan as a means to ensure 
sustainability of project investment.  
 
The income-generating activities focusing on the agricultural sector might increase to a 
limited extent the use of pesticides, although the scope and types of investments are not 
defined at this point. However, the funds invested in these activities are relatively small. 
If necessary, the project will include provisions to avoid using highly toxic pesticides and 
ensure that proper handling, storage and disposal techniques are applied.  
 
The project includes the restoration of historic buildings, financed through counterpart 
funds in the municipality of Pelotas. These investments are funded through a federal 
program (Programa Monumenta) by the Ministry of Culture and managed by IPHAN, a 
foundation for state and municipal bodies devoted to the protection of cultural heritage. 
The objectives of the Monumenta Program are to preserve priority urban historical and 
cultural sites and to increase citizens? knowledge and appreciation of its heritage. The 
Environmental Screening of the sites confirmed that the Program will have substantial 
benefits in preserving these buildings and negative environmental impacts will be 
minimal and temporary.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Program is expected to have an overall positive impact on the environment, 
especially with respect to the rehabilitation and protection of environmentally risky areas, 
improved water quality and waste water treatment, proper solid waste disposal, and 
improved overall quality of life and environmental health. The institutional strengthening 
component includes activities and results indicators to strengthen the municipal capacity 
to manage and monitor environmental and social aspects of the project, and where 
relevant, deliver sanitary and environmental education programs, manage water resources 
and solid waste, and protect river basins and other environmentally sensitive areas. This 
will go hand-in-hand with the State?s strategy to decentralize environmental licensing 
activities to the local level, and FEPAM will be requested to participate in the process.  
 
Specific long-term positive impacts are expected from: (i) environmental rehabilitation 
and social integration in selected neighborhoods of the cities of Rio Grande and Santa 
Maria, and (ii) the closing of the open dump in Uruguaiana. These activities are expected 
to improve the health, economic and shelter conditions of the affected population (e.g. 
those living in precarious areas, such as flood plains or near or on open dumps).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During the preparation of the projects, some activities were dropped due to their potential 
adverse environmental  impacts and/or lack of municipal capacity to address them (for 
example, urban road expansion in environmental sensitive areas of Pelotas) and are not 
included in the final program. Recommendations from the screening process are also 
being integrated in alternative designs of specific investments.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Over the last years, the State of Rio Grande do Sul has steadily decentralized 
environmental assessment and licensing responsibilities to the municipalities. This 
process has strengthened Municipal Environmental Secretariats and, with the exception 
of Rio Grande, all municipalities are responsible for most of the licensing of projects 
within their jurisdiction. This means that capacity exists and the Environmental Agencies, 
with support from Social Workers, have been working in the environmental assessment 
and definition of mitigation measures. Meetings were held with the municipalities and the 
State Environmental Agency (FEPAM), which also included a full-day workshop during 
the pre-appraisal mission to discuss coordination of efforts and collaboration during 
project implementation.  
 
The program has an objective to further strengthen the capacity and provide specific 
instruments to the municipal Environmental Secretariats and social workers to assess 
environmental and social impacts, prepare plans and monitor implementation. Some 
municipalities have implemented excellent public participation and disclosure programs 
that will be shared with the others. Specific activities to strengthen the capacity of 
Page  6
municipalities regarding environmental and social management and supervision are 
included in the Institutional Strengthening Component.  
 
All municipalities have formed a Project Management Unit (UGP), which includes staff 
responsible for coordinating the implementation of environmental and social aspects of 
the project with the relevant Municipal Secretariats.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During project preparation, meetings were organized with local communities by 
environmental and social staff from municipalities to assess local concerns and discuss 
mitigation measures and develop a framework to address environmental and social 
aspects of project preparation. Other agencies responsible for road safety, environmental 
management and social issues were consulted as well. Before the start of any specific 
works that have environmental and social impacts, public consultations will be held with 
affected population and information will be available at the municipalities and on a 
website.  
 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the Program 
includes a Public Participation and Consultation Guide, which was prepared to ensure 
close involvement of relevant stakeholders during all project phases (design, construction 
and operation).  The Guide will further integrate public consultation and participation in 
the screening and environmental and social management process of relevant sub-projects 
(identified as part of the screening process). It will also allow for improvements in the 
design of prevention, mitigation and compensation measures to address negative impacts 
and promote community participation and ownership.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/22/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/22/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  8
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jennifer J. Sara 
08/02/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
08/02/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Soraya Simao Melgaco 
08/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Carlos E. Velez 
08/02/2007 
Comments:   
