Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/25/2006 
Report No.:  AC2482
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P100154 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for the Federal Water Resources Management 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Luiz Gabriel Azevedo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 7, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (53%);Sub-national government administration (20%);Central 
government administration (18%);Other social services (9%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Water resource management (P);Rural services 
and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
100.00
100.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the original project remain unchanged aiming at (i) 
promoting rational and sustainable use and participatory management of water resources 
in Brazil in general, and in the Northeast in particular; and (ii) providing reliable and 
sustainable access to water for domestic, municipal and other uses in priority river basins 
in the Northeast. The proposed additional loan will help finance the costs associated with 
scaled-up activities to enhance the impact of a well-performing project in the water sector 
and to consolidate institutional and legal reforms supported by the project that require 
time to mature and be fully integrated into Government processes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The purpose of the additional loan is to provide continuity to the financing of the 
PROAGUA activities, consistent with its objectives, components, sub-components and 
the project's present expenditure categories, so as to allow for the expansion of actions for 
support to the management of water resources and the increase in water supply for 
multiple uses. It will support the continuation of the existing infrastructure component in 
Page  2
the Northeast Region and include a major institutional development program to continue 
the support to the Northeastern states and to prepare other Brazilian states for a future 
infrastructure-intense project.  No other major changes are being proposed.  
 
The original project was composed of five components:  (i) water resources 
management; (ii) infrastructure; (iii) planning, studies and project design; (iv) Sao 
Francisco watershed; and (v) management, monitoring and evaluation.  During project 
implementation, two new components were included in the loan agreement to attend new 
demands derived from the change in the GoB's structure: (vi) watershed management 
models and pilot initiatives; and (vii) complementary studies to support the 
implementation of water resources infrastructure in the Northeast region.  
 
All activities supported under the Original Project will be maintained, however, in order 
to make impact assessments more objective and facilitate the management and 
monitoring of tasks, the first component of the original project would consolidate other 
components related to planning and studies issues, resulting in only three components for 
the proposed Additional Financing: (i) Water Resources Management (which will include 
the original components i, iii, iv, vi and vii); (ii) Priority Works (same as the original 
component ii); and (iii) Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (same as the original 
component v).  A summary description of the components is indicated below:  
 
Water Resources Management component.  This component would provide the 
necessary technical and financial resources to strengthen the Federal and State 
governments, river basin committees and water user associations to effectively manage 
water resources in Brazil, through institutional development; planning; specific water and 
environmental studies; watershed management models; and complementary studies to 
support the implementation of water resources infrastructure in the Northeast Region.  
 
Priority Works component.  This component would finance the construction of water 
storage and conveyance infrastructure in the Brazilian semi-arid region to provide 
reliable water supplies (in terms of both quality and quantity) for towns and communities 
with enduring problems of water supply for domestic consumption.  
 
Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.  This component would finance three major 
elements, distinct and autonomous from one another but closely inter-related: (i) project 
oversight at the highest level (Executive Committee); (ii) project management at federal 
level, in support of State's UEGPs; and (iii) project monitoring and evaluation (M&E), as 
well as auditing.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The two main components would focus on: (a)  improving water resources management 
and planning at national level, through studies and technical support; and (b) expanding 
the benefits of water infrastructure to other areas in the Northeast semi-arid region with 
works such as bulk water pipelines and conveyance systems, construction of rural water 
supply systems, construction and/or rehabilitation of dams, and other similar hydraulic 
Page  3
infrastructure for multiple uses whereas the rehabilitation of  existing systems would be 
prioritized, as well as additions to or conclusion of unfinished works.  
 
The characteristics of the new potential infrastructure subprojects and of the areas where 
they would be implemented during the additional financing phase are similar to those 
under the original PROAGUA Project. The target population constitutes some of the 
poorest segments of the Brazilian population, with socio-economic indicators that are 
significantly lower than for Brazilians living in other regions.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed additional financing to the PROAGUA would extend the implementation 
period of this successful project.  Project implementation would follow the same 
procedures that have been used so far, with the addition and adoption of new measures 
that address the few issues identified in the analysis of its past environmental 
performance and other lessons learned, reflected in the revised Environmental 
Management Framework.  
 
The main overall positive environmental impact of PROAGUA has been the 
establishment of a culture of planning for sustainable use of water resources at federal 
government agencies and in the beneficiary states.  At the local level, the positive impact 
most frequently identified by beneficiaries in technical audit reports is the improvement 
in peoples well being, especially women, as a result of the decrease in intensive labor 
needed to haul water everyday. The decrease in intestinal diseases, especially in children, 
is also a notable positive impact.  
 
Environmental Assessment:  For the additional financing phase, the overall potential 
project impacts are expected to be similar to those of the Original PROAGUA, as 
Page  4
addressed in the respective original Environmental Assessment. The potential subprojects 
already identified as having potential for implementation during the first year of the 
additional financing have undergone preliminary individual environmental screenings 
and/or environmental assessments, and a summary of the findings is presented in the 
EMF.  
 
The most important potential negative impact would be associated with the 
rehabilitation and/or construction of hydraulic infrastructure For some project works, 
particularly any new large dams, these impacts could potentially be significant if not 
adequately minimized and mitigated, thus warranting the Category A level classification.  
However, the application of the revised Environmental Framework would ensure 
minimization and adequate management of all potential impacts.  
 
For the original project, the borrower developed a regional environmental analysis for 
the originally beneficiary states, and a screening system that was used during the project 
and will continue to be used, with improvements, in the additional financing phase. Thus, 
from the initial stage of each subproject and throughout its operation, a sequence of 
studies, technical audits, and environmental assessments are carried out, not only to 
comply with the Brazilian legislation and Bank safeguards, but also for the continuous 
improvement of Project actions.  
 
The main assurance in terms of compliance with safeguards is the strong positive track 
record of implementation of this project. Procedures are in place, PIUs are staffed and 
trained and the implementation of 42 sub-projects (four of them were Category A) over 
the past 7 1/2 years has demonstrated the capacity to detect problems and to effectively 
resolve them. The focus of the work conducted for the preparation of the additional 
financing has been on improving the overall framework which has been successfully 
implemented by incorporating lessons learned (see item 4 for details) with the 
implementation of the project and by revising it to conform with changes that have taken 
place in relevant policies (.e.g. resettlement and indigenous peoples). The revised 
framework will be applied to every sub-project presented for the additional financing 
phase. The GoB has been proactive in terms of disclosing all environmental reports and 
studies developed during the first phase. The revised framework has already been 
disclosed in Brazil and it is available at the Banks Infoshop together with preliminary 
studies and information of potential sub-projects being considered for implementation 
during the first year of the additional financing phase.  
 
For the proposed additional financing phase, as part of the preparation process, three 
major activities were carried out by the borrower: (i) a review of the environmental and 
screening procedures carried out during the first phase and an evaluation of results and 
lessons learned; (ii) an update of the original environmental assessment and frameworks 
updating them to the improvements made during project implementation and revised 
safeguard policies issued, including an update of the involuntary resettlement and 
indigenous peoples frameworks; and (iii) preliminary environmental assessment of the 
potential 14 subprojects proposed to be implemented in the first year with preparation of 
Page  5
environmental report card. This information is part of the revised EMF for the additional 
financing project.  
 
A
preliminary environmental screening and/or environmental assessment have been 
conducted for each one of these proposed works, based on technical documents prepared 
by the proposing states and consulting firms contracted. These works were pre-assessed 
by consultants from the UGPO/MI team - the Program Management Unit of the Ministry 
of Integration, also based on the experience obtained from the implementation of the 
Original PROAGUA. An Environmental Report Card was drafted for each work that was 
analyzed, as per model adopted by the Original PROAGUA. Before any of these 
subprojects can receive final approval for implementation, additional environmental, 
social, technical and economic studies would be carried out. The UGPO/MI team and the 
Bank would use the information from these studies in the decision-making process for 
giving the final approval to any of the potential subprojects.  
 
Afterwards, before funds can be released to any one of the approved works, technical 
field audits would be carried out by UGPO to confirm all reported information.  
 
Both direct and indirect impacts would be considered in the analysis of each subproject, 
to ensure that possible negative impacts are identified during the early stages of 
subproject design and that adequate mitigation plans are developed and accounted for as 
integral part of the subproject. The subprojects listed as potential candidates for 
implementation during the first year of the Additional Financing were analyzed and 
developed within original projects environmental safeguards eligibility criteria. 
Additional subprojects, to be proposed for implementation during the second and third 
years, would be developed and analyzed within the environmental framework updated 
and prepared for the additional financing phase.  
 
In addition, for the first Category "A" level subproject to reach the advanced EA stage 
within the subproject preparation cycle the (i) client's environmental study (EIA) and (ii) 
ToRs for the supplementary environmental analysis to be prepared for Bank sign-off to 
cover any additional safeguards-related issues that are not covered in the EIA document 
itself will be submitted to the Banks Safeguards Advisory Team for review.  The 
subsequent Category "A" subprojects would be subject to a similar Bank review prior to 
their approval, but this review would be undertaken by the environmental specialist on 
the Task Team.  
 
Natural Habitats: although the initial environmental screening and/or assessment for the 
potential first year subprojects did not identify potential large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts to natural habitats, it's expected that an area of about 1. 7 thousand 
hectares would be inundated by the two potential dam subprojects.  Most of these areas 
are already heavily modified by agriculture and cattle grazing, and no significant negative 
impacts on natural habitats would result from construction of these dams. In addition, a 
positive environmental impact of both dams would be the area of permanent conservation 
(APP) that would surround each reservoir after completion, as required by the Brazilian 
legislation. For other infrastructure works to be implemented after the first year, in the 
unlikely event of negative impacts to critical natural habitats, appropriate environmental 
mitigation and compensation measures would be agreed with and carried out by the 
borrower, including an environmental compensation in the amount of 0.5% of the total 
infrastructure cost (foreseen under Law 9985/2000).  
Page  6
Pest Management.  No pesticides would be used during the implementation of the 
proposed Additional Financing.  
 
Cultural Property: no high valued cultural property is expected to be affected by the 
eventual construction of two potential dam subprojects , or by any other potential project 
supported works. In the event that some high valued cultural property would be found to 
be potentially affected, the state historical society (existent in all states) would be 
informed and involved to evaluate the case and resolve the issue with the project team in 
order to preserve that cultural property.  
 
Involuntary resettlement:  potential relocation of families from hydraulic basins is 
expected by the potential construction of two potential dam subprojects. The initial 
studies indicated that 82 families would be affected by the entire project. Resettlement 
plans for the potential dams have already started to be developed, specifying relocation 
policies, planning principles, household registration, evaluation of assets that would be 
lost, definition of benefits, criteria for eligibility and support to the resettled population 
for reestablishing income generating activities.  Except for the two potential dams, the 
other listed potential subprojects would not involve any resettlement.  Nevertheless, 
should that be necessary, PROAGUA would follow procedures based on the revised 
framework. This framework will be an integral part of the Additional Financing 
Operation Manual.  
 
Indigenous peoples: During the original PROAGUA preparation, a TOR model has been 
developed for adoption in assessment processes of any sub-project that may affect 
indigenous areas. This TOR, designed in compliance with the former OP 4.20 - 
Indigenous People (now revised as OP 4.10), involves the consideration of eventual 
impacts of sub-projects upon indigenous people and the development of measures 
capable of assuring benefits that are compatible with their culture, such as: 
anthropological research; support to land demarcation and ownership; basic needs 
definition and support actions, such as for health, education, sanitation and transportation, 
production, etc.  
 
Presently, due to the review of this OP and its substitution for OP 4.10, in January 2005, 
the framework was revised to the present safeguard version. Nevertheless, for the 
additional financing phase of the project, no subproject candidate to be implemented  in 
the first year is expected to affect any indigenous area.  There are no indigenous groups 
living in or near areas where works have been proposed for the additional financing. The 
revised indigenous peoples framework is part of the projects EMF and will be included in 
the projects operational manual.  
 
Current Brazilian legislation is quite restrictive in relation to interventions on 
indigenous land. The use of water resources located on indigenous land, according to the 
Brazilian Constitution (Article 231), depends on approval by the National Congress, 
which demands a quite lengthy process. Serving indigenous populations with basic 
sanitation is a specific attribution of FUNASA - the National Health Foundation, 
affiliated to the Ministry of Health, as per Provisionary Measure 1911/99, of July 1999. 
Any project whose implementation may cause any interference on indigenous land will 
Page  7
require prior environmental licensing by the federal environment agency (IBAMA), 
which obligatorily will have to consult with FUNAI - the National Foundation for 
Indigenous People, in accordance with Resolution no. 237/97 issued by CONAMA, the 
National Environment Council.  
 
Safety of dams: two dams subprojects have been listed as potential candidates for 
implementation during the first year of the project (17m and 18m high) as well as some 
proposed water supply systems which would capture water from existing reservoirs. As 
was required for the first phase, a Dam Safety Panel would be established to approve the 
final engineering designs, supervise contracting and inspect the construction of any large 
dams that may be financed and dams to be used as sources for water supply systems.  The 
initial designs for the two potential dams, Missi and Riacho da Serra, have been reviewed 
by the Ceara Dam Safety Panel, and have received their preliminary approval.  
 
This is an area in which the implementation of PROAGUA has actually excelled. 
During the entire first phase of project implementation, a highly competent Dam Safety 
Panel was established. This panel met regularly to review possible new dams to be 
financed by the project, as well as existing dams which were being used as supply for 
pipelines and/or conveyance systems. A comprehensive set of guidelines for the design, 
construction and operation of dams and reservoirs was developed and a manual was 
issued by the Ministry of National Integration. These procedures have been observed and 
adopted by states in the Northeast and in other regions of the country. The Panel has also 
offered important inputs in procurement matters and on the revision of designs and/or 
operational rules which have led to substantial reduction in costs. This contribution is 
highly appreciated by states and the Panel is often called to provide inputs and advise for 
the implementation of works not financed with loan resources. This indicates the strong 
buy-in and the perception of value added by the Panel.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
-
Involuntary resettlement. The potential long term impact foreseen for this project would 
be the potential involuntary resettlement of  82 families. The initial resettlement plans 
developed for the potential two dams were based on the Terms of Reference prepared for 
the Original Project as well as that used in the state of Ceara for the implementation of 
the PROGERIRH project (over the past ten years than Bank has financed three sequential 
water resources management projects in Ceara.  Combined these loans have financed the 
implementation of several dams which constitute a successful history). The updated 
version of OP 4. 12, launched in December 2001, has not implied significant changes in 
the text of the TORs which are guiding the studies for the two potential dams. However, a 
revised Resettlement Framework has been developed for the Additional Financing phase, 
and based on this new IRPF, the initial plans developed for the two potential dams will be 
revised and updated accordantly.  
 
Cumulative impacts.  No cumulative impacts are expected in this project.  For water 
supply systems, an EA (or EIA in the case of category A subprojects) would be prepared, 
taking into consideration the overall context of the respective sub-basin.  For water 
Page  8
supply systems, the EA/EIA would characterize the potential interferences with other 
water uses in the same sub-basin, through a quantitative water balance and, if required, 
evaluation of the discharge reduction effect on the self-depuration capacity of the 
downstream water course and reservoir. In the case of dams, in addition to the 
characterization of the immediate interferences in the water course and sub-basin in a 
smaller scale, an evaluation of the dam's interference with other reservoirs, both existing 
and planned, with the water basin should be undertaken through an evaluation of 
cumulative water balance.  
 
Risk of Disseminating Waterborne Diseases. The possibility for PROAGUA works to 
raise the risk of proliferating vectors for contagious diseases has been a concern from 
early Project preparation. Indeed, one of the foreseeable effects of the supply of good 
quality water in the appropriate quantity for human consumption would be an increase in 
the volume of sewage generated. In the region encompassed by the project, the existence 
of sewage systems is rare. The construction of dams and their reservoirs also creates 
favorable conditions for the transmission of waterborne diseases, being noteworthy the 
schistosomiasis, a common disease in the semi-arid region. The Aguas Vermelhas 
subproject, implemented during the Original PROAGUA phase, implemented a 
comprehensive integrated schistosomiasis control program, involving the following 
activities, among others.  The results of this control program have been greatly 
satisfactory and, if necessary, the Terms of Reference developed for the Aguas 
Vermelhas schistosomiasis control program are available for use during the 
implementation of the PROAGUA - Additional Financing in other areas which might be 
found to have similar problems.  
 
In the event that the risk of an increase in water-borne or endemic diseases is identified  
in the environment report cards filled out by the proposing states, whether the proposed 
work is a dam or a water supply system, the costs of developing and implementing a 
control plan would be included as part of the proposed work.  
 
The implementation of sanitary sewage systems is always recommended by the 
PROAGUA team when support to the implementation of a water supply system is 
analyzed, but such services are the responsibility of other government institutions 
(Ministry of Cities, Ministry of Health, state agencies). Nevertheless, whenever such 
institutions are not in a condition of implementing the appropriate systems and there is 
risk of dissemination of water-borne diseases, then PROAGUA shall exceptionally 
provide the financial support required, as was the case with the Aguas Vermelhas System 
and the Diamantina System, whose sanitary sewage systems have already been 
implemented. One example, among potential listed works to be developed in the first 
year of the Additional Financing, is the sanitary sewage system for Coqueiro Seco town 
which has been listed for implementation in the year 2007, along with its water supply 
system, and integrated to those of two other towns (whose sewage system/solution is the 
responsibility of the Federal Government).   
 
Page  9
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The procedures developed during the preparation of the Original PROAGUA, and 
improved during its implementation to reflect lessons learned, would also be adopted 
during the Implementation of PROAGUA - Additional Financing. Some additional 
modifications were necessary in view of the present division of responsibilities between 
ANA and MI in terms of Project implementation.  
 
Any subproject to be financed under PROAGUA must necessarily be part of an existing 
river basin or state water development plan. This is the initial instance where discussions 
(both technical and political) take place regarding the individual worth of implementing 
or not a subproject.  At that stage, the relevance of a subproject is evaluated in relation to 
the existing needs and to other possible alternatives to address such needs. The upstream 
consultation process for the development of basin or state water plans provide a solid 
foundation for the selection of potential sub-projects to be financed under the loan.   
Additional downstream consultation takes place during the development and approval 
phase of each sub-project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Procedures for subproject approval. The States submit subproject proposals to the 
Managing Committee, for inclusion in the Annual Operation Plan (Plano Operativo 
Annual - POA). Upon inclusion in the POA, all subprojects identified as potential 
candidates for financing under the PROAGUA must undergo the following steps and 
procedures under the PROAGUA subproject preparation and approval process:  
 
Step 1: 
  The first document to be prepared and submitted to the PROAGUA 
UGPO by the proposing State is the Work Identification Report - WIR (RIO, in 
Portuguese).  In this document, the environmental information is restricted to the 
identification of potential impacts that could severely affect the possibility of approval for 
financing under the PROAGUA, or that would require such major modifications to the 
initial plans that might result in not allowing the PROAGUA meet its deadlines.  
Therefore, once such case is identified in the WIR, an alternative must be sought for 
meeting the demand that would be otherwise supplied by the proposed water supply 
system.  
 
Other interferences, either with properties or residents, may represent such huge costs in 
order to properly address social or environmental issues that such an initial assessment 
may be enough for discouraging the developer, leading him/her to look for other 
alternatives before continuing with the studies and engineering projects.  
 
Step 2:  Preparation of the Preliminary Technical Report - PTR (RTP, in Portuguese) 
would be the next stage after a subproject receives approval at the WIR stage. During the 
PTR stage, a much more detailed environmental assessment is carried out, including the 
identification, analysis and assessment of the development's most significant impacts and 
identification of the main mitigating and/or compensatory measures. Such analysis must 
include the different technical alternatives proposed under the engineering studies, and 
shall help - or even condition - the selection of the alternative or alternatives to be 
developed in more detail during the full feasibility stage. Such alternatives, including the 
possibility of non-execution of the subproject, must be conceived and assessed according 
Page  10
to their capacity to achieve the main objective of the proposed subproject.  During the 
PTR preparation, a consultation with potential affected communities would be carried out 
and any recommendation would be evaluated and considered in the alternatives and in the 
subproject design.  
 
During the PTR - especially in the case of regional pipelines, but also in the case of 
pipelines serving a single municipality - all communities located along the pipeline path 
must be identified, the number of inhabitants must be quantified, and the main springs 
used for water supply must be registered, even if these communities are not the main 
object of the studies that justify the proposal under analysis. During this stage, the 
possibility of serving these communities must not be discarded, which can be made either 
through fountains (if the main pipeline carries drinking water), or through compact WTSs 
(water treatment stations) in case the pipeline carries raw water. Even though, from the 
technical point of view, there is a common trend not to consider benefiting sparse 
populations under these types of subprojects, from an environmental and social 
perspective, frustrating the expectations of a set of families, that see a pipeline passing by 
their front door without benefiting them, should be considered as a negative impact.  
 
Step 3:  The next and last stage in the subproject preparation and approval process is the 
elaboration of the Full Feasibility Report - FFR (RFV, in Portuguese). At this stage, 
additional technical, economic, environmental and social studies, including preparation of 
detailed engineering designs and the final EA/EIA, would allow for due consideration of 
the costs and benefits of the several proposed alternatives of service.  For example, this in 
depth analysis would prevent the Project from approving the construction of a pipeline 
that would pass through a community, with no access to water, without including an 
alternative for water supply to this community. This requirement would prevent a 
situation where the said community would have no better option than making clandestine 
perforations in the pipes passing by their front door.  
 
Upon evaluation of the FFR by UGPO/MI, this report, as well as the positive opinion of 
UGPO/MI (if that is the result of the evaluation) would be forwarded to UGPG/ANA, for 
verification of compliance with Project eligibility criteria and final no-objection from the 
World Bank. Upon the final approval,  the proposing state drafts the Basic Project that 
shall allow for the bidding of the contracts, after receiving approval from UGPO and a 
no-objection from the World Bank.  
 
All subproject proposals must address the institutional arrangements and responsibilities 
for the implementation and supervision of the programmed environmental mitigation 
measures, and the cost of such actions must be included in each sub-projects budget, and 
used for economic and financial evaluation purposes. The future potential works to be 
financed, as in the original project, would not cause major negative environmental and/or 
social impacts. For each subproject, in addition to the environmental assessment, the 
following documents would also be submitted to the Bank: (i) a plan for the management, 
operation and maintenance of the proposed work; (ii) evidence that the land and the rights 
to that land are physically and legally available; (iii) evidence that Participating States 
hold the rights over the water for the proposed work; (iv) evidence of all corresponding 
environmental permits; and (v) whenever required, presentation of a resettlement plan 
and/or an IPDP.  
 
Page  11
Assessment of borrower capacity.  During the original project implementation phase, 
adequate planning, with environmental strategy and close supervision (field based), has 
ensured satisfactory compliance with safeguards. In terms of compliance with Bank 
safeguards, despite the large number of infrastructure systems that have been financed by 
the project, there have been no major environmental issues that were not or are not being 
addressed; potential problems were detected and dealt with. In a country with strong civil 
society groups, the project has never been the source of any complaint and, quite on the 
contrary, has often been praised for its implementation efforts.  
 
Procedures for the local and regional environmental analysis of the proposed works are 
now well established within the routine of the PROAGUA UGPO, including the 
evaluation of the environmental management capacity of the respective proponent State 
and Agency. A study conducted during preparation of the Additional Financing indicated 
that subproject preparation has usually been satisfactory regarding identification of the 
necessary mitigation measures.  Furthermore, the project also financed institutional 
strengthening programs to deal with environmental management, which included 
technical assistance and training in environmental issues at state and federal levels. The 
project, as well as activities carried out by the borrower, has created institutional 
structures and technical groups capable of handling environmental issues such as 
safeguards, mitigation measures, environmental education, adoption of regulations or 
norms for environmental protection and resettlement. In addition, water user associations, 
water basin committees, and local level environmental management groups have been 
created or strengthened during project implementation.  
 
Measures taken. As a result of the environmental studies carried out during the 
preparation of the additional financing proposal, the following activities and procedures 
would also take place during the implementation of the Additional Financing:  
 
-
Environmental management strengthening program for federal and state executing 
agencies.  The implementation of an institutional strengthening plan for the water 
resources sector within PROAGUAs participant states had been planned, and includes 
proposals for mainstreaming environmental issues into the water resources state agencies. 
A
closer relationship between such agencies and the state environmental institutions had 
been foreseen as well, aiming at simplifying procedures that are common to both entities, 
such as, for example, simplified procedures for the licensing of water works.  This 
capacity building work would continue to be implemented under the Additional 
Financing phase, with a stronger focus on the capacity and procedures for environmental 
monitoring during each subprojects operation phase.  
 
-
Resettlement plans. The need to develop specific resettlement plans has deserved 
special attention, due to the characteristics of the potential works listed for Project 
support. A Resettlement Framework has been drafted for the development of resettlement 
plans, specifying relocation policies, planning principles, institutional and project criteria. 
This framework will be included in the Additional Financing Operational Manual.  
 
-
Environmental guidelines - Manual for the Construction of Dams and Operation 
of Reservoirs, and Manual for the Construction of Water Supply Systems. These two 
manuals, which include environmental guidelines, parameters and criteria for the several 
stages of preparation and construction of works, have been developed and adopted during 
Page  12
implementation of the original PROAGUA.  These manuals would continue to be used 
during the additional financing phase, and can be downloaded from the website 
www.ana.gov. br/proagua/biblioteca.  
 
-
Indigenous Development Plan. A revised framework to be adopted in the 
evaluation process of any sub-project that may affect indigenous land or populations has 
been drafted and will be included in the Additional Financing Operational Manual. This 
IPDF takes into account the development of compensatory measures, such as: 
anthropological research; land ownership and demarcation; definition of basic needs, 
such as health, education, sanitation and transportation, production, etc.  
 
-
Program for the Monitoring and Control of Endemic Areas for Schistosomiasis. A 
Terms of Reference was drafted, establishing the conditions for the design of the 
Monitoring Program and for the Proposal for Schistosomiasis Control in the Mosquito 
River Basin, comprising the area of the Aguas Vermelhas System, in the State of Minas 
Gerais (work selected for the first year of the original PROAGUA). This TOR could be 
adapted and applied to other areas featuring similar problems if necessary.  
 
-
Environmental Education and Public Information Programs. The development of 
a
component for Participatory Management and Education is foreseen, involving 
incentives for the establishment of River Basin Committees and Water User Associations, 
with the participation of beneficiaries of the works and a special water resource education 
program for elementary and high school students.   
 
One of the studies conducted as part of preparation activities for this proposed 
additional financing, to review the past and current environmental performance of 
PROAGUA subprojects under construction or already in operation, revealed that, 
although subproject preparation was usually satisfactory regarding identification of any 
necessary mitigation measures, improvements were needed regarding the supervision of 
the adoption of such measures after the conclusion of construction works and during 
operation of the subprojects.  
 
Based on the results of this study, and on other lessons learned from implementation of 
PROAGUA to this date, the borrower has agreed on the following additional measures 
and procedures to be adopted and implemented by the Ministry of Integration during the 
additional financing phase:  
 
(a) Provision of targeted training for Federal and State Units on Bank environmental and 
social safeguards, as well as on federal and state environmental legislation. Compliance 
with safeguards may only be assured if project teams are capable of identifying and 
mitigating potential environmental and social impacts. All project participants are 
responsible for complying with Bank safeguards, as well as with the Brazilian 
environmental legislation. The project must promote the dissemination of knowledge on 
Bank safeguards and on the relevant environmental legislation to the whole project 
technical team, at all levels, as well as to civil society affected by the project. Training 
workshops must be held periodically since safeguards and environmental legislation often 
undergo revisions and modifications, and the composition of project teams usually 
changes throughout project implementation.  The  Priority Works component will have 
specific resources allocated to this end.  
Page  13
(b) Provision of training for Federal and State Units on methodology, procedures, and 
responsibilities for subproject supervision during a subprojects operational phase.  
Technical teams that carry out routine audits on the execution of works must periodically 
submit evaluations on the implementation of safeguards and compliance with the 
legislation. If these technicians receive appropriate capacity building on the subject, they 
may identify non-conformities before they become serious problems. If the UGPO 
coordinator is notified in time, he/she may undertake more efficient measures. In 
addition, independent evaluations on compliance with environmental requirements would 
be carried out on a sample of all subprojects (both completed and under construction). A 
capacity building plan would be developed at the beginning of project implementation.  
The  Priority Works component will have specific resources allocated to this end.  
 
(c) Inclusion of a mitigation measures monitoring plan in the administration, operation 
and maintenance plan (PAOM) for each subproject, and provision of assistance to the 
states for implementation of the PAOMs for the subprojects (including subprojects 
financed under the original project).  
 
(d) Condition the execution of all sub-projects to the proper implementation of the 
respective environmental management plan. Programs on the strengthening of 
environmental management and on social development must be properly designed and 
implemented. Whenever possible, social and environmental indicators must be developed 
and included during the projects design stage, aiming at assuring the appropriate 
implementation of such programs. A link must be established between the projects' 
environmental and social actions and the execution of the works, in order to ensure their 
implementation. Civil society involvement in the process is essential.  A focal point 
would be identified in each subproject to facilitate the interaction between the affected 
community and the project implementation team.  
 
(e) Insert into all relevant bidding documents, clear references to PROAGUAs 
environmental guidelines for contractors and to the need for bidders to follow them. The 
elaboration and dissemination of manuals containing environmental guidelines for the 
preparation of studies and for the execution of works does not assure - by itself, the 
effective incorporation of such guidelines into the sub-projects. In addition to providing 
specific training to the Project technical teams, it would be mandatory that the works' call 
for bids incorporate the identified environmental measures, with the appropriate 
adaptations to be made by the proposing State team and approved by the UGPO. Such 
environmental measures must be made explicit, and their unitary and total costs must be 
defined in the works' cost spreadsheets, so that the contractor would be fully aware and 
interested in carrying them out.  
 
(f) Mandatory supervision, by the Ministry of Integration, of the implementation status 
of all environmental mitigation measures, right after subproject construction and 
throughout its operational phase.  Close supervision of ex-post implementation of the 
civil works and mitigating measures has to be carried out to assure the compliance with 
the safeguards and the national and state legislations.  
Page  14
Brazilian legal framework.  Brazil is probably the developing country with the oldest 
and most consolidated environmental licensing system, launched in the early 70s. The 
system is well consolidated and widely disseminated. In addition to having qualified 
personnel, the environmental licensing procedures, including the more complex 
environmental impact assessments, are standard and widely disseminated in all states. 
The CONAMA (National Environmental Counsel), through its resolution n. 237/1997, 
updated the licensing system, establishing the environmental studies and licensing 
process to be carried out for any subproject to be implemented. The licensing process 
includes several stages of licensing: preliminary (LP), for implementation (LI) and for 
operation (LO). Some states included other stages in the process. For each stage a 
different set of documents is required, including the environmental studies, such as EIA. 
For subprojects that can potentially affect the environment, the CONAMA resolution 
requires that the environmental studies be disclosed and public consultations be carried 
out.  
 
Regarding the WRM institutional and policy framework, the GOB approved the Water 
Resources National Policy Law, law n.9433/1997, to establish a new institutional 
framework and instruments (e.g. Water Resources National Plan - PNRH, bulk water 
rights and charges, etc.) to address IWRM issues. The National Water Resources 
Management System (SINGERH) was created by this, with the main objectives of 
coordinating the integrated water management system and implementing the National 
Water Resources Policy. The SINGERH comprises the National Water Resources 
Council (CNRH), the National Water Agency (ANA), State Water Resources Councils, 
River Basin Committees, federal, state and municipal institutions that deal with water 
management issues, and water agencies.  Similar legislation has been introduced in 
almost all states.  Since 1997, some 50 river basin committees have been established in 
federal and state river basins and one water agency was created.  
 
The implementation of PROAGUA has set some very positive examples of transparent 
dissemination of information. All EAs, manuals, environmental studies and baselines 
studies produced during the implementation of the project have been disclosed by the 
National Implementing Agencies.  This information is available to the public in the 
following website http://www.ana.gov. br/proagua/biblioteca.asp. In addition to the EA 
information, the project discloses information on technical characteristics, activities being 
financed and procurement, among others.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are: (i) municipalities and small communities benefiting from increased 
quantity and quality of water; (ii) small farmers, cattle breeders; and (iii) people 
potentially affected by the construction of civil works.  
 
The project offers ample opportunities for consultation and dissemination of 
information. Upstream consultation occurs during the development of statewide water 
resources plans, or watershed master plans. These plans are the results of a participatory 
Page  15
process in which priorities are established. State plans are approved by State Assemblies 
(legislature) and further consultation takes place. Projects are also included in the atlas of 
the National Water Agency which again is the result of a long participatory work.   
 
Downstream consultation takes place a number of times during the approval process of 
a
subproject. Design criteria require field visits and consultation with local communities 
for the establishment of parameters and the identification of needs.  
 
Brazilian environmental law requires a licensing process which involves three distinct 
phases: (a) preliminary license; (b) construction or implementation license; and (c) 
operation license. In accordance with the potential impact of a proposed subproject, 
public consultations are required and mandated by law. Inputs received during the 
consultation process have to be addressed by the project proponent to the satisfaction of 
the licensing agency.  
 
When the works involve water supply to small communities, the population is 
previously consulted about their intention of joining the new system. If the cities are 
bigger, the licensing process demands public hearings as explained in item 4 above. In 
any case, during the preparation of the Final Feasibility Report, the community should be 
consulted directly.  
 
As part of the environmental education program, during the implementation of the 
works and in the initial phase of operation, there are environmental and sanitary 
campaigns in each subproject, when issues about the infrastructure works and its 
interrelation with the users are discussed with the community once again.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/25/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  16
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  17
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz Gabriel Azevedo 
09/25/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
09/25/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
09/25/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/25/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
09/25/2006 
Comments:   
