Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/16/2006 
Report No.:  AC2169
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P095626 
Project Name:  BR-Family Health Extension II 
Task Team Leader:  Gerard Martin La Forgia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 18, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 17, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (95%);Central government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Population and reproductive health (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Health system performance (S);Participation and civic engagement 
(S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
161.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
221.60
221.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Brazil Family Health Extension Project (PROESF) is a 7-year Adaptable Program 
Lending (APL) in three phases. The overall APL Program objectives are:  
 
(a)  Expand population coverage of PSF to about 100 large, urban municipalities; 
(According to the original design, Phase I (PROESF I) was to extend coverage to 40 
municipalities, and Phase II (PROESF II) to an additional 60.  Phase III would support 
consolidation of PSF in the 100 municipalities. However, the Government has decided to 
expand coverage under Phase I, and the project currently supports 187 municipalities 
with more than 100,000 inhabitants.)  
 
(b) Establish family health as a core element of health professional and para-
professional training; and  
 
(c) Strengthen MoH capacity to monitor and evaluate PSF health services, policies and 
training activities on a systematic basis.  
 
Consonant with Program's goals, the objectives of the proposed second phase project 
are:  
Page  2
(a) Increase access to PSF-based care in large, urban municipalities;  
 
(b) Raise the technical quality of and patient satisfaction with PSF-based care;  
 
(c) Improve the efficiency and effectiveness of PSF service providers as well as the 
broader delivery system;  
 
Means to achieve these objectives include: conversion of traditional basic care providers 
to the PSF approach, expansion of PSF coverage, increasing the provision of on-demand 
services, strengthening health promotion and management of chronic diseases, 
establishing referral and counter-referral linkages between family health teams and the 
broader network of health providers; strengthening in-service and pre-service training of 
personnel, applying quality of care certification mechanism; introducing results-based 
management, including quality-based purchasing, applying performance-based financing 
mechanisms, strengthening monitoring practices and information management both in 
states and municipalities and supporting systematic impact evaluation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The second phase will consist of three components:  
 
Component 1. Expansion and Consolidation of Family Health Care in Municipalities 
(US$305.6 million total costs or 79.7 percent; $94.0 loan amount). This Component aims 
at scaling up and strengthening PSF capacity at municipal level. The strategic aim is to 
raise PSF population coverage from 33 to 45 percent in participating municipalities. 
Coverage extension activities would continue to focus on large urban areas, which are 
characterized by poorly integrated, traditional service delivery systems and large numbers 
of families living in poverty and confronting severe social risk. The component would 
support five sets of activities: (i) the extension of Family Health to municipalities where 
this model has not yet been adopted or is at an initial phase of implementation, and 
continued expansion of the model in municipalities that have already made significant 
headway on family health, but have yet to attain coverage targets. This activity would 
also support the conversion of traditional units to the PSF model; (ii) consolidation, 
quality improvement and innovation in municipalities that have shown significant 
progress in PSF coverage extension in the first phase, including strengthening 
supervision, establishing links to higher levels services for care management, and 
introducing the PSF quality certification program;  (iii) support for municipal-based in-
service training;  (iv) strengthening municipal management of family health with an 
emphasis on introducing results-based management practices (e.g., performance contracts 
between municipal managers and PSF teams); and (v) improvement of monitoring and 
information systems. Implemented by 187 municipalities of approximately 250 
municipalities with populations of 100,000, this Component would finance works (new 
construction and rehabilitation), goods, training and technical assistance. All financing 
will be channeled to municipalities through pooled funding (SWAp approach).  
 
Component 2.  Strengthening State Capacity for Supervision, Monitoring and Technical 
Support of Family Health Services (US$39.0 million total costs or 10.2 percent; $29.0 
loan amount). This Component aims at strengthening state capacity to: (i) support 
municipalities extend coverage, improve technical quality, and manage service delivery; 
Page  3
(ii) improve the supply, quality and stability of family health teams; and (iii) conduct 
supervision, monitoring and impact evaluation as key functions of state health 
secretariats. Consistent with recently approved MoH regulations, states will play an 
increasingly important role in measuring results, monitoring municipal performance, and 
evaluating impact of health delivery statewide. They also are responsible for increasing 
the supply and quality of health professionals and para-professionals and providing 
technical and supervisory assistance (in policy making, planning, information and service 
management, and human resource training) to low-capacity municipalities. Implemented 
at the state level, this Component would include three sets of activities: (i) organizational 
restructuring of state health secretariats, contracting of personnel, and training to support 
the new state roles specified above; (ii) support for pre-service formation and continuous 
education of family health professional staff; and, (iii) institutionalization of monitoring 
and impact evaluation functions in state secretariats. The Component would be 
implemented by 26 States and the Federal District (DF), and would finance goods, works 
(rehabilitation), materials, training and technical assistance.  
 
Component 3. Strengthening Federal Oversight of the Family Health Program (US$37.0 
million total costs or 9.7 percent; $37.0 loan amount). This Component aims at 
strengthening PSF policy and technical support, and oversight capacity at federal level. 
This component would strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Health to provide 
support to states and municipalities regarding the implementation of the Program. The 
component would finance development of PSF governance, policy and regulation, 
including results-based financing and management, human resources and incentives 
policies; and support the states and municipalities to develop training programs, research, 
monitoring and evaluation, and coordination and supervision capacity. It will also finance 
research and evaluative studies on specific aspects of PSF service organization and 
delivery as well as institutionalize impact evaluation in the MOH. Several activities 
would support implementation of interventions specified for Components 1 and 2, 
including: (i) upgrading the Basic Care Information System (SIAB); (ii) revising the 
indicators of the ?basic care covenant? (between MOH and municipalities) and 
introducing a new monitoring system for federal performance assessment of states and 
municipalities; (iii) evaluation of in-service and pre-service training centers; (iv) 
development and dissemination of instruments, manuals and training for linking 
financing to performance;  (v) evaluation of basic care information systems; (vi) 
development of clinical guidelines for primary care case management of specific diseases 
and conditions; (vii) strengthening formation of family health professionals through 
supporting specialization, residencies, post-graduate degrees and research for Family 
Health physicians and nurses; and (viii) demonstration projects and specific initiatives to 
develop and implement improved curricula and establish links between medical/nursing 
schools and family health teams, including annual conferences to share experiences and 
innovations, national and international study tours, and development of textbooks and 
training materials. Implemented centrally, the Component would finance goods, training, 
technical assistance, and the project operational costs.  
 
Implemented centrally, the Component would finance goods, training, technical 
assistance, and the project operational costs.   
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Activities under Component 1 will take place in the large, urban municipalities with more 
than 100,000 inhabitants. Under Component 2, activities mainly consist of technical and 
training assistance that will be implemented by participating states. Centrally executed by 
the Ministry of Health, Component 3 also consists of technical assistance, training and 
research.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
During the PCN stage the project was rated as Category "C" for environmental aspects. 
However, as project preparation advanced, the Ministry of Health included new 
construction of small primary health care units under the activities eligible to be financed 
in Component 1.  Such constructions would take place in high density urban areas 
(favelas). Based on this request, which is the only modification of project design that may 
have environmental implications, the project was reclassified into Category "B".  
 
An Environmental Assessment (EA) was prepared for the purposes of identifying 
potential environmental impacts in compliance with World Bank Safeguard Policy 
(OP/BP 4.01). The EA focuses on two areas with potential impacts. The first concerns 
new construction and rehabilitation of ambulatory health units. The second involves the 
implementation of an effective waste management system in these as well as other 
ambulatory units receiving project financing.  
 
The proposed project will construct new but small-scale ambulatory units in low-income 
neighborhoods of large urban cities. Building area will range from 100 to 300 m2. Based 
on a preliminary needs assessment, the MOH estimates that approximately 230 units will 
Page  5
be constructed in the 187 participating municipalities. Construction will not take place in 
protected areas or on ecologically fragile sites. The EA analyzed potential impacts of new 
construction, both positive and negative. In general, any adverse impacts are expected to 
be localized and reversible. However, the improvement of medical waste management in 
ambulatory health units will have beneficial environmental impacts.  
 
During unit construction, the impacts would generally be temporary, of low intensity 
and with well-known mitigation measures that can be easily implemented. Negative 
impacts could results from inadequate site selection, terrain movements, dust and noise 
contamination of superficial water supplies and inadequate disposal of garbage and 
construction waste. However, the potential impact is low because all works are small 
scale. Nevertheless, environmental guidelines that are aligned with Brazilian legislation 
as well as MOH basic unit construction guidelines (see below) will be included in the 
Operational Manual.  
 
During facility operation the main possible internal negative impacts are related to 
inadequate management and disposal of medical waste generated from patient diagnosis 
and care. This would pose a safety threat to both patients and employees. This risk will be 
mitigated through strengthening the system for management and disposal of medical 
wastes, per government environmental regulations and MOH guidelines. Other external 
negative impacts are related mainly to waste generation and atmospheric pollution 
generated from equipment, sewage treatment and disposal, and treatment and removal of 
non-medical solid waste.  
 
The Safeguard on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is not triggered. All sites will be 
located on public lands. Nevertheless, the Operational Manual will stipulate that any new 
construction that may result in resettlement will not be eligible to receive funding.  
 
The Safeguard on Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) is not triggered for the proposed 
project for two reasons. First, the project targets large cities over 100,000 inhabitants. 
According to the 2000 Census, only 0.3 percent of the population is indigenous in these 
cities. Nevertheless, since an undetermined number of this group live in poor 
neighborhoods of these cities, and given that PSF targets such areas, urban indigenous 
will benefit from project-financed activities. Second, one of the objectives of the Bank?s 
Second Disease Surveillance Project (VIGISUS 2) is to extend family health and basic 
care services to Indigenous peoples. This project contains US$40 million of financing for 
Indigenous health activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term negative impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Due to the small-scale nature of the proposed construction activities, no project 
alternatives were considered.   
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The health sector possesses a vigorous legal and regulation framework related to facility 
construction and medical waste management. The legal and regulatory framework has 
been strengthened in recent years through the issuing of more detailed regulations and 
guidelines governing medical waste management and health facility construction (in 2004 
and 2005).  More recently (in 2006) the MOH produced a basic health unit construction 
manual based on current legislation, incorporating these recent changes. The guidelines 
included in the manual will be followed by participating municipalities as they plan, 
construct and operate the new basic care units.  
 
An Environmental Framework (EF) was prepared to guide selection, screening, 
construction and monitoring of new health unit construction. The EF is based on above-
mentioned regulatory and institutional instruments, and will be incorporated in the 
Operational Manual. The EF specifies actions and measures to mitigate potential 
environmental risks, including any required procedures and approvals, at four stages of 
construction activities: functional analysis and site selection, design, construction and 
operation.  Specific measures include: (i) environmental screening and monitoring of 
construction sites; (ii) environmental licensing of all construction; (iii) environmental 
supervision of construction process; (iv) development and implementation of medical 
waste training program to improve medical waste management system; and (v) MOH and 
Bank supervision of the medical waste management system in family health units. 
Finally, an environmental checklist to monitor implementation of medical waste 
mitigation measures is included in the project's M&E framework.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Unified Health System (SUS) is built upon consensus among health authorities, civil 
society and communities. An essential part of its structure is a set of formalized forums to 
discuss policies, plans and initiatives at all levels of government. Health Councils 
consisting of representatives of civil society (universities, non-profit health organizations, 
NGOs and women groups) are legally mandated in each sub-national government. The 
proposed project together with its implementation plan, including new constructions, will 
be debated and approved by the Municipal Health Councils in each of the 187 
participating municipalities.  The PCU will not approve any plan until evidence is 
presented of consultations with and approval by civil society organizations and any 
affected communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/15/2006 
 
Page  7
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gerard Martin La Forgia 
12/15/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena 
12/04/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
12/15/2006 
Comments:   
