Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/01/2007 
Report No.:  AC2583
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P095013 
Project Name:  BR Municipal APL1: Cubatao - Guara 
Task Team Leader:  Paula Dias Pini 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 17, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 16, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other urban 
development (P);Other social development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
14.63 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
9.75 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
9.75 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to support the Municipality of Cubatao promote sustainable 
development by improving the economic investment climate, strengthening municipal 
finance control mechanisms, and addressing urban informality.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of two components: (1) Sustainable Municipal and Regional 
Development and (2) Addressing Urban Informality. Below is a description of the two 
components and their sub-components:  
 
Component 1. Sustainable Municipal and Regional Development  
 
1.1.
Addressing Competitiveness (US$ 0.50M):  
 
Through this component, the project would support the municipal government with a 
strategy and a working plan for addressing the institutional aspects contributing to the 
increased difficulties for public and private investments in Cubatao.  
Page  2
(i) Assessing Consistency Between Municipal and Environmental Regulations: Current 
inconsistencies between the municipal land use regulation and the federal and state 
environmental regulations significantly increase the difficulties for both the public and 
private  sectors to make investments in Cubatao. These inconsistencies will be assessed 
by consultants with expertise in these topics through a methodology combining technical 
review and consultation with the stakeholders involved. Based on these assessments and 
consultations, a proposal would be developed;  
 
(ii) Supporting Municipal and Environmental Sector Strategic Joint-Programs: As part 
of the strategy for improving dialogue with the environmental sector, the project will 
finance consultancy services to maximize the environmental programs in Cubat?o to 
improve the investment climate. Various environmental mitigation programs are carried 
out by the private and public sectors in Cubat?o in compliance with the Federal and State 
Environmental License requirements. The impact of these programs can be maximized by 
further improving their focus and integration. These improvements may also significantly 
contribute towards facilitating the investment climate in Cubatao. To this end, the project 
would finance consultancy services to assess these programs and propose a more strategic 
rationale to guide their objectives and design.  
 
1.2. 
Addressing Creditworthiness (US$ 1.65M):  
 
Improving key finance control mechanisms has been identified as a priority by the 
assessments carried out during the project preparation, as well as by the consultations for 
the Agenda 21.  
 
i) Municipal Finance Planning and Control Mechanisms; and (ii) Institutional Capacity 
Support.  
 
1.3. 
Ensuring Cities as Partners (US$ 0.30M):  
 
BSMA Integrated Territorial Management Pact: in close cooperation with other regional 
stakeholders (BSMA?s municipal governments, State of Sao Paulo Government, Federal 
Government and private sector, specially industry and port sectors), the project will 
finance studies and technical tools aimed at supporting regional development. These 
studies, including a consultation process, will focus on two topics of a broader priority 
regional development agenda already agreed on by the mentioned regional stakeholders. 
These two topics directly benefit promoting sustainable development in Cubatao and 
are:(i) Financing the development of Cubataos strategic environmental assessment to 
complement the Regional Environmental Assessment on BSMA, to provide inputs for a 
regional dialogue involving the federal, state and municipal governments, the private 
sector and the civil society on a common vision for the BSMA short, medium and long 
term sustainable development goals; ii) Financing the development of a preliminary 
proposal for an Information Management System.  
 
Component 2. Addressing Urban Informality  
 
2.1.
Executive Planning for Addressing Urban Informality in Cubatao (US$ 0.45M): 
The project will assist in financing integrated technical inputs, intergovernmental 
dialogue (Federal, State and Municipal governments) and community participation to 
develop a proposal providing technical, institutional, legal and financing alternatives to 
address urban informality in Cubat?o, including: (a) review municipal land use 
Page  3
regulations to offer low-income housing alternatives within the formal urban area; (b) 
reaching agreements with the Federal and State governments on environmental priorities 
toward favoring an optimal use of areas already converted to urban use; (c) agreeing with 
the State Government on a low-income housing program in conjunction with agreements 
with the Federal Government to use remnants of federal land (mostly from the privatized 
Federal Railroad).  
 
2.2.
Bringing Urban Formality to Vila dos Pescadores (US$ 20.77M): This sub-
component will finance the execution of the public infrastructure integrated with 
activities aimed at bringing urban formality to Vila dos Pescadores (VP). To this end, this 
sub-component includes civil works for building the urban infrastructure and, 
consultantcy services for providing technical support on planning, social development 
and environmental protection. The activities included are:(a)Adopt in VP an urban 
regulation complying with the 2006 City of Cubatao Master Plan requirements; 
(b)Finance the detailed engineering designs of the technical solutions to comply with the 
above; (c)Finance social assistance activities to: (i) inform the population about the 
planning and civil works phases schedules and details; (ii) act as a bridge connecting the 
population and the several sectoral specialists that will be working in the area; (iii) work 
closely with that segment of the population to be resettled, providing assistance 
throughout the resettlement process; (iv) operating the grievance mechanisms, with a 
permanent social team in the area; (v) implement 'post-works'assistance to the entire 
community in order to reduce  maintenance and repair costs of the infrastructure built; 
(d)Finance the civil works that will provide regular urban services to VP.  
 
2.3. 
Environmental Management and Rehabilitation (US$ 0.70M): This component 
will support a consultancy and civil works to: (i) ensure the protection of mangrove 
habitat; (ii) compliance with the state environmental licenses conditions; and, (iii) an 
environmental education program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be executed in the Municipality of Cubatão. Project investments in civil 
works are concentrated in just one site: the Vila dos Pescadores, a 23ha slum, where 
about 3,000 families are living in extremelly critical social and environmental conditions. 
About 80% of them live in stilt house without any formal urban services. Water and 
electricity services are irregulary accessed through informal and precarious connections. 
Wastewater and solid waste are directly dumped in the water underneath the houses. In 
addition to investments, the project will carry out studies addressing broader issues 
related to municipal development aspects.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga (LCSSA) 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Vila dos Pescadores is currently one of the main sources of pollution to the mangroves in 
Cubatao due to lack of sewerage collection, to address this problem it will receive 
investments from the project in integrated urban infrastructure.The wastewater and solid 
waste produced by the 10,000 inhabitants are dumped into the mangroves. The project 
will support investments in systems for wastewater and the solid waste collection, which 
will be connected to appropriate disposals already existents. Vila dos Pescadores also 
consti
tutes a critical social issue for the Municipality of Cubatão because about 80% of 
its 3,000 families are constatly affected by flooding, and contact with contaminated 
water, solid waste, rats, insects and also snakes. During the flooding the risk of 
contamination is critical. Accidents involving fires,people falling into the mangrove, or 
pedestrial hit by the train, happen with regular frequency.  
 
The main project safeguard issues are involuntary resettlement, the environmental 
impacts of civil works related to urban upgrading in Vila dos Pescadores; and the 
protection and rehabilitation of natural habitats.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement. The project main objective in Vila dos Pescadores is to 
provide appropriate housing for those families currently living in stilt houses. To achieve 
this objective, the project will remove the families from the stilt houses and resettle them 
in appropriate houses in the same area currently occupied by Vila dos Pescadores. The 
urban solution provided does not requires removing families to other areas. The strategy 
proposed for the works execution would no require the use of temporary housing. An 
initial lot of about 400 resettlement housing units will be built in an unocccupied adjacent 
area, and then used to resettle 400 families living in precarious housing in the area closest 
to the new housing. Once these 400 families  are removed, the empty precarious housing 
will be demolished, and construction of another 400 new houses will take place in this 
area. The process will continue until all identified families are resettle.  
 
Page  5
A
Resettelment Framework has been prepared during the project preparation phase. A 
Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared in the first year of the project implementation, 
when detailed engineering designs will be also prepared. Both documents will be 
prepared following an integrated and participatory methodology. The engineering designs 
will provide the detailed information required for preparing the Resettlement Action Plan.  
 
Noise, Air and Water Quality. The following potential impacts are linked to the civil 
works for the resettlement of the Vila dos Pescadores and are likely to be temporary in 
nature: i) increased localized soil erosion; ii) sedimentation of drainage systems; iii) 
impacts on water quality; iv) increased pressure on existing vegetation; and, v) 
disturbance of mangrove habitat during construction. The analyses undertaken for the EA 
revealed that the potential negative impacts associated with the civil works in the Vila 
dos Pescadores are significantly less than the positive benefits derived from the increased 
environmental protection afforded by the formalization of urban development, improved 
service delivery and improved municipal management arising from institutional 
interventions.  
 
Natural Habitats.   The project includes several actions to improve and protect the 
natural habitat in the limits of Vila dos Pescadodores. As an example a bike path will be 
build along the perimeter of the Vila, constituting a clearly visible physical limit for the 
Vila dos Pescadores, and as such making it easy to identify any illegal new occupation 
beyond that perimeter. It is expected that the overall balance in areas of natural habitats, 
especially mangroves, would be extremely positive.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The long term social and environmental impacts of the project are extremely positive, 
both in terms of improving quality of life for Vila dos Pescadores residents and 
improving natural habitats in the area.  For example, the project will improve residents' 
access to water, sanitation, electricity, daycare, school, parks and recreation areas. The 
project investments will allow for collection of wastewater and solid waste produced by 
about 10,000 people living in Vila dos Pescadores. Without the project, wastewater and 
solid waste will continue to be dumped into the mangrove.  
 
The project will include a "Mangrove Rehabilitation and Conservation Program" that 
will rehabilitate and restore (1) mangrove areas adjacent to the existing urban areas of the 
Vila dos Pescadores, (2) denuded areas within the project area and (3) riparian areas 
along the Maria Ribeira and Casqueiro rivers.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
series of alternatives were considered - such as not financing the project, selecting an 
alternative resettlement option, or creating land for use in the mangrove area. None of 
these options would have been feasible, either because of scarcity of land for urban use, 
thus resulting in high land prices, social/political realities and environmental regulations.  
Page  6
The existing design has been determined best for minimal adverse impacts and maximum 
social, economic and financial sustainability.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to address the potential impacts, the Environmental Assessment has developed a 
detailed and comprehensive Environmental Management Program. Responsibility for 
implementation and oversight of this program will lie with the Borrower's Project 
Coordination Unit. Additional oversight will be provided through the legislative 
measures governing environmental licensing in Brazil through the Sao Paulo State 
Environmental Secretariat (SEMA). The proposed program incorporates a number of 
separate activities, including an Environmental Management Plan for the civil works, 
which will be addressed during project implementation and for which specific budget 
allocations have been reserved under the respective project components. Activities 
included under the EMP are: (i) Social Communication Program; (ii) Environmental 
Education program; (iii) Program of Environmental Controls for Civil Works; (iv) Civil 
Works Natural Rehabilitation Program; (v) Environmental Monitoring Program; (vi) 
Mangrove Rehabilitation; and, (vii) Conservation Program Environmental Compensation 
Program.  
 
The borrower's capacity, both institutional and technical, is extremely high for this type 
of project.  In terms of institutional capacity, SEMA has more stringent environmental 
regulations than the Bank and requires that 0.5% of total project costs (Bank-funded or 
privately-funded) to be invested in environmental conservation. In terms of technical 
capacity, the São Paulo Urban Development and Housing Company (CDHU) has 
successfully implemented similar resettlement projects, such as in Guarapiranga where 
CDHU built 4,000 housing units for families living in high-risk areas.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the project preparation a number of meetings and consultations have been 
undertaken with a wide range of stakeholders. These include relevant government 
agencies at the municipal, state and federal levels, relevant community groups and non-
governmental organizations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/09/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/02/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/28/2006 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/09/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  8
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
