Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2006 
Report No.:  AC1852
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P082651 
Project Name:  BR APL 1 Para Integrated Rural Dev 
Task Team Leader:  Daniel R. Gross 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
40.00
40.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objective is to build conditions in which the rural poor of Para 
can increase their incomes in a sustainable and secure environment.   
 
3. Project Description 
Para Rural consists of four components: Component A is Income Generation to support 
the financing of Productive Investment Plans (PIPs) proposed and implemented by 
eligible producer associations.  Component B is Territorial Development with Sub-
components B1 Environmental Management and B2 Land Administration.  Component C 
is Policy Development and Component D is Project Management with sub-components 
D1 on Coordination, D2 on Communication and D3 on Monitoring and Learning (M&L).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the State of Para, Brazil.  The State is characterized 
principally by humid tropical forest with some variations in the density and formation of 
the forest.  In the South, there is an ecotone between the cerrado and rainforest biomes.  
Perhaps a third of the State's area has been deforested.  Some of this deforested area is 
under pasture or crops and other areas are in secondary growth, plantation forest, 
Page  2
perennial or annual crops.  The income generation activities (except for forest 
management) will be focused mainly in the deforested areas, "behind the frontier" where 
there are large concentrations of rural poor. Zoning and land administration activities will 
be focused on municipalities where there are conflicts or unusual levels of migration 
which may be forested or deforested.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The triggered policies are listed above.  The project would not support major 
infrastructure or other activities with large-scale or irreversible environmental or social 
impacts.  
 
The project will not support deforestation in excess of the limits established in the 
forestry code.  Some resources may be devoted to reforestation, especially in vulnerable 
areas such as riparian zones or areas subject to erosion.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project cumulative impacts are likely to be positive because of the support for ecological 
economic zoning plans and mechanisms to enforce the zoning plan. Screening criteria 
will ensure that potential negative cumulative impacts are identified and prevented or 
appropriately mitigated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Very small CDD projects could have been supported to minimize potential adverse 
impacts, but the Borrower opted for larger scale local productive arrangements to 
produce sustainable results.   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower has conducted detailed analyses and produced policy frameworks that will 
guide project implementation.  The State has considerable expertise and implementation 
capacity in its environmental agency (SECTAM) and other governmental agencies and 
NGOs that would be involved in project implementation, monitoring and learning. 
However, the Project Coordination Team together with SECTAM have adopted strict 
guidelines for project screening and mitigation and the scale of the projects to be financed 
are not likely to produce major environmental impacts.The project team will include an 
environmental screener and consultants will be called in to assist with technically more 
complex issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the rural poor, NGOs that represent and advocate for the 
rural poor, international NGOs, the private sector including particularly ranchers, loggers, 
farmers and mining companies. In order to ensure the broadest possible access for the 
target population, fair selection process for income generating subprojects, the State has 
undertaken a communications initiative during project preparation to maximize 
ownership of and participation in project activities.  From January 6 to Feb. 11, 2005, a 
series of consultations was held across the state in which 529 people representing 250 
groups and 65 municipalities participated.  These broad consultations had representation 
from SEPROD, EMATER, producers, technical specialists, and municipal government 
employees, NGOs, mayors, workers, rural workers associations, settlement projects, 
research institutions and federal government.  Also, consultations and meetings are 
ongoing regarding the mechanism for selection of three NGO representatives who will sit 
on the Committee that will make the final decisions regarding PIPs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/13/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/05/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/13/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/05/2005 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/23/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/23/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/05/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/13/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/05/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
Yes 
Page  5
been carried out? 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
10/03/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
10/03/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
10/03/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
