Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2663 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/07/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P006553 
Project Name: BR - INTEGRATED WATER MANAGEMENT IN METROPOLITAN 
SAO PAULO 
Task Team Leader: Martin P. Gambrill 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Land administration and management (P);Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
127.92 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
165.50
165.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives are to: (i) strengthen institutional capacity and improve 
metropolitan management and coordination in MRSP in water resources management, water 
pollution control, land-use policy and basic service provision; (ii) protect and improve the quality 
and reliability of the regions water resources and potable supplies; and (iii) improve the quality 
of life of the poorest populations residing in target areas of the regions major urban river basins.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is designed to respond to the land-use/water resources challenges of the 
Metropolitan Region of Sao Paulo (MRSP)by providing a vehicle which brings together state 
and municipal government interventions designed to reverse the deterioration in the water 
bodies, improve land-use planning and control, increase the living conditions of the peri-urban 
poor residing in the reservoir basins, and strengthen and consolidate metropolitan institutional 
capacity in these fields. It would do this for those river basins that are already heavily degraded 
(Guarapiranga, Billings), as well as initiating actions in those basins that are further from the city 
center but also witnessing similar pressure of informal urbanization (in order to help them get - 
Page  2
ahead of the curve- with regard to land-use planning and water pollution control and not become 
the Guarapirangas and Billings of the next generation). The project comprises the following 
components:  
 
Component 1 - Improving metropolitan management, planning and coordination would support: 
(i) Assistance to the Alto Tiete River Basin Committee (ATRBC) to develop prioritization 
criteria for extraction/pollution funds; (ii) Support the preparation and approval of sub-basin 
development plans and land-use/water pollution control laws for all MRSPs mananciais; (iii) 
Rejuvenation of metropolitan management, planning and coordination, including studies into 
metropolitan land-use and demographic expansion trends, key economic, social and 
infrastructure bottlenecks and needs; (iv) Analyses to identify private and public investment 
initiatives for MRSPs basins that promote sustainable development; (v) Analyses of the 
contribution of water supply, sanitation and related services to economic growth and 
competitiveness of MRSP, and the costs of water pollution and water scarcity to the cities and 
the populations health/wellbeing; (vi) Engagement of government and civil society stakeholders 
in public discussion on key challenges facing the basins to stimulate momentum concerning 
institutional, legal and coordination issues; and       (vii) Project management TA.  
 
Component 2 - Confronting urban informality, reducing water pollution, improving water 
management would support: (i) Expansion of wastewater collection, transportation and 
treatment, of water supply, and of solid waste management services; (ii) Complementary urban 
upgrading interventions in slum/informal settlements including in-slum/extra-slum resettlement, 
legalizing urban/land tenure, and complementary social outreach and job and income creation 
initiatives; (iii) TA to better understand water quality behavior in reservoirs and tributaries and to 
develop appropriate management approaches and treatment technologies, vis-a-vis water 
pollution control, and the potable water, energy generation, and flood buffering systems; and (iv) 
Modeling, monitoring and evaluation of water quality and of service provision related to 
pollution control.  
 
Component 3 - Environmental recuperation and preservation would support: (i) Creation of new 
parks, and green and leisure spaces, in strategic areas of basins; (ii) Revegetation through 
planting of trees and other flora, especially in ecological reserves/parks; (iii) Interventions to 
control and reduce reservoir silting; and (iv) Environmental education and engagement of civil 
society and NGOs in watershed protection and related activities.  
 
Reasons for not triggering specific policies:  
 
OP 4.09.  The project will not finance activities to control plant growth in reservoirs, however it 
will finance revegetation efforts, but project activities will not include the procurement of 
pesticides or lead to increased pesticide use.  Revegetation activities will be carried out with 
appropriate technical measures explicitly stated in the terms of reference for each such activity 
under the project which will be approved by the Bank before the related procurement processes 
start.  The State Secretariat of the Environment will be responsible for procuring and supervising 
these efforts.  This Secretariat has experience of implementing such revegetation activities, 
including through a Bank-financed project (carried out in the Guarapiranga reservoir basin - 
P006541- which closed in 2000), and has a good implementation record for such activities.  
Page  3
OP 4.37.  The project will implement the expansion of the formal water supply distribution 
networks within the metropolitan region, however the proposed system expansions are relatively 
small (around 200,000 inhabitants will be benefited from a total population of 19.0 million 
served with the same water supply system in Sao Paulo Metropolitan Region - SPMR).  The 
expansions will complement other specific urban upgrading activities in low-income/slum 
settlement in the Billings and Guarapiranga reservoir basins; and will mainly consist of replacing 
illegal connections with legal ones. Consequently, there will be no need to increase water 
production from the existing systems, which draw on water from a network of existing dams (of 
which two main ones are Billings and Guarapiranga) and which mixes these different sources 
within the SPMR water distribution system.  
 
The Guarapiranga reservoir was built between 1906-1909, and produces 14 m3/s benefiting 
around 3.7 million people in the SPMR with potable water.  The Billings reservoir was built in 
1925 for energy production, but due to water shortage, the reservoir started to also be used for 
public water supply and other uses. The reservoir produces 4.2 m3/s benefiting 1.2 million 
people in the SPMR with potable water.  The reservoir dams have never had any major 
operational or maintenance problems during their respective lifetimes. SABESP, the State Water 
Company is responsible for the O&M of the dams.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Metropolitan Region of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo State, Brazil   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Generally good. The State Secretariat of Water and Energy is leading the preparation of a 
regional, strategic environmental assessment for the project, and doing so in close collaboration 
with the State Secretariat for the Environment and the State Secretariat for Housing.  All three 
Secretariats have considerable experience with World Bank, IDB, JBIC and others programs 
which includes environmental and resettlement issues.  These three Secretariats were responsible 
for the implementation of the Guarapiranga program, a Bank-financed project, from 1992-2000, 
with a total cost of US$ 400 million, which successfully implemented similar environmental and 
resettlement activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
regional, strategic environmental assessment is being prepared by the Borrower in 
conjunction with the State Secretariat for the Envrionment   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Issues pertaining to this safeguard will be addressed in the regional, strategic environmental 
assessment.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project will entail construction and excavation to expand and replace infrastructure, 
therefore the SEA will include screening for any known cultural property in the project area and 
incorporate - chance find - procedures in the event that culturally significant resources are 
discovered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Borrower is preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) since no works that 
would lead to resettlement will occur during the first year of implementation and final 
subprojects for anything beyond the first year of works are not yet established. During 
implementation, Resettlement Plans, based on the RPF, will be submitted to the Bank for review 
and approval prior to the Bank providing the no-objection for the works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/07/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The State Government has initiated a regional, strategic environmental assessment for the 
project. A draft of this report and executive summary, as well as a draft RPF, will be 
available by the time of the QER meeting.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Martin P. Gambrill 
03/06/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/28/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
03/06/2007 
Comments:   
