Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2850 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P088966 
Project Name: BR Municipal APL: Teresina Enhancing Municipal Governance and 
Quality of Life Project 
Task Team Leader: Martin P. Gambrill 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);Sub-national 
government administration (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Natural disaster 
management (S);Pollution management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
28.30 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
12.13
12.13 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To promote the sustainable development and improve the quality of life of the population of 
Teresina, through (i) city-wide municipal strategic planning and capacity building activities; and 
(ii) integrating the low-income ?Lagoas do Norte? region into the broader city fabric through 
cross-sectoral activities in urban service provision, social inclusion, employment generation, and 
environmental management.  
 
In addition to contributing to Teresina?s plans to improve service planning and provision, social 
inclusion, municipal governance, environmental management and poverty reduction more 
broadly in the city, and improve dialogue on similar issues with the neighboring municipalities 
of Greater Teresina, the project will also pilot and roll-out an integrated approach to these issues 
in its low-income and socially marginalized Lagoas do Norte region. The proposed Lagoas do 
Norte activities dovetail within the framework of Teresina?s Agenda 2015 and, in addition to the 
basic infrastructure and housing improvement interventions, also contemplate actions to promote 
Page  2
employment generation and poverty reduction locally, and to stimulate the region?s integration 
into the socio-economic activities of the rest of the city more broadly. The benefited population 
will be the entire 715,000 people of the municipality, with direct benefits accruing to the 90,000 
inhabitants of the Lagoas do Norte region ? one of the poorest and least served areas of Teresina.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The lending instrument of choice is a specific investment loan. In addition, during project 
preparation, the possibility of leveraging Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) financing 
through the Carbon Finance Group will be explored in relation to the municipality?s great 
interest in remediating the current controlled dump and constructing a sanitary landfill. The Bank 
loan would finance a project consisting of the following six components, and their respective 
sub-components:  
 
4.1 
Urban Land Use (US$ 15.46 M, 38% of project costs): This component encompasses the 
undertaking of: (i) Teresina Urban Master Plan; (ii) Lagoas do Norte Urban Development Plan; 
(iii) Teresina Strategic Urban Transport Plan; (iv) Teresina Resettlement Plan for high-risk 
families; and (v) Interventions in Lagoas do Norte, including: (a) restructuring of the roads and 
transport system; (b) housing improvements and resettlement of at-risk families; (c) removal of 
infrastructure along the banks of the lagoons; (d) sanitary and environmental recuperation of the 
lagoons, and promotion of appropriate economic and leisure uses; and (e) landfilling of some 
lagoon areas to provide appropriate locations for resettlement.  
 
4.2 
Water Supply and Integrated Sanitation (US$ 16.11 M, 45%): Comprising: (i) 
Preparation of the Teresina Water Supply and Sewerage Master Plans; (ii) Diagnosis of the status 
of existing water supply systems; (iii) Preparation of an O&M and M&E Plan for Teresina?s 
water supply and wastewater collection and treatment systems; (iv) Support to the renegotiation 
of the Teresina WSS concession contract; (v) Support of the institutional remodeling and 
implementation of regulation arrangements for WSS concession; (vi) Evaluation of the status of 
WSS provision in rural areas of Teresina municipality; (vii) Preparation of engineering design 
for sewerage system in Lagoas do Norte and in other critical basins within Teresina; (viii) 
Program to support construction and operation of septic tanks; (ix) Preparation of Teresina 
Urban Drainage Master Plan; (x) Reevaluation of existing urban drainage engineering proposals, 
and execution of critical macro- and micro-drainage interventions; (xi) Preparation of Teresina 
Solid Waste Management Master Plan; (xii) Improvement of Teresina solid waste dump; and 
(xiii) Implementation of a selective solid waste collection/recycling system.  
 
4.3 
Environmental Integration (US$ 2.67 M, 6.6%): Comprising the following actions in the 
Lagoas do Norte region: (i) Undertaking of studies and engineering designs to promote the 
recuperation of degraded areas; (ii) Interventions to recuperate environmental aspects of the 
lagoons, promoting the proper functioning of their natural drainage system; (iii) Analysis of 
sustainable quarrying in the lagoon area; (iv) Program for maintenance and expansion of parks 
and green areas; (v) Preparation and implementation of sanitary and environmental education 
programs; and (vi) Preparation and implementation of a water quality monitoring program.  
 
Page  3
4.4 
Employment and Wealth Creation (US$ 1.48 M, 3.7%): Comprising the preparation of a 
strategic evaluation of opportunities and limitations for the generation of employment and wealth 
in Grande Teresina, and its direct implications for the Lagoas do Norte region.  
 
4.5 
Participation and ?Social Control? (US$ 0.79 M, 2%): Comprising: (i) Preparation and 
implementation of community organization and participation plans and activities, with a view to 
responding to community priorities, concerns and methodologies for developing local social 
capital and promoting and strengthening community organizations; (ii) Implementation of 
community economic infrastructure; (iii) Analysis of models of community cooperation and 
wealth creation, including piloting of micro-credit and other methods of support for small 
businesses; (iv) Analysis of, and support to, ?social control? of public service provision (a 
?watchdog? function) in Lagoas do Norte, community, including community mobilization and 
participation for works interventions; and (v) Construction of community facilities, such as 
cr?ches, sports centers, health posts, and community schools.  
 
4.6 
Project Management (US$ 1.93 M, 4.7%): This component will support traditional 
project management activities through the municipality?s project management unit.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Municipality of Teresina, State of Piau?, Brazil   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The municipality has no direct experience of Bank projects and will require careful oversight in 
the implementation of Bank safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will have a full EA which will address the issues related to specific interventions, 
including the consultation process.  An Environmental Specialist will oversee the environmental 
aspects of the project, in particular compliance with the triggered safeguards with special 
emphasis on the Bank?s Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01), specifically Annexes B 
and C, which specify the content of an EA Report for a Category ?A? project and an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP), respectively.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project will have a full EA which will address the issues related to specific interventions, 
including the consultation process.  An Environmental Specialist will oversee the environmental 
aspects of the project, in particular compliance with the triggered safeguards with special 
emphasis on the Bank?s Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01), specifically Annexes B 
and C, which specify the content of an EA Report for a Category ?A? project and an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP), respectively.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project will have a full EA which will address the issues related to specific interventions, 
including the consultation process.  An Environmental Specialist will oversee the environmental 
aspects of the project, in particular compliance with the triggered safeguards with special 
emphasis on the Bank?s Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01), specifically Annexes B 
and C, which specify the content of an EA Report for a Category ?A? project and an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP), respectively.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
In addition, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared and disclosed prior to 
appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The project will have a full EA which will address the issues related to specific interventions, 
including the consultation process.  An Environmental Specialist will oversee the environmental 
aspects of the project, in particular compliance with the triggered safeguards with special 
emphasis on the Bank?s Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01), specifically Annexes B 
and C, which specify the content of an EA Report for a Category ?A? project and an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP), respectively.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/31/2004 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
end-August 2004.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Martin P. Gambrill 
03/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
03/14/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
03/15/2007 
Comments:   
