Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3029 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P104752 
Project Name: Paraiba Rural Poverty Reduction Project II 
Task Team Leader: Jorge A. Munoz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 28, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 8, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Power (10%);Water supply 
(10%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural non-farm income generation (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.90 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
4.50 
 Local 
Communities 
2.50
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project seeks to continue supporting Para?ba?s efforts to increase its Human 
Development Index (HDI) by reducing rural poverty using a Community-Driven Development 
approach already proven successful under the previous operation. Using participatory 
institutional mechanisms already established, the proposed project would: (a) scale up and 
intensify the cross-sector integration of Federal and State programs to reduce rural poverty in the 
State; (b) promote the development of community productive initiatives which generate 
employment and income through markets; and (c) build and consolidate the skills, social capital 
and experience of the Municipal Councils and community associations which constitute the 
project?s participatory framework, to carry out their priority-setting and decision-making role in 
sustainable local development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Total project cost is estimated at US$ 27.9 million, of which US$20.9 million would come from 
the Bank loan. The Project?s preliminary structure by component is:  
Page  2
Component 1 ? Community Subprojects (US$25.1 million or 90% of total project cost) to 
support community matching grants for about 1,000 small-scale socio-economic and productive 
activities, infrastructure, health/sanitation, and other investments aimed at helping the State raise 
HDI, in complement with other State and Federal programs. Community associations would 
identify and implement the investments.  
 
Component 2 ? Institutional Development (US$1.9 million or 7% of total project cost) executed 
by the State Technical Unit (STU) would finance technical assistance and training to support: (a)  
mobilization and strengthening of community associations in their role of identifying, preparing, 
executing, operating and maintaining subproject investments; (b) Municipal Councils in their 
decision-making, oversight and facilitation role; and (c) the State Technical Unit to further boost 
its project coordination capacity and performance.  
 
Component 3 - Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.9 
million or 3% of total project cost) would finance costs (excluding salaries) of project 
administration, supervision, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project Area would comprise the same 222 municipalities included in the previous project, 
with more intense focus on 100 municipalities with lowest HDI. The first 100 would receive 
about 60% of total subproject resources.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The State Technical Unit (STU) for the previous Project complied with Bank safeguard policies 
and project environmental rules (including Federal and State norms) applicable at the time. For 
the proposed project a fully-revised Environmental Management Plan and an Indigenous Peoples 
Participation Plan (IPPP) has been prepared and is being reviewed by the Bank prior to the 
decision meeting.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO) 
Ms Cary Anne Cadman (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed repeater project will apply environmental screens (to be included in the EMP) 
during the technical assessment of subproject proposals. Specifically, the EMP will ensure that 
the project is fully compliant with applicable Bank safeguard policies and relevant Federal and 
State regulations.  The EMP will also have discrete sections devoted to potential productive 
subproject types (e.g., small-scale agro-industries, honey production, dairy production and 
others).  QAT recommendations have been discussed with the State Technical Unit and are 
reflected in the draft EMP and Environmental Assessment (EA) currently under Bank review.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The screening procedures, to be detailed in the EMP and incorporated in the Project 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Operational Manual, will explicitly prohibit approval of any community subproject proposal 
which is likely to cause degradation to essential natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The EMP will include a process, including screening criteria to be incorporated into the 
Project Operational Manual, for detecting the potential use of pesticides under any community 
subproject proposal. Where appropriate, the EMP will also incorporate provisions for promoting 
integrated pest management approaches in relevant agricultural investment subprojects.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The Project Operational Manual will outline procedures to be followed in the event of 
"chance finds" of culturally significant materials during subproject implementation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Paraiba has an indigenous population of about 12,600, the majority comprising the legally-
recognized ethnic grouping of Potiguara. There are also quilombola (slave-descendent) 
communities (162 benefited from the previous project). The repeater project will continue to 
support these groups by expanding  coverage to groups not already reached and intensifying  
actions for those already served. The Indigenous Peoples Participation Plan (IPPP) - to be 
incorporated in the Project Operational Manual - and the PAD, will describe in detail, 
experiences with indigenous peoples and quilombola under the previous project and lessons 
learned.  The IPPP will also define guidelines and specific procedures for engaging these 
communities in project activities. Culturally-appropriate methods will be used to promote 
inclusion ? outreach, studies, information and mobilization campaigns, consultation with 
leaders/community members, TA and training.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/28/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
Because the project will not finance physical or economic displacement, OP 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered. The project Operational Manual will incorporate 
exclusion criteria for any subproject with potential to result in involuntary resettlement, and 
describe screening/approval procedures for subprojects.  
 
The State's implementing agency has prepared an Environmental Analysis, and related 
Environmental Management Plan, and Indigenous Peoples Participation Plan which are 
currently under review by the Bank.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge A. Munoz 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
 
Comments:   
