Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/31/2007 
Report No.:  AC2136
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P083997 
Project Name:  Alto Solimoes Basic Services and Sustainable Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gerard Martin La Forgia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (45%);Other social services 
(30%);Health (25%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
24.25 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.75
10.75 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall APL Phase I project objective is to improve the economic and social 
conditions based on the sustainable use of natural resources in the interior of State of 
Amazonas with a special focus in the target Alto Solimoes Region.  Primary objectives 
include:  (i) raising income, (ii) increasing access to potable water and basic sanitation; 
and (iii) improving health outcomes of targeted populations.  A secondary objective is to 
improve the management capacity and administrative efficiency of the state's public 
sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project consists of four main components:  (A) Policy and Institutional 
Development for Regional, Cross-sectoral Development; (B) Sustainable Development;  
(C) Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS); and (D) Health Care.  
 
Component A. Policy and Institutional Strengthening for Regional and Cross-sectoral 
Development (US$ 6.4 million) aims to establish an enabling regional institutional 
environment in Alto Solimoes that (a) supports high-performing and sustainable State 
development policies and program implementation and (b) facilitates the delivery of the 
outputs and outcomes anticipated in Components B, C and D. The secondary objective is 
Page  2
to promote cross-sectoral linkages among sectoral activities. Project interventions would 
center on (i) capacity building, technical assistance and logistical support; (ii) 
introduction of cost-effective information and communications technologies; (iii) 
effective disbursement and finance mechanisms for sector-specific activities; and (iv) 
application of flexible mechanisms for contracting and managing human resources.  
 
Component B.- Promotion of Competitive Sustainable Development Production (US$ 
7.3 million) has the objective to contribute to the economic efficiency of producers in the 
Alto Solimoes. This goal would be pursued by (a) analyzing and establishing the pre-
conditions for the competitiveness of four existing productive clusters in the area; and (b) 
supporting the implementation of the most needed activities within each cluster to 
achieve the desirable efficiency and productivity to compete in prices and quality in local, 
regional and, in some cases, national markets. Investment matching grants and 
continuous technical assistance would be provided to producer associations with high 
potential of market accessibility and quality of their products. More specifically, the 
subcomponent would finance business assistance to production associations; business 
development plans; grant-writing and proposal development related to business and 
regional development; business organization and structure; analysis of market 
positioning; business development training courses; and implementation of viable 
business plans.  
 
Component C: Water Supply and Sanitation -WSS (US$ 12.7 million) aims to 
contribute to the improvement in the quality of life and the health of the populations 
living in the nine targeted municipalities in the Alto Solimoes region by improving the 
coverage, efficiency and quality of WSS services in the region through the development 
and implementation of (i) a new institutional, regulatory, legal, operational and financial 
framework for WSS service provision for the interior of Amazonas state, generally, and 
(ii) new service delivery models and approaches for urban and rural WSS and urban solid 
waste disposal in Alto Solimoes.  
 
Component D: Health (US$ 5.9 million).  This component consists of two objectives: (i) 
improve the access to and quality of primary and secondary care services for populations 
residing in the Alto Solimoes region; and (ii) improve the efficiency and management 
capacity of state-financed health services. The overall strategy to achieve these objectives 
consists of developing the know-how, instruments and information environment to 
improve the performance and sustainability of publicly-financed health services in the 
State of Amazonas.  
 
Component E: Project Management (US$ 1.6 million). This component would support 
overall project coordination and supervision.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the State of Amazonas, Brazil. Most activities 
supported through the first phase of the APL will be implemented in the Alto Solimoes 
Page  3
region. A subset of activities will be directed to improving public sector governance and 
management state-wide.  
 
Located in far western part of the State bordering Colombia and Peru, the Alto Solimoes 
Region occupies 213,281 km2, and covers nine municipalities. Alto Solimoes is thinly 
populated containing about 230,000 inhabitants with a population density of 0.58 
inhabitants per km2. Indigenous peoples account for approximately one-fifth of the 
Region's population.  The region is characterized principally by humid tropical forest and 
the large areas of protected areas and indigenous lands.  Unlike other regions of the 
Amazon, which are under heavy pressure from deforestation, the Alto Solimoes Region is 
still relatively pristine in part because it is isolated from the rest of the state. Moreover, 
there are no access roads into the Region.  Goods and people are transported mostly by 
riverboat, taking from 3 to 6 days to reach Manaus, located 2 thousand kilometers to the 
East. However, illegal and unmanaged use of the forest and fisheries is growing, 
threatening the sustainability of the Region's natural resources.   
 
Component A:  Interventions under this component will focus on developing a robust 
institutional environment for sustained economic and social development in the Alto 
Solimoes.  Regional activities will be overseen by a Regional Management Office located 
in the city of Tabatinga in the Alto Solimoes Region.  
 
Components B, C and D:  Interventions under this component would focus on selected 
municipalities within the Alto Solimoes Region. The selected municipalities are:  
Benjamin Constant, Atalaia do Norte, Tabatinga, Amatura, Sao Paulo de Olivenca, Santo 
Antonio do Ica, Tonantins, Fonte Boa and Jutai.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ricardo L. B. Tarifa (LCSRF) 
Mr Garo J. Batmanian (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01 ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  
 
This project was classified as Category A due to the sensitivity and remoteness of the 
project area. Following Bank policy, an Environmental Assessment Report (EAR) was 
prepared by independent experts and a consultation process  was scheduled to assess 
potential impacts of the proposed project on physical, biological, socio-economic and 
physical cultural resources.  
 
The EAR analyzed the potential environmental impacts (positive and negative) of the 
interventions supported by the proposed Project.  Overall, expected project impacts are 
positive.  Project activities have been designed to promote the sustainable use of natural 
resources and to improve health and sanitary conditions of the population of the target 
region. Potential negative impacts are localized, reversible and temporary. Potential 
negative impacts from upgrading WSS systems will be minimized by adopting preventive 
measures and best-practice construction techniques.  
 
Project activities, including productive subprojects, will not take place in protected 
areas. Any activity that may involve the participation of the Indigenous population will 
be discussed with these communities and fully comply with the requirements of Brazilian 
law and World Bank safeguards. The scale of interventions is small and is not likely to 
result in increased pressure on either fish or tree species. Management plans for timber 
will include the protection of individual seed trees, and thus mitigating potential genetic 
erosion. Subprojects for fish production will not result in increased pressure on selected 
species because: (i) fish farming of high value species will reduce the pressure for these 
species, (ii) fisheries management subprojects will foster conservation and sustainable 
use of threatened species as well as the establishment of fisheries reserves, and (iii) 
subprojects will follow existing regulations specifying fishing periods and limiting fish 
size and catch volume.  
 
To strengthen and guarantee the beneficial effects of the interventions, the Program 
prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) specifies a series of measures and 
instruments through which the project would address environmental safeguard issues, 
including their costs and responsibilities.   These measures include:  (i) an environmental 
management system, (ii) instruments of environmental management and control;  (iii) a 
sanitation and environmental educational program, (iv) strengthening of environmental 
management (including environmental licensing and enforcement, technical assistance 
for productive activities, water quality monitoring, management of medical waste), and  
(v) an environmental monitoring program.  
 
Environmentally sensitive investments which will be ineligible for project support 
includes subprojects that would: (i) result on significant reduction of forests or include 
clear cuts of the primary forest,  (ii) involve cattle raising, (iii) result in involuntary 
Page  5
resettlement, (iv) take place in Protected Areas or Indigenous lands (except for the 
activities implemented by the indigenous population in their lands), (v) involve the 
purchase of pesticides, (vi) involve the introduction of invasive species ( in the case of 
agricultural subprojects) or  exotic species (in the cases of fish farming subprojects),  and 
(vii) involve practices that contribute to environmental degradation.  
 
During the concept phase of Project preparation, consultations were held with 
government and non-government agencies (including rural producers, local leaders, and 
Indigenous peoples) in Manaus and in Alto Solimoes to receive input on the proposed 
Project concept. A second round of public consultations to discuss and receive feedback 
on the proposed design was realized mid-September with representatives of the civil 
society, communities, local organizations and NGOs.  The EAR and project design 
reflect the recommendations emerging from these consultations. A complete list of 
participants on the public consultations is presented in chapter 7 of the EAR.  The 
complete list of indigenous organizations consulted is presented in Annex A (Indigenous 
Peoples Development Plan) and Annex 3 of the EAR.  
 
OP 4.04 Natural Habitats and Op 4.36 Forests  
 
These policies are triggered because the proposed Project would finance small scale  
productive subprojects related to forest resources management, including the low-
intensity extraction of timber and non-timber products. To that end, a specific study was 
carried out on the potentially adverse impacts of these activities, taking into account the 
principles of the Forest Policy (OP 4.36). The results of these assessments have been 
incorporated into the EAR. The study found that the conceptual approach of the proposed 
subprojects is adequate and recommends measures to ensure that sustainable forest 
management complies with OP 4.36 requirements. These measures are included in the 
Project's Environment Management Plan.  
 
In the areas where these subprojects would be implemented, the following protected 
areas can be found: (i) Areas of Permanent Preservation (APPs) (e.g., strips of land along 
water courses and mangroves); (ii) Legal Reserves as required by the Forestry Code; (iii) 
officially protected conservation units such as parks, national and state forests, ecological 
reserves; (iv) "strict protection areas" under the National Protected Areas Legislation 
(SNUC); and, (v) unaltered areas which maintain their environmental integrity, and have 
been declared protected areas by the State or Federal Governments. All these areas 
constitute "Critical Natural Habitats" according to Bank policies.  The procedures to be 
adopted during the subproject selection and implementation phase will ensure that these 
areas are preserved. For subprojects financed under Component B (Sustainable 
Development), a negative list will specify that project interventions will not be financed 
in "critical natural habitats," and similar exclusionary measures will also be included in 
the environmental check list for productive subprojects.  The EAR identified possible 
impacts and proposed mitigation measures to be incorporated in the project.  
 
OP 4.09 Control of Pests and Parasites  
 
Page  6
Although it is unlikely that  productive activities (which focus on forest and fish 
products) or  micro-projects for organizational development and community production 
(less than $10,000 each) would involve the financing of pesticides or herbicides, this 
cannot be guaranteed because seed capital for agricultural activities may involve the  
purchase of limited quantities of pesticides or herbicides.  In the case this occurs, specific 
measures would be taken to ensure compliance with OP 4.09. the Operational Manual 
will recommend the adoption of an integrated pest management (IPM) approach 
whenever possible.  
 
OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples  
 
Indigenous peoples are present in the project area and are expected to benefit directly 
and indirectly from project-supported activities.  In accordance with Bank safeguard OP 
4.10, an indigenous Framework and Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPP) were 
prepared. The framework is based on applicable Brazilian legislation and IBRD 
safeguards policies. Indigenous peoples who reside in project areas (Alto Solimoes), 
including potential beneficiaries, were consulted in a culturally appropriate fashion in 
order to avoid or minimize potential adverse impacts. Two rounds of consultations took 
place: the first at the concept stage, and second at the design stage. Annex III of the 
Environmental Assessment contains a summary of an Indigenous Peoples Framework 
and Indigenous Peoples Development Plan, as well as the consultation process that took 
place and the names of the consulted organizations. An English language version of the 
IPP is available at the Bank's InfoShop.  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement  
 
The project will not finance any activities that will lead to involuntary resettlement as 
stipulated in policy OP 4.12, including physical relocation or loss of assets or access to 
natural resources.  The operational manual will include a provision mandating that any 
sites for the upgrading or extension of WSS systems will be done in a way so as to avoid 
the need for resettlement. The operational manual and the legal agreement will stipulate 
that any activities or subprojects that may result in resettlement will not be eligible for 
funding  
 
OP 4.37  Safety of Dams  
 
This policy is not triggered by the project.  The project will not finance dams.  
 
OPN 11.03 Cultural Property  
 
Civil works such as the construction of water and sanitation systems may uncover 
cultural properties.  For compliance with the policy of protection of physical and cultural 
property, an environmental manual for civil works has been prepared.  This manual 
provides rules on appropriate environmental practices to be followed by the entities 
contracted to implement the civil works interventions. The manual will be incorporated in 
the bidding documents so that participating firms are aware in advance of all the 
Page  7
necessary environmental requirements. Compliance with the practices outlined in the 
manual will be a contractual obligation of the civil works contractors, and the correct 
implementation of the manual's requirements will be the responsibility of the PCU and 
the contractors. This manual includes a section on procedures to follow in case of 
unexpected findings of objects with possible cultural or archaeological value.  
 
Overall, expected project impacts are positive and beneficiary for the environment.  
Project activities have been designed to promote the sustainable use of the natural 
resources and to improve health and sanitary conditions of the population of the area. The 
project is not expected to have adverse irreversible impacts on the environment nor on the 
populations who live in the area. However, because the project will finance activities in 
the State of Amazonas, home to both the Amazon forest and a variety of indigenous 
populations, a detailed EAR and IPP were prepared to ensure that the project does not 
have an adverse impact on the environment and those populations inhabiting the region 
benefit from the project.  
 
The project is designed to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Bank's 
umbrella policy on Environmental Assessment. Environmental impacts of the project are 
expected to be positive or neutral because:  
 
-
The project does not involve any large-scale engineering or construction 
activities. Water and Sanitation interventions will be directed to the upgrading of existing 
systems. Health care infrastructure expansion will be limited to rehabilitation of already 
existing ambulatory health units and a minor upgrading of emergency services in a 
regional hospital (Tabatinga Referral Hospital "Unidade Hospitalar de Referencia de 
Tabatinga"). These already existing units in the municipalities produce medical wastes 
that, in general, do not have proper management and disposal. As such, EAR proposes an 
action plan for the management of health wastes, which was included in component 
design and is part in the Environmental Management Plan.  In sum, the expected output is 
positive.  
 
-
Water and sanitation interventions would induce the rational use of water in 
existing systems, or the provision of potable water supplies in situations where these are 
currently precarious.  
 
-
The productive subprojects to be funded under the "Sustainable Development 
Subcomponent" component (timber and non-timber forest products, fishing products, 
micro-agricultural projects) are all small-scale initiatives with great potential to raise the 
income of poor communities living in the area through the sustainable use of natural 
resources. However, they have some potential to impact the local environment.  In this 
regard, the EAR presents a series of criteria and procedures to analyze and approve the 
subprojects, including advice on monitoring of subproject implementation. This will 
ensure environmental integrity and the application of mitigation measures.   
 
Page  8
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term negative impact is expected as a result of the project.  On the 
contrary, the environmental and social impacts of the water and sanitation activities are 
expected to be positive, as described below.  
 
The anticipated benefits of the project --summarized from the IPP-- include:  
 
-
For indigenous peoples: Benefits will be both direct and indirect: (i) piloting of a 
special consultative committee  consisting of representatives of state, federal and 
municipal governments; (ii) participation in productive subprojects; (iii) participation in 
micro-business development subprojects (iv) improved access to basic WSS and health 
services in urban areas; (v) organization of referral systems to improve access to specialty 
and secondary care, and (vi) training of FUNASA teams (which provide WSS and basic 
care to indigenous peoples residing in the reserves).  
 
-
For governmental agencies: the project will promote openness and transparency in 
their decision-making processes by intensifying the social control mechanisms, 
simplifying procedures and improving accountability, which will be translated into a 
better management capacity.  
 
-
For women: the project will improve services delivery, especially for WSS and 
health care, making it less burdensome for women to take care of their families.  
 
For all social groups in the project area: the project will improve their living conditions 
through:  
 
-
Expanding access to and quality of the health services.  
 
-
Collecting information on social and economic indicators.  
 
-
Establishing a regional health referral center in Tabatinga.  
 
-
Expanding preventive health and promoting surveillance activities in remote 
areas.  
 
-
Optimizing or installing water supply systems in urban and rural settlements.  
 
-
Making sanitation systems available in rural settlements.  
 
-
Creating management capacity.  
 
-
Raisin incomes through improving business organization and management skills 
and promoting productive projects in fish and fish breeding, wood and non-wood 
products and tropical fruits.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The original request from the State of Amazonas was for a Standard Investment Loan:, 
consisting of a larger scale project  to stimulate economic growth, reduce poverty and 
raise the quality of life in the State's interior.   After considerable analysis, both the 
Borrower and the Bank agreed on utilizing the APL instrument to support the proposed 
project, reduce the scale of activities (for APL phase 1), and  concentrate investments in a 
Page  9
single region for the following reasons: (i) the challenges related to the State?s weak 
institutional capacity, spatial logistics and lack of experience with Bank procedures 
suggest the need for a modest first phase; and (ii) lessons learned from Bank experiences 
in regional and cross-sectoral development point to the robustness of a phased approach 
in which the first phase focuses on institutional capacity building, policy development, 
technical assistance and pilot activities to create the proper foundations prior to expansion 
of the scale or scope of project-supported activities.  
 
In the first request, large scale projects were considered, but replaced by smaller scale 
investments in part to reduce the risk of environmental impacts.   Specifically for the 
sustainable development component, the alternative proposal was to fund hundreds of 
subprojects to foment timber and fish production to foster high economic impact on the 
regional economy.  However, due to the environmental sensitivity of the region, it was 
decided that the first phase would focus on the subprojects that already have forest 
management plans approved by the state environmental agency, and only expand this 
activity in the second phase when there is evidence of the capacity of the state to support 
and monitor these subprojects.  In the case of fish farming, the alternative was to fund the 
establishment of new farms, but it was decided that the first phase would support 
upgrading and strengthening the technical capacity of existing farms.  
 
Finally, the "no project" alternative was considered.  This would lead to the depletion of 
natural resources and further impoverishment of local communities. Without the support 
of the proposed project the region could repeat the "boom and bust" cycle and "wild 
west" phenomenon observed elsewhere in the Amazon. Forest resources will tend to be 
over harvested to supply the informal and increasingly illegal production chain with little, 
if any, consideration for the environment. Workers would remain in the informal sector, 
and resources would be sold with no value-added locally, and below market price. The 
communities would experience short-term economic growth which would be quickly 
replaced by a significant down turn once resources are depleted, resulting in deforestation 
and increased poverty.   Indeed the OED review of the Bank's forest Policy (2000) 
concluded that in forest rich countries such as Brazil,  the past strategy of not being 
involved with forest management did not discourage wasteful practices, and had an 
unintended effect:  "It discouraged the Bank from promoting changed attitudes and 
helping countries build internal capacity and , paradoxically, because the Bank was a 
non-player, it hindered Bank efforts to give conservation-oriented forest constituencies a 
voice in their country's internal decision-making."   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to closely monitor potential environmental impact during implementation, a list 
of environmentally sensitive areas in the state would be prepared prior to project 
implementation. This would be based on data previously disclosed under the Economic 
Environmental Zoning Program.  The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) would carefully 
monitor subprojects within these areas to ensure that there are no cumulative impacts.  
This would be done through an annual review of environmentally sensitive areas where 
Page  10
two or more subprojects have been implemented in order to detect any cumulative 
impacts and recommend necessary mitigation as well as preventive measures.  
 
The Borrower has agreed that the following measures would be taken to ensure 
compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies:  
 
-
Proposed forestry and other productive activities would be supported only if 
based on forest management plans licensed by the Secretary for Sustainable Development 
(SDS).  This information would be incorporated into the standard productive subproject 
dossiers to help associations to minimize environmental problems at the design stage. 
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for productive activities would consist of 
the following requirements: (i) identifying possible impacts including the need for 
additional study and environmental licensing during productive project preparation; (ii) 
screening of productive project  proposals by the implementation unit, with input from 
SDS and IBAMA where necessary; (iii) productive project review and approval of 
simplified environmental impact analysis, including mitigation measures and monitoring 
indicators where appropriate; (iv) community training on environmental impacts and 
responsibilities for mitigation prior to subproject implementation; (v) financing of forest 
and aquatic management plans, implementation of mitigation measures where needed; 
and (vi) monitoring and periodic review.  
 
-
Staff in the PCU, ATER, Municipal Committees of Sustainable Regional 
Development, and associations would receive environmental awareness training.  
 
-
SDS and other State organizations would be involved in the design of information 
and dissemination campaigns for the project.  
 
-
Economic zoning information to identify activities that are being proposed in 
areas of high environmental risks (conservation areas, high biodiversity, and natural 
resources under pressure, fragile or sensitive environments) would be used.  
 
Additionally, with regard to indigenous peoples, the following indicators will be used to 
measure the project effectiveness and participatory strategy:  
 
-
Improved access to quality basic care (in urban areas) and to specialized care and 
secondary care would contribute to the reduction of maternal and infant morbidity and 
mortality.  
 
-
Improved participation in public discussions that results in more legitimate 
decision-making outcomes.  
 
-
Improved technical capacity to obtain means of sustainable survival.  
 
-
Improved environmental management..  
 
-
Improved access to basic infrastructure (water and sanitation).  
 
The indicators above also refer to other vulnerable groups that are not indigenous. In the 
case of the indigenous groups, the indicators will be achieved through culturally 
Page  11
appropriate processes, in accordance with consultations that took place with indigenous 
peoples'representatives.  
 
Instruments for Environmental Management:   The Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) was prepared and includes the following instruments and programs:  
 
a) 
Instruments: Eligibility criteria for subprojects, a negative list with non-eligible 
activities, impact mitigation plan, environmental monitoring plan, environmental check-
list specific for each type of intervention, Environmental manual for constructions.  
 
b)
Programs:  Social Communication Program, Program for Sanitary and 
Environmental Education, Strengthening of Environmental Management. (for improved 
licensing, enforcement, technical assistance, and monitoring)  
 
c) 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Initial meetings with environmental specialists, representatives of civil society and 
government and business organizations took place in January and February, 2006. The 
Environmental Assessment (EA) was made publicly available and discussed with key 
stakeholders.  A revised version of the EA was prepared and open for public consultation.   
The final EA is complemented with the results of the public consultations held in 
Tabatinga (in the target region of Alto Solimoes) and Manaus in September, 2006, with 
participation of the state and region key organizations to discuss the environmental 
sustainability of the Amazonas Regional Development Project.  
 
-
Key stakeholders are:  (i) State  and Muncipal Government entities: Municipal 
offices of Alto Solimoes SDS/IPAAM/AFLORAN, Secretariat of Infrastructure - 
SEINF/Cosama; Secretariat of Planning - SEPLAN; SEPROR; SUSAM; FVS; IDAM; 
CIAMA; (ii) Federal Government entities: IBAMA,FUNASA, INCRA, UFAM, 
Ministerio do Exercito - Comando da Fronteira Solimoes; INPA. (iii) Representative non-
governmental organizations:  GTA,  Consorcio de Municipios do Alto Solimoes, Diocese 
do Alto Solimoes, Fishermen Association , Rural Producers Association, Instituto 
Mamiraua, CNS, GTA, Escola de Luteria do Amazonas, Greenpeace, IMAZON, 
Conselho de Manejo Florestal; Indigenous organizations: Conselho Geral das Tribos 
Ticuna - CGTT ; Conselho Indigena do Vale do Javari - CIVAJA; Organizacao de Saude 
do Povo Ticuna do Alto Solimoes - OSPTAS; Coordenacao das Organizacoes Indigenas 
da Amazonia Brasileira - COIAB.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/25/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/31/2007  
Page  12
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/28/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2007 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  13
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gerard Martin La Forgia 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Garo J. Batmanian 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/30/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
01/30/2007 
Comments:   
