Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2519 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P101418 
Project Name: Goias State Highway Management Project (APL II) 
Task Team Leader: Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (87%);Sub-national government administration (13%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Decentralization 
(P);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
65.00
65.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
It is proposed that the project development objective of the second APL remains the same as that 
of the Program, namely to increase the efficiency of the road transport system within sustainable 
environmental and fiscal frameworks.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
It is proposed that the second APL remains structured with the same five components as included 
in the first APL, with added emphasis on the state reform component.  The project cost is 
estimated at US$130 million, of which US$65 million would be financed by the Bank.  The 
project components would include:  
 
-
a
highway rehabilitation and maintenance component, to:  
 
(a) support the completion of the rehabilitation of the state paved road network (following a 
study undertaken by AGETOP of the condition of its network as part of the supervision of the 
program Terceira Via, about 1,000 km of road sections remain to be rehabilitated) through the 
use of performance-based contracts and economically-optimized technical solutions,  
Page  2
(b) structure a state program to ensure all-weather access on the state non-paved network 
(essentially by upgrading bridges and drainage structures), an essential program to ensure 
movement of goods and people between the municipalities, economic production areas and the 
main services centers, job markets and transport corridors; and  
 
(c) the implementation of a first phase of the program, on about 2,000 km of the non-paved 
network.  
 
-
a
highway paving component, to link selected agro-industrial centers to major highway or 
multimodal corridors (about 200 km. of existing state feeder roads would be paved).  
 
-
a
highway policy and institutional development component, to:  
 
(a) pursue assistance to the state infrastructure secretariat in developing transport policies, 
through the strengthening of the secretariat's transport department, the consolidation of the state's 
freight transport plan, and assistance to define policy and management models to be used in the 
areas of inter-municipal bus transportation and of provision of rural transport services; and  
 
(b) consolidate AGETOP's capacity, through the strengthening of internal procedures' 
performance evaluation capacity, the procedures' modernization, the conclusion of the 
modernization of management and operational information systems, the consolidation of 
progress made in the planning and project management areas, as well as the definition of a 
strategy to ensure the sustainability of the decentralization to the municipalities of maintenance 
responsibilities for the municipal networks.  
 
-
an environmental management component, to:  
 
(a) review the distribution of responsibilities among the relevant state entities, and structure a 
proposal for a management contract between SEMARH and AGMA;  
 
(b) pursue progress in consolidating the capacity of SEMARH and AGMA;  
 
(c) pursue progress in developing instruments to foster private sector participation in managing 
biodiversity and natural resources (such as the Bolsa Verde, the Clean Development Mechanism, 
environmental certification process for producers, and development of alternative methods for 
production); and  
 
(d) consolidate the progress realized in the establishment of protected areas, through definition 
of incentives to the implementation of established areas and the creation of corridors to connect 
such areas.  
 
-
a
state reform component, which will support:  
 
(a) the finance secretariat in designing and implementing a institutional strengthening program 
for the secretariat (including preparation of a strategic plan, restructuring of procedures, 
centralization and modernization of information systems, and development of training programs) 
and implement a series of measures to increase tax collection efficiency (especially with respect 
to the collection of ICMS-related debts, and improvements of ICMS tax bureaus efficiency);  
 
(b) capacity strengthening at the level of the planning secretariat at (i) the planning level, 
through the update of the state long-term strategic plan, the elaboration of a regional 
development agenda, the consolidation of the monitoring systems for the state programs, (ii) the 
administration organization level, through the reduction in superposition of responsibilities 
across entities, the detailing of competencies and obligations between entities in charge of 
defining policies and those in charge of executing such policies, and the structuring of at least 2 
Page  3
management contracts; and (iii) the level of provision of services to the public, through support 
to the expansion of the Vapt-Vupt system; and  
 
(c) the consolidation of the state regulatory capacity, through further support to the state 
regulatory agency, to improve monitoring of concessionaires' activities, structure a capacity to 
monitor hydrological resources use, structure a regulatory framework for provision of inter-
municipal passenger transport services, structure a first PPP project, and develop training 
programs for the agency's staff.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The state of Goias is located in the high central plains of Brazil, in the Biome known as the 
Cerrado. The region's natural vegetation consists mainly of savannah, or open fields with brush 
vegetation, with riparian forests along the rivers. The state's economy has traditionally been 
based on extensive cattle ranching, but over the past three decades, the region has seen a very 
rapid development of agriculture, particularly corn and soybean, and industry.  
 
The civil works to be financed by the second APL (as was the case for the first APL) will be 
located on sections of the existing state road network, within the roads' right-of-way. No new 
road construction will take place.  
 
The technical assistance activities to be financed under the second APL (as it was the case for 
the first APL) will benefit the state as a whole.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
With support from the first APL, the state significantly increased its capacity in managing 
natural resources and protecting biodiversity, with: (a) the institutional strengthening of the 
state's environmental agency, and the consolidation of environmental impact assessment and 
mitigation procedures within AGETOP; (b) a significant increase in the proportion of the state's 
surface under environmental protection, from 1. 8% in 1998 to 4.2% in 2005; and (c) progress 
realized in the development of enconomic incentives to enhance the effieciency and effectiveness 
of the state's environmental management policy instruments.  
 
In addition, the civil works component of the first APL was implemented under a safeguard 
framework designed during the preparation of the first APL (including a Sector Environmental 
Assessment, AGETOP's Environmental Norms and Procedures, a Public Consultation Manual, 
and an Involuntary Ressettlement Framework).  No safeguard-related issue arose during the 
implementation of the component, and, during the discussions undertaken in the context of the 
ICR preparation, no suggestion was made either by AGMA or AGETOP to modify the 
framework.  This confirms the adequacy of such framework as well as of the state's capacity to 
implement it.  
 
It is thus proposed to use the same basic safeguard framework for the second APL; however, an 
assessment of the efficieny of its implementation under the first phase, to identify possible 
weaknesses and needs for updates, will be carried out, and the framework will be improved in 
line with the results of this assessment. More details are in section II below.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
Ms Juliana Menezes Garrido Pereira (LCSFT) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental impacts resulting from civil works on existing road sections are expected to 
be relatively minor, and mostly related to civil works execution.  It is proposed that such impacts 
be identified and mitigated in accordance with the provisions of the framework designed during 
the preparation of the first APL, which will be reviewed and updated if such need arises from the 
assessment of the implementation of the framework under the first APL. It is also proposed to 
update AGETOP's Environmental Norms and Procedures to adapt them to additional technical 
solutions for road rehabilitation and improvement.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
As was the case during the preparation of the first APL, it is not expected that the 
implementation of the second APL will have any negative impact on natural habitats.  Specific 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will need to be prepared for road rehabilitation 
works, and Environmental Impact Assessments and EMPs will be prepared for road paving 
works. These documents will be used by AGMA as the basis to issue the environmental licenses. 
In the case of road paving works, a satisfactory review by the Bank of such documents will be 
condition for the emission of the Bank's no-objection to works contract bidding.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
As was the case during the preparation of the first APL, it is not expected that the 
implementation of the second APL will have any negative impact on physical cultural resources, 
as the project civil works will be located within the existing right-of-ways of road sections.  
However, "chance findings" are possible, and it is proposed that the Sectoral Environment 
Assessment includes a section describing the procedures to be followed in such event (the 
IPHAN procedures).   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
As was the case during the preparation of the first APL, it is not expected that the second 
APL's implementation will impact indigenous peoples in the state (the implementation of the 
first APL did not generate such impact).  Indeed: (a) the state counts only an estimated 340 
indigenous people (on an area as large as that of Italy, mostly located in two areas (around the 
municipalities of Nova America and Aruana), as well as a few Quilombos communities in the 
northern part of the state; and (b) as stated above, civil works will be located within the right-of-
ways of state roads, usually quite distant from indigenous peoples' areas or Quilombos' 
communities.  However, as it is not possible to a priori ensure that all road sections would be 
selected as not to affect an indigenous people area, it is proposed to prepare an indigenous people 
development framework.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As was the case during the preparation of the first APL, it is not expected that involuntary 
resettlement will occur as a result of the second APL's implementation (no involuntary 
resettlement was undertaken during the implementation of the first APL).  Indeed, as stated 
above, civil works will be located with the roads' right
-
of
-
ways, which are very much free of 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
settlement.  However, as it is not possible to a priori ensure that an involuntary resstlement issue 
will not arise during implementation, it is proposed to use the framework prepared during the 
preparation of the first APL, which will be reviewed and, if necessary, updated. In addition, the 
project will strengthen the state's capacity in consolidating its protected areas, without supporting 
land acquisition or exchange. In further project preparation, the team will assess whether the 
activities under the environmental component might lead to restrictions in access to natural 
resources legally designated parks and protected ares, resulting in adverse impacts on the 
livelihoods of the displaced people. In the affirmative case, a process framework will be 
prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/26/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The activities aiming at completing the existing safeguard framework have been launched 
following the clearance of the minutes of the PCN review meeting.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
11/16/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
11/16/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
