Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1734 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P094315 
Project Name: Sao Luis Urban Upgrading Environmental Management and Social 
Inclusion 
Task Team Leader: Martin P. Gambrill 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 17, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSFW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (75%);Sub-national 
government administration (15%);Solid waste management (10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Other social 
protection and risk management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.64 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
23.76
23.76 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project aims to promote the sustainable development and improve the quality of life of the 
population of S?o Lu?s through: (a) integrating the low-income communities of the Bacanga 
basin into the broader city fabric through cross-sectoral activities in urban services provision, 
social inclusion, income generation, and environmental management; and (b) municipal capacity 
building activities to support strategic planning, management, and service delivery city-wide.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
PMSL is seeking World Bank financing for a proposed Urban Upgrading, Environmental 
Management and Social Inclusion Project, which would address critical municipal governance 
issues broadly, and specific infrastructure and social development needs in the Bacanga basin in 
particular, while building municipal capacity for longer-term land-use, urban, socio-economic 
and environmental planning and management, and for sustainable urban and social service 
provision. The proposed project has an estimated total cost of US$ 59. 4 million, of which US$ 
Page  2
35.64 million (60%) will be IBRD funds, to be executed as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) 
over a five-year period. PMSL?s longer-term vision for the municipality and the metropolitan 
region extends beyond upgrading existing informal settlements, to creating physical, economic, 
social and political conditions that promote the island?s sustainable development while inhibiting 
the future expansion of unplanned occupation. The proposed Project will support the local and 
the wider municipal and metropolitan elements of implementing this vision through the 
following components:  
 
Component 1 ?Municipal planning, policy, institutional development, and project management  
(US$ 5 million): (a) preparation and overseeing the implementation of the municipal urban 
development plan; (b) preparation and overseeing the implementation of territorial, land-use, 
socio-economic and environmental management plans for Bacanga basin; (c) sanitary and 
environmental education and promotion; (d) strengthening institutional capacity and governance, 
and the planning and management of basic service provision and other related activities; (e) 
support to municipal-wide M&E programs for service provision and environmental protection; 
(f) project management and audits.  
 
Component 2 ? Urbanization, social inclusion and poverty reduction (US$ 49.9 million): (a) 
WSS, drainage and solid waste management; (b) restructuring of roads and transport system, and 
road paving; (c) transfer of federal and state land to municipal control; (d) resettlement of at-risk 
populations; (e) creation of parks and green spaces; (f) social services provision/improvement; 
(g) employment and income generation promotion; (h) support to PMSL?s micro-credit program.  
 
Component 3 ? Environmental and water resource management (US$ 4.5 million): (a) 
renovation and management of Bacanga Dam; (b) evaluation of, and support to, implementation 
of conservation areas; (c) revegetation/reforestation of key areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
S?o Lu?s Municipality, Maranh?o, Brazil   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSEN) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSFU) 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment will be undertaken by an independant consultant following 
OP/BP 4.01   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
All issues related to the Natural Habitats OP/BP4.04 will be analyzed and reported in the 
same environmental impact report prepared by the consultant undertaking the Environmental 
Assessment.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Bank-wide guidance on this issue is that any time civil works are involved in a project, the 
Cultural Property policy OPN 11.03 is automatically triggered regardless of whether there are 
any known physical cultural resources in the project area. The fulfillment of the policy's 
requirements would constitute screening for physical cultural resources as part of the 
Environmental Assessment process, and the inclusion of "chance find" procedures in all bidding 
contracts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
consultant will be contracted to prepare a Resettlement Framework for the project. It is not 
currently anticipated that there will be involuntary resettlement during the first year of Project 
implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The analysis and rehabilitation of a small dam will be carried out under the auspices of the 
Project. Although an inspection panel is not triggered due to the dam's size, all the same dam 
saftey consultancy analyses (structural, geotechnical, hydraulic) will nevertheless be undertaken 
during Project preparation.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/17/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/28/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Initiate:09/01/2005; finalize 04/28/2006   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Martin P. Gambrill 
01/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
