Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3186 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P106208 
Project Name: Pernambuco SWAP: Improving Quality and Efficiency of Education and 
Public Management 
Task Team Leader: Ricardo Rocha Silveira 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (80%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
154.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
543.66
543.66 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the Pernambuco Improving Quality and Efficiency of Education 
and Public Management Project (the PE SWAp) are to: (a) improve the quality and efficiency of 
public education, (b) foster equity in the provision of education services, and (c) support the 
overall state modernization effort through interventions to be carried out at the state level as well 
as in the Secretariat of Education for later replication in other sectors.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed PE SWAp would be a SIL addressing activities in both education sector reform 
and public sector management needed to improve educational outcomes, as detailed below. The 
proposed operation will address educational priorities by leveraging funds and mobilizing 
programs through Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEP)-linked disbursement, disbursement-
linked indicators and technical assistance. It is proposed that the Bank finances $154 million:  
$150 million in education sector investments under a SWAp approach, and $4 million for 
Page  2
technical assistance needed to support the definition and design of activities necessary to guide 
management reforms in the State and mainly focused on the education sector.  
 
Axis I: Improvement of Basic Education.  
 
The PE SWAp reaffirms the states priority towards addressing educational issues first identified 
and included in EDUQ and elaborated in subsequent analytical work and the PE SWAp Carta 
Consulta.  
 
Component 1. Basic Standards Program. The Secretariat of Education (SEE) has defined basic 
standards to be applied, gradually, to all state schools in all levels of education.  These basic 
standards include: (i) rehabilitating and upgrading infrastructure and equipment, (ii) introducing 
computer and science labs and training of teachers in their use, (iii) equipping school libraries, 
and (iv) providing learning materials. Additionally, basic standards include (v) assuring the 
adequate number of teachers per classroom.  
 
The performance indicator will be the number of schools meeting basic standards (this indicator 
might be disaggregated). The implementation of basic standards is supported by eight EEPs 
totaling $420 million.  
 
Component 2. Literacy Program.  An important sectoral priority is to ensure the conditions for 
children to become literate in the early years of Fundamental Education. To achieve this, the 
State Government has introduced a comprehensive teacher training program, in cooperation with 
the Ayrton Senna Foundation (ASF).  The ASF supports the training of literacy tutors for 
subsequent replication to all teachers in Fundamental Education (EF), and the provision of 
materials.  
 
Performance Indicators:  (i) the proportion of participating low EF state students that are 
certified as literate (able to read and write) and (ii) the share of municipal low EF students that 
are participating in the literacy program.  
 
The implementation of the literacy program is supported by one EEP of $33 million.  
 
Component 3. Overage Correction Program. There are three sub-programs addressing age-
grade distortion.  Each sub-program targets overage students of a segment of basic education.  In 
the early years of EF, the ASF is working with SEE to provide both literacy (for overage students 
without the basic elements of literacy) and acceleration (for overage students already literate).  In 
the later years of EF, and in secondary education, SEE is proposing to use the methodology for 
acceleration provided by the Roberto Marinho Foundation.  
 
Performance Indicators:  (i) the number of students in the state and municipal systems, in low 
EF, that are certified as: (a) literate, and (b) accelerated; (ii) the number of students in the state 
and municipal systems, in high EF, certified as accelerated and (iii) the number students in the 
state system, secondary education, certified as accelerated.  
 
Page  3
The implementation of the overage correction program is supported by three EEPs totaling $24 
million.  
 
Component 4. Strengthening Monitoring and Evaluation.  The project will fund the upgrading 
and operalization of the individual student monitoring system and the implementation of 
Pernambucos student assessment system.  The idea is to provide a greater focus on feedback of 
individual students and better usage of assessment results in the development of classroom 
remedial measures.  
 
Performance Indicators: (i) the number of students monitored individually in the state and 
municipal systems (ii) design and implementation of an action plan, satisfactory to the Bank, to 
disseminate information on student performance,and (iii) design and implementation of action 
plans of remedial measures, satisfactory to the Bank, in response to results of student 
assessments (and accompanying individual monitoring system) in the schools in the bottom 
quintile of performance.  
 
The implementation of the overage correction program is supported by two EEPs totaling $4.5 
million.  
 
Axis II: Reform of Public Sector Management  
 
The proposed Project would support public sector modernization through strengthening the 
performance of the state expenditure management systems and other targeted technical 
assistance activities.  The aim is to establish a good governance platform which will permit the 
state to deepen institutional reforms and improve expenditure quality.  One PSM component will 
put in place critical cross-cutting instruments that will benefit both state PSM, in general, and the 
PSM of the education sector, in particular.  A second PSM component will further strengthen 
education management through education sector-specific interventions.  
 
Component 1. General Public Sector Management Interventions.  The State Government plans 
to carry out a number of studies and initiatives aimed at better understanding and reforming the 
States managerial issues.  Among the areas are: (i) Results-Based Management, (ii) institutional 
strengthening in procurement through implementation of the action plan resulting from the 
application of the OECD indicators, and (iii) institutional strengthening in financial management, 
through implementation of the action plan resulting from the application of the Public Financial 
Management Performance Measurement (PEFA).  
 
This component also includes the strengthening of the State Secretariat of Management and 
Planning (SEGPLAG) in its function to support coordination with sectors and monitoring and 
evaluation of sector programs.  During project implementation, this will be limited to 
coordination with the education sector and monitoring and evaluation of programs under AXIS I 
of the Project.  
 
Component 2. Education Sector Management Interventions. The SEE would prepare a 
prototype education sector strategic plan with priority activities and suggested monitoring 
indicators as a disbursement condition, by March of 2010. Subsequently, Results-Based 
Page  4
Management (RBM) will be mainstreamed through the budget cycle (strategy, budget 
formulation, budget execution, M&E, feedback loop, budget for following year), making use of 
performance indicators and addressing necessary systems and organization reforms to support 
this effort.  The implementation of the strategic plan could be captured as a Disbursement-linked 
Indicator.  Formulation of the first strategy (and recommendations for mainstreaming RBM 
workshops and training) will be supported by technical assistance.   
 
Although these will be further defined during preparation, the technical assistance/studies that 
are currently being considered for funding under this component include: creating/strengthening 
the M & E unit at the SEE; studies on rationalizing teacher use, valorization of teaching 
profession, school security, cost benefit of addressing the age-distortion problem, and age-
distortion good practices.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented mostly by the SEE, and will affect schools located throughout 
the state.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has been implementing two projects with investments of the same nature: 
FUNDESCOLA and EDUQ. Thus, it is expected that the Borrower builds upon any existing 
instruments to address safeguard policies under this operation. This issue will be part of project 
preparation activities.  
 
The proposed operation is rated as Category C for environmental impact classification. 
Consequently, a stand alone Environmental Assessment is not required, but the Borrower will 
make available a Manual for Contractors focusing on good practices for environmental 
management in school rehabilitation works. To this end, the Borrower will build upon available 
documents from other Education projects in Brazil, such as EDUQ and Fundescola. The Manual 
will be part of the Projects Operational Manual and, where applicable, would be part of contracts 
financed by the State for school works.  
 
The proposed operation is rated as Category C for environmental impact classification. 
Consequently, a stand alone Environmental Assessment is not required, but the Borrower will 
make available a Manual for Contractors focusing on good practices for environmental 
management in school rehabilitation works. To this end, the Borrower will build upon available 
documents from other Education projects in Brazil, such as EDUQ and Fundescola. The Manual 
will be part of the Projects Operational Manual and, where applicable, would be part of contracts 
financed by the State for school works.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena (LCSEN) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Regarding Social Assessment the team will update the existing work carried out during the 
preparation of EDUQ project with the objective to verify project?s potential effects on 
Indigenous Peoples and to determine if an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be necessary. In 
order to comply with the requirements of OP 4.10, the Borrower will lead prior and informed 
consultations with potential indigenous beneficiaries.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/26/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Social Assessment to verify the projects potential effects on Indigenous Peoples and to 
determine whether an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is necessary. The Social Assessment is 
expected to be available by Appraisal (Dec. 2007).   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ricardo Rocha Silveira 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
 
Comments:   
