Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/09/2007 
Report No.:  AC3245
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P106038 
Project Name:  BR  São Paulo Trains and Signalling 
Task Team Leader:  Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
375.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
635.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan Bank for Internaitonal Cooperation (JBIC) 
540.00
1,175.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed development objective is to: a) improve the level-of-service provided to the 
urban rail transport users in the S?o Paulo Metropolitan Region in a safe and cost-
efficient manner by increasing the peak?hour and off-peak carrying capacity of Lines A 
and F of the Companhia Paulista de Trens Metropolitanos(CPTM) and Lines 1, 2 and 3 of 
the S?o Paulo Metro Company (Metro)?; and b) continue the strengthening of the 
transport management and policy functions at the SPMR.  
 
16. 
This objective will be met by: (i) financing rolling stock critical for increasing the 
peak-hour carrying capacity of both rail systems; and ?systems? (signaling, telecom and 
electrical) to allow for the increase in train frequencies and timely transfers between 
buses, suburban trains and the metro; (ii) fine-tuning and implementing pricing, 
regulatory and funding policies which improve cost-recovery and increase long-term 
financial sustainability of the State and municipal governments, and the operating 
agencies involved and (iii)  designing urban transport strategies and actions to mitigate 
the impact of rising transport costs on the mobility of the poor.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project will comprise two components:  
 
(a) Infrastructure and Equipment: to acquire (i) forty trains (Electrical Multiple Units-
EMUs) of eight cars each and accessories for the CPTM; and (ii) seventeen trains of 6 
cars each and accessories for the S?o Paulo Metro; (iii) signaling , telecom and electrical 
related equipment and associated infrastructure for CPTM; (iv) signaling and telecom 
equipment and associated infrastructure for the S?o Paulo Metro. This component 
accounts for about 97% of the total project cost. The train acquisition alone represents 
about 75% of the total project cost of US$1550m.  
 
(b) Institutional and Policy Development to (i) consolidate the Regional Transport 
Coordination Commission (CDTI) for the SPMR ;(ii) update the integrated Transport 
Policy, Land Use and Air Quality Management strategy (PITU) for the SPMR to meet 
both transport and air quality targets and to introduce sound cost-recovery, tariff, 
regulatory and subsidy policies; (iii) prepare an action plan to review the funding of the 
urban transport system in the SPMR in view of the adoption of the Bilhete-?nico 
Integrado; and (iv) project management and supervision of the project including the 
acquisition and reception of the trains and systems. This component represents about 3% 
of the total project cost.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the Metropolitan Sao Paulo Region in Brazil involving the Sao 
Paulo Metrorail System serving primarily the Municipality of Sao Paulo and the Sao 
Paulo Suburban Train Company serving the metropolitan area.  
 
The proposed project will not cause any displacement or involuntary resettlement.  
Reconstruction of stations along lines A and F is being carried out with non-Bank 
funding and is taking place entirely within the railway right-of-way.  Aside from possible 
minor traffic disruptions and short-term delays along train routes, there will be very little 
adverse social impact.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSEN) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no potential large scale impacts related to this project. Environmental and 
social impacts have been assessed and are being addressed related to the rehabilitation 
and operation of Lines A and F of the CPTM network. An Environmental Program has 
been prepared to reduce impacts during the operation phase of the Line F, which 
includes, among others, recommendations to increase safety along lines and reduce 
environmental impacts related to the operation of trains (noise, vibration, oil leakages, 
and maintenance).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is going to have positive long-term impacts as the trains will be operating on 
existing railways and improve the overall quality of the public transport in the city. 
Furthermore, the project will finance the development of a long term strategy to further 
integrate transport systems and land use and reduce the environmental impacts, especially 
air pollution, in the city. The project itself is likely to reduce the increase in motorized 
traffic in the city with improved and higher-quality train services.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternatives were considered as the trains will be running on existing lines.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
Project Management Unit will be established by the Borrower to supervise the project 
and ensure compliance with Bank policies. A social-environmental specialist will be 
assigned to this unit and help implement recommendations of environmental control 
program for the operation of trains on the lines and integrate environmental concerns into 
the daily activities of CPTM?s maintenance facilities, focusing on implementing 
activities to reduce and properly treat different waste streams, reduce energy use, better 
Page  4
manage the risk associated with using hazardous chemicals, and integrate environmental 
and worker safety and health requirements in daily operations. Preventive maintenance of 
trains will reduce the potential impacts of oil leakages and proper signaling and education 
of surrounding population will increase safety along the lines.  
 
The Project will help CPTM in implementing a set of management tools and principles 
designed to guide the allocation of resources, assignment of responsibilities and ongoing 
evaluation of practices, procedures, and processes to integrate environmental concerns 
into its daily business practices, as well as outreach and improve user-satisfaction to 
address specific concerns and continuously improve environmental and social 
management practices.  
 
Besides, the project will finance the update of the integrated Transport Policy, Land Use 
and Air Quality Management strategy (PITU) for the SPMR to meet both transport and 
air quality targets.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Since the project focuses on the acquisition of trains, the key stakeholders are the users. 
Surrounding and affected communities were subject to consultations as part of the 
environmental assessment of the works and licensing of the routes.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/27/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/14/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/14/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  5
credit/loan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
11/08/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
11/08/2007 
Comments:   
