Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/16/2007 
Report No.:  AC2789
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P094715 
Project Name:  National Biodiversity Mainstreaming and Institutional Consolidation 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Adriana Moreira 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Central 
government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
22.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
75.00
75.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To promote mainstreaming of biodiversity at national level in key government and 
private sector planning strategies and practices; and consolidate and strengthen 
institutional capacity to produce biodiversity information relevant to mainstreaming.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Mainstreaming Biodiversity into Selected Government and Economic 
Sectors (Total: US$ 31.0 m, GEF US$ 8.0 m)  
 
The objective of this component is to successfully implement the National Biodiversity 
Policy and promote the mainstreaming of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use at 
scale. This will be achieved through government actions aimed at different economic 
sectors with the purpose of seeking the support of relevant stakeholders. Each 
mainstreaming initiative will follow four main steps: (1) for each initiative, consolidation 
of existing information on the problems, bottlenecks, and on the possible alternative 
solutions; (2) consensus building with stakeholders (analysis of problems and the best 
solutions); (3) development of the chosen solutions (methods and procedures); and (4) 
Page  2
implementation of the chosen solutions in selected areas. Such an approach is based on 
the experiences of PROBIO and other federal programs. This component will be 
implemented through two subcomponents: (1.1) Planning and refinement of publick 
sectoral policies and policy instruments; and (1.2) Sectoral activities incorporating 
biodiversity mainstreaming applied at the national level.  
 
Component 2: Mainstreaming Biodiversity into the Private Sector (Total US$ 33.0 m, 
GEF US$ 7.5 m)  
 
The objective of this component is to incorporate the conservation and sustainable use 
of biodiversity into key private sector planning strategies and practices. The main 
mechanism for this component will be the creation and management of an Opportunities 
Fund, housed in and managed by FUNBIO. Support from the Fund will be based on the 
assessment of proposals received and on inducement of subprojects that address the 
possibility of mainstreaming biodiversity in integrated large-scale productive landscapes. 
This component will seek to promote private sector strategies and policies that support 
biodiversity conservation through working with producer groups, associations, 
cooperatives, chambers of commerce, and large firms, and in coordination with existing 
initiatives with similar objectives. This focus on policies and strategies will allow the 
component to have a broader impact than individual projects might allow. This 
component will be implemented through three subcomponents: (2.1) Territorial 
mainstreaming subprojects; (2.2) Best practices and productive/management innovations; 
and (2.3) Coordination and fund management.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Generation of Biodiversity Information 
for Policymaking (Total US$ 30.5 m, GEF US$ 6.5 m)  
 
This component has two objectives. First, to strengthen the technical, institutional, and 
organizational capacity of the institutions responsible for developing and implementing 
biodiversity policy, in Brazil, based on the establishment of mechanisms for coordination 
among these institutions. Second, to promote the production and exchange of biodiversity 
information, inform policy decisions and project design in all sectors, and facilitate the 
tracking of progress toward international commitments like the CBD 2010 targets. This 
component will be implemented through two subcomponents: (3.1) Institutional 
strengthening; and (3.2) Management of biodiversity information.  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (Total US$ 2.5 m, GEF US$ 0.0 
m)  
 
This component will support the other activities of the project by ensuring efficient 
implementation, supervision, coordination, and administration. This component will be 
implemented through two subcomponents: (4.1) Project administration, monitoring and 
evaluation; and (4.2) Information dissemination and communication strategies.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project aims at mainstreaming biodiversity into government policies that will have a 
countrywide impact.  The envisioned subprojects will take place in selected Areas of 
High Biodiversity Importance (as established by Presidential Decree of May 22, 2004) 
for all major Brazilian Biomes (Amazonia, Caatinga, Cerrado, Atlantic Forest, Pantanal 
and Pampas).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga (LCSSA) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The primary goal of the proposed project is the conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity. An Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out, and the results indicate 
that the effects of the project on the environment are likely to be overwhelmingly positive 
as a result from (i) better conceptualization and implementation of policies and programs 
that support conservation strategies; (ii) increased capacity for biodiversity monitoring 
and conservation; (iii) a shift towards the adoption of more sustainable land use and 
sustainable use of natural resources; and (iv) an increase in availability of information on 
biodiversity and on conservation best practices.  
 
Most project activities would support biodiversity-friendly results at the policy or 
information level, while others would support on-the-ground investments to test, 
demonstrate, and facilitate the adoption of more biodiversity-friendly approaches to 
productive activities in various sectors. Potential negative environmental impacts are 
expected to be minimal, and mainly of a localized and temporary nature, originating 
mostly from (a) rehabilitation or construction of small buildings and other minor 
infrastructure, or (b) specific activities related to productive subprojects financed under 
subcomponents 1.2  and 2.1. The project?s Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
addresses the potential negative impacts identified in the EA, and proposes a plan for 
Page  4
avoiding, minimizing and mitigating such eventual impacts associated with project 
activities However, because project activities are designed to be environmentally 
sustainable, with especial attention to the conservation of biodiversity and natural 
resources, they are expected to have the smallest possible negative impact on the 
environment, if any. Participation in project activities by different stakeholders will take 
place on a voluntary basis, especially in subprojects that involve the adoption of more 
sustainable use of natural resources.  
 
The EMP lists all activities with potential negative impacts, specifying time and 
extension of such potential impacts, their intensity, scope, risk of occurrence, potential 
persistence, proposed prevention/mitigation/rehabilitation measures, as well as costs and 
responsible parties for implementation of specific actions under the EMP. In addition, the 
EMP includes an plan for adoption of integrated pest management in project supported 
acitivities, as well as procedures and responsibilities for evaluating and monitoring the 
potential negative environmental impacts of project activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative potential impacts of such nature are envisaged for this project. Howewver, it 
is expected that project activities would result in long term positive impacts on 
conservation of biodiversity in the Areas of High Biodiversity Importance established in 
May 22, 2004, by a Presidential Decree.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment, covering all the safeguard policies triggered by the 
project, including social issues, was carried out by MMA and FUNBIO.  A wide variety 
of stakeholders that were involved in project preparation also participated in evaluating 
project-related safeguard policy issues.  The borrower also prepared an Environmental 
Management Plan with appropriate measures to mitigate any potential negative effects of 
project implementation. The capacity of both MMA and FUNBIO to monitor safeguard-
related issues, and to implement the environmental management plan, has been evaluated 
as average. Capacity building in this area is necessary and will be included in the yearly 
project implementation plans. In addition, the project will compile, generate, and 
disseminate knowledge and information on the importance of biodiversity conservation, 
and of biodiversity-friendly technologies and producedures in various productive sectors.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders associated with the Project may be classified into two groups: 
governmental and private sector stakeholders. The main governmental stakeholders 
include: federal government institutions, including the Ministry of Environment (MMA), 
Page  5
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply (MAPA), the Ministry of Agrarian 
Development (MDA), the Ministry of Health (MS), the Ministry of Science & 
Technology (MCT), the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, the Brazilian Institute for the 
Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA), the Rio de Janeiro Botanical 
Garden (JBRJ), the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (EMBRAPA), and the 
National Commission on Biodiversity (CONABIO). In the early stages of 
implementation, other ministries, including Energy and Mining, Transport, and perhaps 
Tourism, are expected to join the project.  
 
The main private sector stakeholders include: (a) national organizations from various 
private sector groups, and (b) natural resource users. As additional subprojects are 
identified during project implementation, the number of relevant and participating 
stakeholders will increase, involving a larger gamut of national and international NGOs, 
universities, and other research institutions. Stakeholders will play an important role  
during the discussion and analysis of specific policies and the need for mainstreaming  
biodiversity in the different sectors. Institutions such as the Museu Goeldi, environmental 
NGOs, producer groups, and community associations are expected to become active 
participants in different facets of project implementation.  
 
The involvement of primary stakeholders during project preparation  took many 
different forms, including a workshop, on October 27?29, 2004, with the coordinators of 
subprojects of PROBIO, to determine the main aspects that a new project should have, a 
multi-stakeholder exercise to review pertinent programs and to develop proposals for 
mainstreaming biodiversity across these sectors, meetings with the partners of the project 
to prepare the Concept Note, and discussions with project partners to further refine the 
project design and proposal and formulate the incremental cost analysis. Private sector 
actors were involved indirectly through engagement in the Business and Biodiversity 
Challenge workshop, led by the Brazilian Business Council for Sustainable Development 
(CEBDS) and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and more 
directly with reference to this project through referral by FUNBIO to business interests 
represented on its Board of Directors. The project also organized a high-level 
international workshop as a side event to the Convention on Biodiversity?s March 2006 
Conference of the Parties 8 meeting, with the participation of GEF and World Bank 
representatives. This workshop brought together a number of different stakeholders to 
summarize the challenges and experiences of different countries in mainstreaming 
biodiversity into sector policies and programs, with a specific focus on the private sector.  
 
During project implementation, stakeholders will also participate in a number of 
different ways. CONABIO will act as a consultative commission for this project on high-
level questions of biodiversity priorities, policies, and guidelines, and will also promote 
mainstreaming among different sectors and provide general orientation for project 
implementation. The Project Coordination Committee will be chaired by MMA, and will 
include representatives from EMBRAPA, FIOCRUZ, FUNBIO, IBAMA, JBRJ, MAPA, 
MCT, MDA, MS, and other institutions invited by the Committee to become project 
partners during project implementation. This Committee will serve as a deliberative and 
consultative unit with the responsibility for coordinating, overseeing, and evaluating the 
Page  6
implementation of all project activities, and promoting integration of the different project 
components. Partnerships will be established with universities, research institutions, and 
NGOs for the execution of project activities at the local level and for project monitoring.  
 
The participation of local stakeholders and beneficiaries will include a strong 
involvement in the planning, implementation, and monitoring of demonstration activities, 
and inclusion of their demands for training in sustainable management of natural 
resources in the project?s annual planning. During project implementation there will be 
ongoing participation by the actors involved and society in general through seminars and 
workshops. These are perhaps most important in Component 1, where a broad array of 
stakeholders will be brought together to discuss sector challenges to biodiversity 
conservation and to develop appropriate solutions to these problems. To complement and 
consolidate the contributions of international experiences on biodiversity mainstreaming 
and monitoring in the preparation of this project, a more extensive international 
workshop on these topics is planned for the first year of project implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/20/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  7
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
03/16/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
03/16/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
03/16/2007 
Comments:   
