Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2939 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P104995 
Project Name: BR Santos Municipality Project 
Task Team Leader: Paula Dias Pini 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Sub-national 
government administration (50%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.18 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
40.18
40.18 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objectives of the Santos Municipality Project are to improve the city?s critical 
infrastructure and the living conditions of the low-income communities, and to improve the 
municipal government?s capacity for service delivery and facilitating economic development in 
the city.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. Support to Municipal Infrastructure Modernization Program (US$54.3M): The major 
investments under this project will go towards infrastructure drainage works that have been 
identified by the Municipality of Santos. Throughout project preparation potential other 
investments may be identified. The main works will be the rehabilitation of drainage canal works 
in the northeast region of the city, with larger poverty levels and poorer living conditions due to 
frequent flooding. Possible work would include: (i) projects and works of dredging canals; (ii) 
works to rehabilitate storm water systems; (iii) works to create open air flood contention ponds; 
(iv) rehabilitating flood-gates and storm water pumping stations; (v) equipment for the drainage 
Page  2
system automatic control center; and (vii) works for land slide prevention and micro drainage. 
The component will also support infrastructure operation and maintenance to improve the system 
administration framework, through institutional strengthening and expanding automated control 
systems for the channels to increase security and system efficiency, and works in the Santos? 
hills zones to avoid landslides, including increasing the municipal management capacity in 
macro drainage operation, maintenance and cost recovery.  
 
2. Promoting Social Programs for the Poor Communities (US$20.0M): This component will 
likely include the provision of appropriate housing to resettle approximate 900 families living in 
precarious shacks in flood prone areas, the strengthening of programs to control irregular 
occupation, and the implementation of social development programs to provide support to 
families facing critical social needs in order to facilitate their access to programs income 
generation opportunities and other social support programs.  
 
3. Institutional Capacity Strengthening (US$5.7M): This component intends to strengthen 
municipal management in terms of effective service delivery and the municipality?s ability to 
promote economic growth in light of the expected economic driving forces such as the port, the 
energy sector, and tourism sector. While the focal areas of institutional strengthening will be 
discussed and prioritized during the project preparation process, the initial priority areas include: 
(a) Land use planning: Strengthening the municipality institutional capacity in land use planning 
and control including identification of land use conflicts, technical and institutional proposals for 
addressing these conflicts, and proposing alternatives to maximize the use of the scarce land 
available. This also includes a more comprehensive analysis for assessing alternatives use of land 
for increasing port city integration in terms of expanding port related economic activities; and (b) 
Finance control mechanisms: Includes revising the municipal working routines, expanding 
informatization, and facilitating access to planning, financial and resource allocation tools while 
improving access mechanisms to e-government system, improving operating and maintenance 
costs control mechanisms. In addition, in consideration of the presence of multiple institutions in 
the municipality, stakeholder participation will be an important element of the institutional 
strengthening process. Finally this component will also include activities to strengthen the 
municipality?s capacity to efficiently implement the project and coordinate with the international 
stakeholders.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project location is the northest zone of the Municipality of Santos territory   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is the first proposed Bank loan to this municipal government. However the municipality has 
a
well structure social and environment departments. The municipality has already implemented 
resettlement programs with results appropriate to the Banks requirements. The municipality has 
to comply with the state environmental legislation which requires strict procedures for 
environment impact analysis, mitigation measures which will be verified three times for 
requesting the three obligatoires environmental licenses.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga (LCSSA) 
Page  3
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
will be prepared prior to appraisal   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
will be addressed in the EA   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
will be addressed in the EA   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
a
resettlement framework will be prepared prior to appraisal   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/17/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
draft EA and resettlement framework will be available for the QER review.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
