Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Report No.:  …
38477
 
Date ISDS Updated: January 25, 2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P101507 
Project Name:  Rio Grande do Norte Rural 
Poverty Reduction Project   
Task Team Leader:  Jorge A. Muñoz 
Estimated Appraisal Date for Additional 
Financing:  January 22, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan (SIL) 
Sector: General Ag (100%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic 
engagement; rural services and 
infrastructure; municipal governance and 
institution building. 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:   
Daniel Gross 
Loan amount ($m.):  
IBRD:  22.5 m. 
B.  Project Objectives 
The proposed Additional Financing would support the scaling-up of the Rural Poverty 
Reduction Project in Rio Grande do Norte to (1) improve well-being and incomes of the 
rural poor through better access to basic social and economic infrastructure and services 
and support for productive activities, using proven community-driven development 
(CDD) techniques; (2) increase the social capital of rural communities and capacity to 
organize collectively to meet their own needs; (3) enhance local governance by greater 
citizen participation and transparency in decision-making through the creation and 
strengthening of community associations and Municipal Councils; and (4) foster closer 
integration of development policies, programs and projects in rural areas at the local level 
by assisting the project’s participatory Municipal Councils to extend their role in seeking 
funding from, setting priorities for and making decisions concerning the allocation of 
resources from, other complementary programs.  
 
C.  Project Description 
As under the Original Loan, the Additional Financing will support the following three 
Project components:   
Page  2
(1) 
Community Subprojects 
will provide matching grants to community 
associations to finance their implementation of about 1,643 small-scale socio-
economic infrastructure, productive, education, health, culture, environmental and 
other investments
 benefiting an estimated 51,000 families (229,500 people)
.
For 
poverty targeting purposes under the Additional Financing, the 165 participating 
municipalities have been divided into three areas of relative priority based on 
Municipal Human Development Index (HDI-M), rate of urbanization and, total 
resources received under the first-phase project.  Area A representing the poorest 
59 municipalities, will receive 42% of community subproject resources; the 59 
municipalities of Area B, 35%; and, the 47 municipalities in Area C, 23%. 
(2)
 Institutional Development
 will support: (a) technical assistance and training 
to mobilize and strengthen community associations in their role of identifying, 
preparing, operating and maintaining subproject investments and (b) training for 
the project Municipal Councils and technical advice for the State Technical Unit 
for their expanding roles under the Additional Financing; and  
(3) 
Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation
 will 
support, 
inter alia
,
the costs (excluding salaries) of State Technical Unit (STU), 
the monitoring of project implementation and subsequent impact evaluation. 
D.  Project location  
 
The Project Area remains the same as that under the Original Loan and will cover 165 
municipalities (of the 167 total statewide).  
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The State Technical Unit (STU), COPES/SETHAS, has complied fully with Bank 
safeguard and project environmental rules in implementing the Project under the Original 
Loan.  The Project has an Environmental Management Plan (EMP); it has worked well 
and will be enhanced under the proposed Additional Financing.   
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01)   
 
The Rio Grande do Norte Rural Poverty Reduction Project (classified as 
Category B)
,
applies several environmental "screens" to the technical 
assessment of subproject proposals, and is currently operating a Project 
EMP under the Original Loan, which is functioning satisfactorily.  
 
Specifically, the EMP: (a) ensures that the Project is fully compliant with 
relevant State and Federal environmental legislation and Bank Safeguards; 
(b) further consolidates the integration of environmental standards in 
Page  3
subprojects financed under the Project; (c) fosters a convergence between 
rural poverty reduction and the conservation and adequate valuation of the 
environment; and (d) links environmental conservation and protection 
activities with investments that increase the HDI, consistent with Rio 
Grande do Norte’s  medium-term investment program (Multi-Year Plan – 
PPA, 2004-2007). 
 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OP 4.10
)
In Rio Grande do Norte, there is no officially recognized indigenous 
group. Accordingly, no Indigenous Peoples’ Planning Framework (IPPF) 
was prepared for the Original Project or – based on the most recent, 
available information – for the Additional Financing. However, the State 
will continue to work with ethnic groups including 
Quilombolas
 (Afro-
descendent communities) promoting their inclusion while respecting their 
cultural identities. 
 
[X]
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
As discussed in the EMP and further detailed in the Project Operational 
Manual, neither the State, nor the Bank, through the Project, will approve 
subprojects which cause degradation to essential natural habitats. 
[X]
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
The EMP already defines a process, including screening criteria in the 
Project Operational Manual, for detecting the potential use of pesticides 
under both the Original Loan and the proposed Additional Financing. 
Where appropriate, the Project already promotes integrated pest 
management approaches under subproject investments.   
[X]
 
Cultural Property (
OPN 11.03
,
being revised as OP 4.11) 
In the event of “chance finds”, the Project Operational Manual already 
outlines procedures to be followed in the event of such discovery of 
culturally significant materials during subproject implementation.   
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
III. APPROVALS 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jorge A. 
Muñoz Date 
Approved by:
 
Sector Manager: 
Mark Cackler 
Date 
Comments 
Page  4
