Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/18/2007 
Report No.:  AC2917
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P101418 
Project Name:  Goias State Highway Management Project (APL II) 
Task Team Leader:  Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 28, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (87%);Sub-national government administration (13%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Decentralization 
(P);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
65.00
65.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Goias State Highway Management Program?s objective is to increase the efficiency 
of the road transport system within sustainable environmental and fiscal frameworks.  
The program consists of two phases, the first phase of which (Goias State Highway 
Management Project, P055954) has been successfully implemented over the 2001-2006 
period, and the second phase being the proposed project.  The project development 
objective of the second APL remains the same as that of the first APL and the Program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The second APL will remain structured with the same five components as included in the 
first APL, with added emphasis on the state reform component.  The project cost is 
estimated at US$130 million, of which US$65 million would be financed by the Bank.  
The project components would include:  
 
?
a
highway rehabilitation component (US$83 million), to:  
 
(a) support the Government in rehabilitating the state paved road network, by financing 
the rehabilitation of about 1,200 km of road sections (AGETOP has rehabilitation 
Page  2
contracts already bid under the first phase following Bank procurement procedures, 
covering about 750 km of road sections);  
 
(b) design a strategy to ensure all-weather access on the state non-paved network 
(essentially by upgrading bridges and drainage structures), an essential strategy to ensure 
movement of goods and people between the municipalities, economic production areas 
and the main services centers, job markets and transport corridors; and  
 
(c) support the implementation of such strategy on a pilot basis, on about 15% (2,000 
km) of the non-paved network, by financing localized upgrading works on about 500 km.  
 
?
a
highway paving component (US$32 million), to improve links between selected 
agro-industrial centers and major highway or multimodal corridors.  About 200 km of 
existing state feeder roads would be paved, for which contracts have already been bid 
under the first phase following Bank procurement rules.  
 
?
a
highway policy and institutional development component (US$4 million), to:  
 
(a) pursue assistance to the state infrastructure secretariat in developing transport 
policies, through the strengthening of the secretariat?s capacity in formalizing a state 
transport sector policy, assistance in defining policy and management models to be used 
in the areas of inter-municipal bus transportation, the consolidation of the state?s freight 
transport plan, and support to the secretariat?s participation in the structuring of a pilot 
PPP project; and  
 
(b) consolidate AGETOP?s capacity, through the design of a result-based framework,   
the strengthening of the agency?s technical capacity in the areas of planning, project 
management and technology, the conclusion of the modernization of management and 
operational information systems, as well as the definition of a strategy to ensure the 
sustainability of the decentralization to the municipalities of maintenance responsibilities 
for the municipal networks.  
 
?
an environmental management component (US$5 million), to support:  
 
(a) increased efficiency of the State Environmental System (SISEMA), through 
strengthening of the system?s institutions and M&E structure, enhancements to the 
state?s environmental fund structure; decentralization of selected environmental 
responsibilities to municipalities; improved coordination among environmental-related 
stakeholders;  
 
(b) further progress in developing instruments and public policies to foster public and 
private sector participation in managing biodiversity and natural resources (such as the 
Bolsa Florestal, ICMS Ecol?gico, the Clean Development Mechanism, environmental 
certification process for producers, etc.) and establish/update environmental quality 
standards;  
 
(c) development of proposals for more sustainable practices and better respect of 
environmental legislation in private rural areas, through incentives to implement, monitor 
and evaluate the use of the environmental management instruments to foster sustainable 
practices, land reclamation of protected areas, and  the creation of corridors to connect 
such areas; and  
Page  3
(d) further consolidation of protected areas to protect the biodiversity of the Cerrado 
biome.  
 
Under this component, a series of complementary activities could be undertaken during 
the project implementation period, provided the Global Environment Facility (GEF)-
funded GEF Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Project (P091827), presently under 
preparation, is approved both by the Bank and the Federal Government.  The GEF 
Sustainable Cerrado Initiative Project would benefit the Federal Government and selected 
states in the Cerrado Biome, including the state of Goias.  The project would have 3 main 
objectives at the state level: increased surface of the biome under protection, increased 
sustainability of the biome?s natural resources, and strengthened institutional and policy 
framework.  
 
?
a
state reform component (US$6 million), which will support:  
 
(a) the finance secretariat in designing and implementing an institutional strengthening 
program for the secretariat (including preparation of a strategic plan, restructuring of 
procedures, centralization and modernization of information systems, and development of 
training programs) and implementing a series of measures to increase tax collection 
efficiency (especially with respect to the collection of ICMS-related debts, and 
improvements of ICMS tax bureaus efficiency), and structuring a pilot PPP project;  
 
(b) capacity strengthening at the level of the planning secretariat at (i) the planning 
level, through the update of the state long-term strategic plan, the elaboration of a 
regional development agenda, the consolidation of the monitoring systems for the state 
programs, (ii) the administration organization level, through the reduction in 
superposition of responsibilities across entities, the detailing of competencies and 
obligations between entities in charge of defining policies and those in charge of 
executing such policies, and the structuring of at least 2 management contracts; and (iii) 
the level of provision of services to the public, through support to the expansion of the 
Vapt-Vupt system; and  
 
(c) the consolidation of the state regulatory capacity, through further support to the state 
regulatory agency, to design a framework for result-based management, improve 
monitoring of concessionaires? activities, structure a capacity to monitor hydrological 
resources use, structure a regulatory framework for provision of inter-municipal 
passenger transport services, participate to the structuring of a pilot PPP project, and 
develop training programs for the agency?s staff.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The State of Goias is located in the Central Plateau (Planalto Central) of Brazil where 
parts of the headwaters of three large hydrographic basins - two Brazilian and one 
international - originate.  The State of Goias is also of key importance given that it is 
wholly located within the Cerrado Biome - one of the 25 world biodiversity "hotspots". 
Goias also shields the areas that supply water to the Guarani Aquifer currently considered 
to be the world's largest subterranean reservoir containing good quality water.  
 
Page  4
In common with most other Brazilian states, Goias is a victim of serious environmental 
conservation problems. Only 34% of the original vegetation cover remains in the state 
and land for agricultural purposes continues to expand and replace the hitherto varied 
types of vegetation native to the Cerrado Biome. The modern, highly-capitalized 
agricultural sector has contributed negatively to the environment through excessive 
mechanization and the use of agrotoxics, fertilizers and soil correctors. Negative effects 
on the rural areas have also resulted from the large amounts of animal waste deposited 
and careless disposal of packaging. Currently 4.8% of Goias? area is legally protected on 
the basis of Conservation Units (CUs), but only a minor part of these protection areas is 
consolidated, amounting for state CU to 0.06% of the total area.  
 
While the most sensitive environmental areas and indigenous/traditional peoples? 
territories are found in the northeastern part of the state, most rehabilitation and all 
paving works already procured under the first APL are located in the southeastern part.  
 
Safeguards Policies triggered (see also Part 6):  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): as for the first phase, environmental impacts 
resulting from civil works on existing road sections are expected to be relatively minor, 
and mostly related to civil works? execution.  It is proposed that such impacts be 
identified and mitigated in accordance with the provisions of the framework designed 
during the preparation of the first APL and updated during the preparation of this second 
operation.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): as was the case during the preparation of the first APL, 
it is not expected that the implementation of the second APL will have any negative 
impact on natural habitats.  Specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) must 
exist for road rehabilitation works and improvements of critical points under the proposed 
project, and these plans have been or will be used by AGMA as the basis to issue the 
environmental licenses. In the case of road paving works, Environmental Impact 
Assessments and EMPs have been prepared and approved by the Bank before bidding 
processes started. The respective environmental licenses were issued or are about to be 
issued.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): as was the case during the preparation of the 
first APL, it is not expected that the implementation of the second APL will have any 
negative impact on physical cultural resources, as the project civil works will be normally 
located within the existing right-of-ways of road sections.  However, "chance findings" 
during paving works are possible, and to handle such findings, Brazil has a well-
developed legislative and normative framework, which is under the oversight of the 
National Institute for Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN). 
Additionally, AGETOP and AGMA have proven experience and appropriate procedures 
to recover ?chance findings? in line with these procedures and rules. These procedures 
are described and highlighted in the updated Sectoral Environment Assessment.  
 
Page  5
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): as was the case during the preparation of the first 
APL, it is not expected that the second APL's implementation will impact indigenous 
peoples in the state (the implementation of the first APL did not generate such impact). 
Indeed: (a) the state counts only an estimated 340 indigenous people mostly located in 
two areas (around the municipalities of Nova America and Aruana), as well as a few 
Quilombos communities in the northern part of the state; and (b) as stated above, civil 
works will be located within the right-of-ways of state roads, usually quite distant from 
indigenous peoples' areas or Quilombos' communities. The protected areas to be 
consolidated are also not expected to affect the livelihood of indigenous people, except 
for one protected area of sustainable use (APA Pouso Alto), where the indigenous and 
traditional peoples living in the buffer zone could benefit from a technical assistance 
program to be included in the respective management plan. For cases like this and for any 
other possible case not yet foreseeable, an indigenous people development framework 
was prepared for this second operation and will be used, as necessary.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): as was the case during the preparation of the 
first APL, it is not expected that involuntary resettlement will occur as a result of the 
second APL's implementation (no involuntary resettlement was undertaken during the 
implementation of the first APL).  Indeed, as stated above, civil works will normally take 
place within the roads' right-of-ways, which are very much free of settlement. No 
involuntary resettlements are necessary in the protection areas to be consolidated under 
this project because in those areas that do not allow private property to coexist the state 
already owns the respective land. Few cases of land acquisitions happened along the 
roads' right-of-ways during the first phase and were resolved in on of the following two 
ways:  (i) the owner of the land donated it to the state; or (ii) the state entered into 
negotiations with the owner based on the replacement value of the land.  However, as it is 
not possible to a priori be 100% sure that work implementation and the consolidation of 
protected areas will not result in relocation of people and/or restriction of access to 
legally designated parks and protected areas, the involuntary resettlement framework 
prepared for civil works during the preparation of the first phase was revised/updated and 
a
process framework prepared. These frameworks will be used, if appropriate.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Claudia Sobrevila (ENV) 
Ms Elena Correa (SDV) 
Ms Juliana Menezes Garrido Pereira (LCSUW) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated. However, 
as civil works in general, the road works to be carried out under the second phase have a 
potential to negatively effect the environment, but these impacts are not expected to be 
significant. They are normally localized and temporary, and adequate preventive and 
mitigation measures exist and are routinely applied. The rehabilitation works will not 
require involuntary resettlements or land acquisitions, nor will they interfere with 
indigenous peoples? territories. Similarly, the localized improvements on the unpaved 
network will not require involuntary resettlements or land acquisitions, and the chance of 
interfering with indigenous peoples? territories is minimal. The paving works will not 
interfere with indigenous peoples? territories, nor do they require involuntary 
resettlements, but there is a need for a small amount of land acquisitions and ?chance 
findings? of archaeological and paleontological artifacts may occur. As far as the 
consolidations of protected areas is concerned, no negative environmental impacts are 
expected, and no involuntary resettlements are required. There may be a need for 
restrictions to the access of some resources, and in one specific case positive spillovers 
for the bordering indigenous and traditional peoples? territories are likely. More details 
on the potential environmental and social impacts of the project activities are given 
below.  
 
Rehabilitation of paved state roads. About 600 km of road sections to be rehabilitated 
under the second phase have already been procured under the first APL, and the analyses 
undertaken in the process of obtaining the simplified environmental licenses indicate that 
no significant negative social and environmental impacts are envisaged. Similarly, for the 
remaining rehabilitation works (more or less 600 km) no significant environmental and 
social issues are expected considering that rehabilitation works are related to the existing 
road structures, mostly to pavements. Indeed, the major potential negative impacts 
already took place at the time the roads where built in the 60s and 70s, and the same is 
true for indirect and cumulative impacts, such as induced land cover land use changes in 
the influence area of the respective roads. However, as with other road construction 
Page  7
activities, road rehabilitation works can temporarily cause soil erosion, disturbance of 
water flows, chemical pollution, traffic disruption, noise, and other impacts on 
surrounding communities and natural life. Most of those potential negative impacts are 
site-specific, and it is unlikely that these works will significantly alter environmentally 
sensitive areas. Few, if any, of the potential environmental impacts are irreversible and 
appropriate mitigation measures are well known and do not represent any difficulty for 
project implementation. No involuntary resettlements will have take place since the 
works are limited to the existing road structures. There is also no risk of interference with 
indigenous peoples? territories because there is only one paved state road that runs near 
to an indigenous peoples? territory, and it will not be rehabilitated under the second 
phase.  
 
Road surfacing works. The total extension of road sections to be surfaced under the 
project has been bid under the first APL, and the environmental studies and public 
hearings for these paving works showed that (i) the environmental impacts are limited 
and localized, and mitigation measures are well known, (ii) there is no need for 
resettlements, and (iii) there is no risk of interferences with indigenous or traditional 
peoples? territories. However, these studies showed that some land acquisitions to correct 
road alignments will be necessary. This land is normally obtained by AGETOP either 
through (i) land donation to the state; or (ii) negotiations with the owner based on the 
replacement value of the land. For two of the three road sections, the studies do not 
exclude the possibility of ?chance findings? of archaeological and paleontological 
artifacts. However, Brazil has a well-developed legislative and normative framework to 
handle such findings, which is under the oversight of the National Institute for Protection 
of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN).  Additionally, AGETOP has proven 
experience and appropriate procedures to recover ?chance findings? in line with these 
procedures and rules. These procedures are described and highlighted in the updated 
Sectoral Environment Assessment.  
 
The works to upgrade unpaved state roads to all-weather conditions consist of localized 
improvements to engineering structures (e.g. drainage and bridges) on existing unpaved 
roads.  Improvements mainly include replacements of wood bridges by concrete bridges, 
and installation of permanent drainage facilities.  Such improvements take place within 
the existing road rights-of-way. However, as with other road works, these improvements 
can temporarily cause soil erosion, disturbance of water flows, traffic disruption, noise, 
etc. These impacts are site-specific and are unlikely to cause any significant negative 
environmental. Given the restriction of these works to existing rights-of-way, no land 
acquisitions or involuntary resettlements are required. It is also extremely unlikely that 
there will be an interference with indigenous peoples? territories because the limited 
number of indigenous peoples? territories in the State of Goias and their location, as well 
as because of the localized nature of this type of interventions.  
 
Consolidation of conservation units (CUs). Among the activities to be undertaken under 
the environmental component, only the subcomponent concerned with the consolidation 
of the State Conservation Units System (SEUC) might cause environmental and social 
impacts (mainly positive ones), which could potentially trigger Bank safeguards. These 
Page  8
activities will increase the effective protection of key environmentally-relevant areas and, 
with the exception of the possibility of restriction on the use of some resources, are not 
likely to negatively impact on neither the environment nor the communities living near 
the areas.  
 
The CUs initially targeted in the second phase of the Program are: (a) the Integral 
Protection Units of Altamiro de Moura Pacheco State Park (PEAMP) and the Serra de 
Caldas Novas State Park (PESCAN) and (b) the Sustainable Use Environmental 
Protection Areas (EPAs) of Pouso Alto and Jo?o Leite. Other CUs could be considered 
during project implementation in conformity with the eligibility criteria contained in the 
operative manual, which exclude any CU that has a potential for environmental and 
social impacts for which the project has no adequate instruments to avoid or mitigate 
them.  
 
For the four above-mentioned CUs no resettlements will be necessary, but the technical 
studies carried out to date have not yet been conclusive on whether or not there may be a 
need for some restrictions on access to certain resources. Only the APA Pouso Alto 
borders with the indigenous territory of Av?-Canoeiros (six inhabitants) and an area of 
Quilombo Calunga (around 5,000 inhabitants). However, given the nature of the APA 
Pouso Alto, which is a limited protection area, allowing for human presence and the 
sustainable use of its resources, no issues of restriction on the use of resources are likely 
to arise. For this APA the project will assess in the framework of the management plan if 
the consolidation has a potential to create positive spillovers for these indigenous and 
traditional peoples (e.g. through specific technical assistance programs), and, in the 
affirmative case, will, in consultation with the latter, design and implement special 
programs to take advantage of these spillovers.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impact has been identified for this project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
For purposes of OP4.01, this second operation is classified as a category ?B? project.  
The nature of project activities remains the same as the nature of activities undertaken 
under the first operation (classified as a category ?A? project), the implementation of 
which did not generate significant negative environmental and social impacts (see 
below).  The difference in this second operation is that the location of all paving works 
and of protection areas has already been identified, and assessments conducted, which led 
to the conclusion that: (i) project activities will not generate significant negative 
environmental and social impacts, and (ii) environmental impacts identified are site-
specific, and reversible, with the implementation of well-known mitigatory measures.  
Page  9
The Bank safeguards that have been or would possibly be triggered during project 
implementation include: Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Physical Cultural 
Resources, Indigenous Peoples, and Involuntary Resettlement. As shown in the 
Assessment of the environmental and social impacts of the first phase, the overall 
safeguard framework prepared during the first phase revealed as satisfactory. Therefore, 
for the second phase the same framework will be used, but it was updated and improved 
to cater for (i) the extension of the project scope during the second phase, especially the 
spot improvements on unpaved roads and the activities related to the consolidation of 
protected areas, (ii) the new priorities as far as project works and capacity building for the 
environmental sector is concerned, (iii) some minor improvements suggested based on 
lessons learned from the 1st phase, and (iv) the revision of some of the Bank?s safeguard 
policies.  
 
The updated safeguard framework includes a: (i) Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment Report on the First Phase of the State of Goi?s Highway Network 
Management Program; (ii) Sectoral Environmental Assessment Report; (iii) Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy for Highway Works; (iv) Process Framework to Mitigate 
Restrictions on Access to Natural Resources; (v) Indigenous People Development 
Framework; and (vi) Public Consultation Manual.  
 
Brazil has a well-developed legislative and normative body to handle environmental 
issues and to deal with cultural property safeguard policies. As it is the case elsewhere, 
the State of Goi?s and its road and environmental agencies handle social and 
environmental impacts of road rehabilitation, paving, and the consolidation of protection 
areas by directly following applicable federal legislation and norms (in the case of 
cultural property, indigenous people and involuntary resettlement safeguard policies) or 
through state legislation and norms, based on or in line with federal legislation and norms 
(in the case of environmental assessments). Additionally, the road agency itself has a 
complete set of norms and procedures to adequately deal with the environmental and 
social impacts of its activities.  
 
The normative body and the procedures used in the State of Goi?s are adequate to 
handle Bank safeguard policies on environmental assessment and cultural property. 
However, they are not sufficiently developed to ensure that the Bank?s safeguard policies 
on indigenous peoples? and involuntary resettlements are adequately handled. Therefore, 
the State of Goi?s agreed to use specific frameworks to deal with indigenous peoples? 
and resettlement/restriction of access to resources issues.  
 
Brazil and the State of Goias have a good track record in handling safeguard issues in 
the context of road maintenance, rehabilitation works and consolidation of protected 
areas financed externally. Moreover, AGETOP and AGMA have the necessary capacity 
to adequately deal with the social and environmental safeguard issues of the proposed 
project. As agency responsible for all public construction works in the state, AGETOP 
has considerable experience in dealing with environmental, resettlement, land acquisition 
Page  10
and indigenous peoples? issues, and the first phase helped AGETOP to get familiar with 
Bank safeguard policies. Similarly, when defining and implementing its environmental 
protection policy, AGMA has commonly to deal with fragile communities in a 
participatory way and with resettlement/land acquisition issues. However, since AGMA 
has not dealt with Bank social safeguard issues under the first phase, capacity 
strengthening in this area is envisaged. Both AGMA and AGETOP are responsible for 
supervising the implementation of environmental aspects in road work and the 
compliance with the conditions of environmental licenses.  
 
Despite considerable achievements during the first phase under the environmental 
related components, AGETOP and the state environmental agencies still suffer from 
some institutional weaknesses and policy and normative gaps, which mainly consist of (i) 
lack of clarity in the roles of each entity in the State Environmental System; (ii) 
unsustainable centralization of environmental activities; (iii) lack of public and private 
sector participation in managing biodiversity and natural resources; (iv) lack of a legal, 
institutional and financial framework for water resources management; (v) lack of 
sustainable use of resources in private rural areas; (vi) missing consolidation of already 
created protected areas; (vii) lack of environmentally sustainable agricultural production; 
and (viii) lack of specific studies in strategic areas responsible for the deforestation, such 
as charcoal, to identify alternatives and incentives.  
 
Under the second phase a number of capacity strengthening activities are envisaged to 
complete the capacity strengthening program initiated under the first phase, to fill some 
of the above-mentioned gaps, and to ensure that the State of Goi?s will be able to 
adequately deal with environmental and safeguard issues under this project. Additionally, 
for items such as iv, vii and viii activities could be contemplated through other projects 
(such as Bank?s PRO?GUA project or a contribution from the GEF to support 
complementary activities of the environmental component) or specific technical 
assistance.  
 
Technical assistance, consultant services, and activities to deal with safeguard concerns 
have specific budget allocated in the environmental (consolidation of protected areas) and 
in the road components.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The number of direct project beneficiaries of the second phase will be expanded to 
include, in addition to AGETOP, SEINFRA (the State of Goi?s Secretariat for 
Infrastructure), AGMA, and AGR (the Goi?s Regulation Agency), the following entities: 
SEFAZ (the State Finance Secretariat), SEPLAN (the State Planning Secretariat) and 
SEMARH (State Secretariat for the Environment and Water Resources).  
 
Other key stakeholders are: (i) municipalities, farmers, agro-industrial industries, and 
small communities benefiting from access increased accessibility to services and markets; 
(ii) people potentially affected by the construction of civil works; (iii) people living at or 
around CUs who could benefit from greater inclusion in the society and in the CU?s 
management;  and (iv) indigenous people/traditional communities (quilombolas) living 
Page  11
on CU?s buffer zones who could potentially benefit from technical assistance derived 
from the CU?s management plan.  
 
The project offers ample opportunities for consultation and dissemination of 
information. During preparation of the first phase, AGETOP prepared a Public 
Consultation Manual approved by Governor Decree 5.391 of  March 30th, 2001.  The 
Manual describes the process of public consultation (including indigenous peoples, if 
applicable) and covers the objectives, methodology, resources, etc. The process consists 
of organizing meetings with the population affected, basically aimed at introducing the 
works about to be undertaken and the impacts that this might have on the population.  It 
was used during the first phase with great sucess; it was updated during preparation to be 
used during the second phase.  
 
With regard to the environmental component, the establishment of the CU?s 
Consultative Council aims at ensuring the effective participation of local people in the 
implementation and management of the CU.  The Council is presided over by the body 
responsible for its administration and comprises representatives of both public bodies and 
organized civil society.  Thus the Council is basically a forum responsible for organizing 
popular participation during the implementation and management of the CUs.  In 
addition, for the creation of protected area, a round of consultations are carried out based 
on specific technical studies to allow the legal approval for its creation.  
 
In addition, CEMAm, the State Environmental Council, is responsible for evaluating 
and deliberating regarding environmental issues in the state.  It is also chaired by the 
body responsible for its administration and comprises representatives of both public 
bodies and organized civil society.  CEMAm will be strengthened and its representatives 
trained with project support.  This will assure sustainability and transparency of future 
environmental activities.  
 
Brazilian environmental law requires for the normal licensing process to involve three 
distinct phases: (a) preliminary license; (b) construction or implementation license; and 
(c) operation license. In accordance with the potential impact of a proposed project, 
public consultations are mandatorily required by law. Inputs received during the 
consultation process have to be addressed by the project proponent to the satisfaction of 
the licensing agency. For road works in the State of Goias, a Technical Manual: 
Licensing of Highway Works was prepared under the first phase as a joint effort among 
AGMA, AGETOP and the World Bank. This Manual followed state and federal laws and 
procedures for environmental licensing and has to be applied for all road works. The 
Manual has contributed to the standardization of environmental licensing processes, 
setting forth the principles, concepts and basic requirements needed to bring works into 
line with environmental preservation norms, as required by law. It also includes 
information about the consultation process.  
 
In addition, the project safeguard documents mentioned above were made available for 
public consultation from April 10, 2007 on AGETOP, AGMA and SEMARH websites.  
On April 12, 2007 a meeting was held to evaluate the safeguards documents produced 
Page  12
during the preparation of the project, with participation by interested members of the 
public (public sector, private sector and civil society).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/28/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/28/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/28/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
Page  13
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  14
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
06/29/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Claudia Sobrevila 
06/29/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
08/14/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Juliana Menezes Garrido Pereira 
06/29/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
08/21/2007 
Comments:   
