Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC2929
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P105959 
Project Name:  BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 4 - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 31, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P);Pollution management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
95.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan Bank for Internaitonal Cooperation (JBIC) 
95.00
95.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective of the project is to improve the quality and long-term sustainability of 
urban transport in the Sao Paulo Metropolitan Region (SPMR) by interconnecting the 
existing subway, commuter rail and bus networks through the construction of Metros 
Line 4 under a BOT type scheme, partially financed by the private sector. A subsidiary 
objective is to improve the access of the low-income population in the areas served by 
Line 4 to employment, health and educational facilities.  There have been no changes in 
the Project Development Objectives which remain the same in the proposed additional 
financing requested by the Borrower.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project involves building a 12.8 km underground metrorail line with 11 underground 
stations, a train yard area and maintenance facilities serving the Sao Paulo Metropolitan 
Region, Brazil, with a population of about  18 million inhabitants.  Once built, Line 4 will 
be concessioned to a private operator under a 30-year contract.  The project has two main 
components.  Part A is an Infrastructure and Equipment Investment Component to: (i) 
build Line 4 under a BOT type contract including the transfer stations between the metro, 
commuter rail, buses, autos, and non-motorized transport; and (ii) finance the Project 
Page  2
Management and project supervision consultants.  Part B is an Institutional and Policy 
Development Component: (i) support the concession of Line 4 to the private sector; (ii) 
undertake a cost-efficiency study of the Sao Paulo Metro.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Metro Line 4 project (also known as the Yellow Line) is located in the City of Sao 
Paulo and divided in two phases, the first of which is a 12.8-km line from the Luz 
Railway Station in downtown Sao Paulo to Vila Sonia, a mixed residential and 
commercial district in the southwest quadrant of Sao Paulo.  The present project will 
support construction of the First Phase only.  Phase II, which is in a planning stage, will 
extend this line further West and South to cover a greater area of the Metropolitan Sao 
Paulo region.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSSA) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project will have a primarily positive environmental impact since it will promote 
more efficient and cleaner transport systems in Sao Paulo and interconnect existing 
subway, commuter rail, and bus networks.  Line 4 is being implemented in a highly 
urbanized and densely populated area.  Environmental Impact Assessment and 
Preliminary Environmental Reports were prepared to receive the environmental license 
for construction of Metro Line 4.  An integrated Environmental Management Plan was 
prepared by the consortium.  The Environmental Assessment and Management Plan have 
been adequate to date in identifying and addressing environmental impacts.  The main 
challenges have been to deal with contaminated construction sites (mainly from leaking 
underground gasoline tanks) that were encountered along the path of the metro, and 
nuisance due to construction noise.  An adequate management and supervision system is 
Page  3
in place, but enforcement mechanisms should be strengthened and become more 
transparent.  
 
On the social side, the project involved resettlement of families and businesses located 
in the Vila Sonia area where the rails come to the surface for train parking and 
maintenance shops.   The resettlement action plan was implemented satisfactorily 
although long delays between the first cadastre caused dissatisfaction and led to legal 
action by most of the resettled people which, in turn, caused further delays in 
compensating affected persons and families for their losses.  
 
On January 12, 2007, there was a partial tunnel collapse and subsidence that occurred at 
the Pinheiros station under construction. There were seven deaths of persons in vehicles 
and pedestrians transiting the area.  No tunnel workers were killed.  Some 70 families and 
businesses were evacuated as a precautionary measure pending investigation of the 
structural soundness of the buildings in the area.  This event created an unanticipated 
social impact on the local population that the Borrower is now seeking to mitigate.  See 
below for additional comments on the measures taken and to be taken   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The long-term impacts that can be anticipated are mainly positive as regards the 
reduction in travel time, reduction in vehicular pollution, increased access to employment 
and services and other benefits.  There may be some localized impacts due to increased 
traffic around Metro Stations. Once the social impacts of the January 12, 2007 accident 
(see above) have been satisfactorily mitigated, no long term adverse social impacts are 
anticipated.  While one cannot completely rule out the potential for another accident, 
Metro is taking additional measures to anticipate and prevent recurrence of such 
accidents.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The proposed additional financing is based on the original project design.  Alternatives to 
that design were considered in the original PAD and the EIA.  The objectives and design 
of the project have not changed, nor have the basic conditions; therefore it is not 
appropriate to consider alternatives for this operation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To implement the environmental management system, an organizational structure was 
established with clear responsibilities, procedures and required resources to monitor 
environmental and social impacts of the project and ensure mitigation measures are 
adequately implemented during construction phase. The consortium has been required to 
prepare monthly progress reports on the environmental and social aspects of the project. 
These reports have been improving over time and have an adequate format, although 
some of the graphs and data presentation can be improved. An environmental officer 
within Metro reviews these reports and provides detailed comments, so there is an 
Page  4
extensive database of information available. Besides this supervision by Metro, the 
PMOC (Project Management Oversight Consultant) provides overall oversight on project 
implementation and CETESB provides specific support to the Metro and the consortium 
in monitoring air quality around selected sites. The State Secretary of Environment 
receives regular summary reports and provides the licensing of selected activities and on 
overall project implementation. Some activities (e.g. vegetation removal and 
replacement, disposal of spoil at sites that will have future development) require separate 
licenses and different environmental agencies get involved in the process and provide 
additional supervision.  
 
The Borrower has prepared a supplemental Abbreviated Remedial Resettlement Action 
Plan to provide assistance to the families and other persons evacuated from the site of the 
January 12, 2007 accident.  This plan includes temporary housing, food and other 
benefits until families are allowed to return to their homes and cash compensation both 
for material losses, lost business profits and the suffering undergone by the displaced 
people.  The costs are borne by the insurance companies and the contractors.  All 
settlements involve the participation of Metro, the contractors and their insurers, the Sao 
Paulo Public Defender and the State Justice Department.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Bank has reviewed implementation of the EMP and, in general, finds Borrower 
performance to be satisfactory.  The Bank made a number of recommendations for 
improvements to the environmental protection measures, which will be incorporated into 
the project's EMP.  Similarly, the Bank reviewed resettlement performance to date and 
found it to be satisfactory although subject to rreservations by the affected families due to 
the long delay in implementation of the resettlement plan.  Details are available in Annex 
2
of
the PAD.  
 
The key stakeholders for the project are the residents of Sao Paulo, particularly those 
living along the route served by Line 4. In addition, stakeholders include the municipal 
administration as interested parties, the state government as the Borrower of record, the 
contractors responsible for actual construction, and, indirectly, all those who breathe the 
air in Sao Paulo.  Metro has maintained contacts with all of the key stakeholders through 
various mechanisms.  One of them deserves special mention:  Metro has set up two 
visitor centers where people can walk in or telephone and be received by a trained social 
worker.  These centers serve as sources of accurate information about Metro and also as 
reception points for complaints, suggestions and comments.  Metro responds to each 
query as soon as feasible, reaching out into the organization to find answers to questions.  
Additionally, the staff compiles a monthly report classifying and summarizing the 
questions and comments received and transmits it to management. This is best practice 
and helps to maintain channels of communication with the community and assures 
adequate responses to citizen concerns.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/20/2000 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/30/1994 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/20/2001 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/27/2001  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/25/1998 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/20/2001 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a  
 
Recommendations to improve environmental management and supervision are being 
incorporated into the EMP and will be cleared by the Bank. In view of the accident of 
January 12, 2007, the Borrower is preparing an Abbreviated Remedial Resettlement 
Action Plan that will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
04/26/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Procee 
04/26/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
04/26/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
04/26/2007 
Comments:   
