Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/03/2007 
Report No.:  AC3021
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P094315 
Project Name:  BR Municipal APL: Sao Luis Enhancing Municipal Governance and 
Quality of Life Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ming Zhang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 17, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (75%);Sub-national 
government administration (20%);Solid waste management (5%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Other social 
protection and risk management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.64 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
23.76
23.76 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the São Luís Enhancing Municipal Governance and Quality of Life 
Project is to improve public service for the residents in the Bacanga Basin of São Luís 
Municipality, and enhance the capacity of the city government in promoting local 
economic development and municipal management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes three main components:  
 
Component 1: Municipal Management Strengthening and Local Economic 
Development (Total Estimated Cost: US$ 6.2 million)  
 
This component will support the development of a Local Economic Development and 
Competitiveness Strategy, capacity building for job and income generation, technical 
Page  2
assistance for financial and budget enhancement, and technical assistance for project 
implementation.  
 
1) 
The formulation of a Local Economic Development and Competitiveness Strategy 
will include a LED plan aiming to provide strategic directions for economic 
development; a competitive upgrading strategy for the critical clusters (Arranjos 
Produtivos Locais) such as tourism and cultural heritage preservation and a resource-
based cluster centered around the two major enterprises in the city; simplification of 
business processes (Doing Business) and the Municipal Balance ScoreCard; and other 
actions that are recommended from the cluster enhancement process.  
 
2) 
Capacity building for Job and income generation support will be provided by 
financing activities such as job creation for low-income residents, particularly for those 
residing in the project focal area of the Bacanga, training and facilitation of access to 
existing microfinance programs, and providing technical assistance support to the Deputy 
Secretariat of Employment and Income Generation (Secretaria Adjunta de Geração de 
Emprego, Trabalho e Renda).  
 
3) 
Financial and Budget Management Enhancement will support the review of 
institutional structures and legislation related to budget and financial areas and 
strengthening of systems for planning, budget, financial administration, accounting and 
internal control;  technical assistance in budget formulation; human resource management 
in budget and financial areas; training on budget and financial management; technical 
assistance in budget formulation and execution; fiscal information disclosure; and 
strengthening of the municipal procurement system, including assistance to the CPL’s 
Central Bidding Committee.  
 
4) 
Finally, project implementation support will be provided to strengthen the Project 
Management Unit (UGP), support project management, project monitoring and 
evaluation, public service satisfaction survey, and conduct community outreach, 
communication and dissemination activities for the project.  In addition, support for 
institutional strengthening will be provided to SEMSUR, the municipal secretariat 
responsible for urban drainage and solid waste management. This support would be 
provided with the aim of increasing and improving SEMSUR’s operational and 
management capacity, with emphasis on drainage and solid waste services. A 
comprehensive analysis of the secretariat will be conducted to design the organizational 
restructuring that allows for adequate management and provision of public services by 
either the municipal government or a third party.  
 
Component 2: Sanitation and Water Improvements (Total Estimated Cost: US$ 34 
million)  
 
This component aims to improve the storm water drainage, sewerage and water supply 
systems as well as develop and pilot solid waste management measures in the targeted 
areas of the Bacanga Basin.  
 
Page  3
1) 
Sewerage system improvements will include construction of a sewage collection 
system for the entire area of the left bank that feeds into the existing Bacanga Sewerage 
Treatment Plant (ETE); execution and completion of the wastewater collection system in 
the targeted areas of the basin n
ot covered by CAEMA’s project; and implementation of a 
mechanical sludge drying system at ETE Bacanga.   
 
2) 
Storm drainage system improvements will concentrate on micro and macro-
drainage for the Canal do Coroado and Rio das Bicas and include constructing storm 
drain networks on the right bank of the project area; improving the hydraulic operation of 
the urban drainage canals by cleaning up the canals, improved operation and 
maintenance, and removing structural obstacles in the canals; rehabilitating areas of 
environmental value so as to improve the quality of the waters that flow to Bacanga Lake 
and reduce the decayed areas along the lake’s right bank; and preparing a Solid Waste 
Management Plan and a pilot to be carried out in the Bacanga Basin.  
 
3) 
Water supply system improvements will focus on reducing the number of deep 
tubular wells, expanding the water distribution system toward the non-serviced areas, 
especially on the basin’s left bank; increasing the number of metered connections; 
equipment to control unaccounted-for water; and rehabilitating the concrete structure and 
the metallic bridge that supports the 900 mm distribution pipes in the Bacanga Dam. The 
project will also support a Loss Control Pilot Program to be implemented by CAEMA.  
 
4) 
This component will also finance technical assistance activities for the 
strengthening of sanitation management and supervision of construction works, including 
technical assistance to PMSL for regulating water and sanitation services, improving 
operations and maintenance of drainage services, and development of a solid waste 
management plan.  
 
Component 3: Urban and Environmental Improvements (total estimated cost: US$ 15.8 
million)  
 
The component will support informal area upgrading and resettlement, rehabilitation of 
the Bacanga Dam, and municipal environmental management.  
 
1) 
Informal area upgrading and resettlement will include establishment of the legal 
limits of urban occupancy in the Basin and addressing the issue of accommodating future 
migrants to the city; resettlement of families living in risk-prone areas; construction of 
local roads that will allow improved supply of public services in the area; construction of 
public spaces and community facilities in resettlement locales in the project area; land 
tenure regularization for part of the population; and other urban improvements in the 
areas to enhance accessibility and living conditions.  
 
2) 
Rehabilitation of the Bacanga Dam will include rehabilitation of the dam’s 
structure and the electro-mechanical equipment; development of operational rules for the 
dam that balance the flooding control objective and the environmental objective of 
minimizing pollution in the lake; monitoring of water quality in the lake, which will 
Page  4
furnish the necessary data to plan the control actions devised to fight pollution; and 
investigation on the origin of Cadmium discharge and preparation of a Plan to Control 
Emissions.  
 
3) 
Municipal Environmental Management Support will invest in the implementation 
of the municipal environmental policy; formulation and implementation of an 
environmental education plan for the Bacanga Basin; and support in the implementation 
of the management plan for Bacanga state park.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The municipality of São Luís, the capital city of the state of Maranhão, is located on the 
Island of São Luís in the extreme north of the Brazilian Northeast. The ‘island’ is, in fact, 
an archipelago of 62 islands comprising 720 km2 of land and an additional 150 km2 of 
mangrove swamps. The archipelago contains the metropolitan region of São Luís, which 
is divided into four municipalities with a total metropolitan population of more than one 
million, of which over 900,000 reside in São Luís municipality. The metropolitan area is 
home to a significant industrial sector with potential to expand, and its Itaqui seaport is an 
important driver for development given its strategic location, depth and modern facilities. 
The city is of historical significance its colonial center has been declared a UNESCO 
World Heritage Site. The archipelago is distinguished by its ecological diversity, 
encompassing mangroves, riparian forests, and patches of Amazonian forest, which, in 
combination with over 30 km of beaches, offer substantial potential for eco-tourism.  
 
The Bacanga River Basin, which is the focus area of the proposed Project, is the largest 
catchment area lying fully within the island, occupying 130km2 and housing over 
230,000 of the municipality's residents. Despite the pressure of informal urban expansion, 
the basin still comprises 80% vegetation cover. The Bacanga Basin is an important area 
in terms of economic activity as well as natural and human resources. The area contains 
the city's historical center and main industrial region, the Bacanga State Park (with a 
reservoir that produces 10% of São Luís' potable water) and the Maracanã 
Environmentally Protected Area (created to buffer urban and industrial expansion), as 
well as a large percentage of the municipality's low-income, peri-urban population. The 
municipal government of São Luís (PMSL) has identified these settlements as a top 
priority for urban upgrading.  
 
To dampen the effects of the large tidal variations within the basin, and to allow the 
consolidation of upstream urban infrastructure, a dam and floodgate were constructed at 
the mouth of the Bacanga by the state government in the 1970s. This intervention created 
a
permanent saline lake and permanently exposed previously submerged land, including 
much mangrove forest, which was subsequently occupied by informal housing, whose 
residents suffer from extreme drainage and wastewater problems due to high water table 
levels. The dam’s floodgates are in a state of disrepair and are poorly operated, thus 
preventing release of water during storms and leading to flooding in the informal 
settlements bordering the lake. Furthermore, the resulting lack of water exchange has 
significantly compromised the ability of the lake to assimilate organic matter, aggravating 
Page  5
water quality degradation associated with uncontrolled domestic and industrial pollution, 
and elevating levels of contaminants found in fish caught in the lake.  
 
The targeted project area of the Bacanga Basin includes the eight communities (barrios) 
of Via Embratel, Campo UFMA, Sá Viana, Pindorama, João Paulo, Filipinho, 
Coroadinho, and Sacavém. These communities were selected based on technical studies 
and various consultations by PMSL, and have the following characteristics:  
 
-
more than 90% of the families earn less than 2 minimum salaries;  
 
-
residents suffer from an inadequate rainwater drainage system, which is aggravated by 
the cumulative effects of improper garbage disposal, resulting in seriously high pollution 
levels that pose a direct and serious threat to public health;  
 
-
less than 40% of the population in the areas is covered by sewerage collection 
network;  
 
-
sewage is not treated;  
 
-
current per capita water consumption is less than 40% of the municipal average;  
 
-
approximately 750 families live in areas with high risk of flooding;  
 
-
inadequate sanitation contributes to deteriorating water quality of the lake inside the 
Bacanga Dam.  
 
The project target area does not include Centro Historico, the UNESCO World Heritage 
site.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed Project is expected to provide highly positive environmental impact. The 
construction of the infrastructure could result in some limited negative environmental 
Page  6
impacts. The mitigating measures related to possible negative impacts were included in 
an Environmental Management Plan which contains the relevant costs, the 
implementation schedules and an indication of those responsible for its implementation.  
 
The São Luis Project is rated Environmental Category A, in accordance with the 
corresponding safeguard policies. The Project triggers the following safeguards: OP 4.01 
(Environmental Assessment); OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats); OP 4.12 (Involuntary 
Resettlement) and 4.37 (Safety of Dams). These policies are addressed in detail in the 
Environmental Assessment.  The following items are highlighted:  
 
1) OP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment. The project is classified as Environment 
Category A. A Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) has been prepared which 
aims to identify the project’s potential environmental impacts in accordance with the 
Bank’s environmental policies applicable to Category A projects. An Environmental 
Management Plan has been prepared comprising: (i) Socio-environmental management 
of the project which includes the revised and updated REA; (ii) environmental manual for 
works; (iii) Dissemination and Social Communication Project (PCS); (iv) Environmental 
Education Project; (v) Framework for Resettlement; (vi) mitigating actions for the 
envisioned interventions at this Project’s stage; and (vii) strengthening of environmental 
management for the city government of São Luís.  
 
In accordance with the Bank’s Information Disclosure Policy (BP 17.50), the project 
and its various components also benefited from a process of dissemination, discussion 
and public consultation.  In order to reach as wide a public as possible, the Municipal 
Government of São Luis (PMSL) organized a number of meetings during the preparatory 
stage of the project with the local community leaders of the areas affected. To complete 
the process of dissemination and consultation, the PMSL disseminated the Executive 
Summary and the preliminary Regional Environmental Assessment Report on its website 
and through correspondence with the main Federal, State and municipal bodies 
concerned, as well as with non-governmental and community organizations, the Public 
Ministry, etc. The final consultative hearing took place on July 6th with the participation 
of community-based bodies such as the Committee for the Defense of the Bacanga and 
Rio das Bicas Rivers, the District Health Committee, the Regional Engineering and 
Architecture Council and members of the general public.  
 
2) OP 4.04 – Natural Habitats. The project is expected to have a positive impact upon 
natural habitats, as the proposed interventions seek the maintenance of the maximum 
water level in the Bacanga Lake and the sectorization of a permanent preservation strip of 
30 meters (APP) and plan for use of those areas (vegetation, urban parks, leisure areas, 
etc) in order to promote their utilization by the population and prevent re-settlement. 
Additionally, the project will support the Municipality and the State in consolidating the 
existing Conservation Unit – Bacanga State Park, maintaining and ensuring the 
environmental conditions on the Basin.  
 
3) OP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources. The project will not affect the areas of 
historical and cultural heritage of the city of São Luís. Project targeted areas are outside 
the Central Historic District. The project will entail construction and excavation to 
Page  7
expand and replace infrastructure, therefore the EA will include screening for any known 
cultural property in the project area and incorporate chance finding procedures in the 
event that culturally significant resources are discovered. In addition, Brazil has a well-
developed legislative and normative framework, which is under the oversight of the 
National Institute for Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN).  
 
4) OP 4.12 
–
Involuntary Resettlement. The project would require the resettlement of 
families living in high-risk areas subject to frequent flooding, having contact with solid 
waste accumulated below the stilt houses, or infested by pollutants during the flooding. 
The initial estimate of the number of families to be resettled is 750. The identification of 
areas and families for resettlement is still ongoing, as the key topographical studies 
needed to define the area subject to relocation have not yet been concluded. The families 
to be resettled will be compensated with appropriate land, housing, and related 
infrastructure built in safe areas in nearby areas. A Framework for the Involuntary 
Resettlement has been prepared in accordance with World Bank guidelines and 
safeguards (OP 4.12).  The Resettlement Action Plan for the families will be developed in 
accordance with the Framework and executed at a later stage, after these families are 
identified.  
 
5) OP 4.37 – Safety of Dams. Despite being small, Bacanga Dam (8.4 meters high), 
underwent a safety assessment study, performed in accordance with criteria and 
procedures of OP 4.37. During Project preparation, the independent assessment of the 
dam identified the following major problems: (a) deterioration of the floodgate system; 
(b) deterioration of the supporting structure of floodgates and the spillover structure; (c) 
sub-aquatic erosion near to the supporting structure of the floodgates.  As a result of the 
assessment, rehabilitation work of the dam will be included in the project, and the work 
will comprise: rehabilitation of the structure and the electro-mechanical equipment of 
Bacanga Dam, which will remove the risk of rupture and will allow for proper daily 
operation; and development of the dam’s operational rules, that balances the flooding 
control objective and the environmental objective of minimizing pollution in the lake; 
monitoring of water quality in the Lake, which will furnish the necessary data to plan the 
control actions devised to fight pollution.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed Project is expected to provide highly positive environmental impact, with 
its objectives for environmental improvements, particularly related to the flood control 
and water quality of Bacanga Reservoir and its effluent, and the strengthening of the 
urban and environmental planning of the Bacanga Basin. In addition to the environmental 
interventions, the project will also improve the quality of life in specific low-income 
settlements, support policy and institutional development, and strengthen the São Luis 
environmental agency. Other positive impacts are related to: (i) natural habitats – 
consolidation of a permanent preservation strip of 30 meters (APP) around the reservoir 
and plan for use of those areas (vegetation, urban parks, leisure areas, etc) and  
consolidation of the Bacanga State Park; and (ii)  improvement of solid waste 
management and pollution reduction in the rivers and the Bacanga Lake.  
Page  8
Infrastructure construction would likely result in localized short-term negative 
environmental impacts including dust and noise pollution, and erosion. These issues 
would be managed through a series of mitigation measures described in Environmental 
Construction Manual (ECM).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During project preparation, three main evaluations were carried out.  
 
1) 
Analysis of scenarios of the operational conditions of Bacanga Lake and the 
consequences in the reduction of floods on the marginal areas, on the improvement of the 
qualit
y
of the Lake’s waters and the need to resettle the population residing in risk-prone 
areas.  
 
A
hydraulic and operational modeling study of the Bacanga Lake was undertaken in 
order to identify the risk-prone urban areas. The study examined several scenarios of 
precipitation on the basin (RT of 2, 10 and 25 years), tidal conditions, the operational 
conditions of the floodgate systems and the effects of those scenarios on flooding of 
consolidated urban areas in the drainage basin, including the need for the resettlement of 
populations living in critical areas.  
 
The analysis of the scenarios resulted in the suggested alternative for lake operation, 
with a maximum water level of 2 meters in the dry season and the maintenance of a 
system of daily and seasonal operation of the floodgates, so as to maintain the lake’s 
volume during times of intense precipitation and preventing floods on marginal areas to 
the lake above the water level of 2 meters. The chosen alternative would result in better 
water conditions in the lake through the daily exchange in the lake-estuary system, as 
long as the systems of sewage collection were improved in the basin. This alternative also 
reduces significantly the need for resettling households in terms of the operating 
scenarios of up to the 3 meter water level.  
 
2) 
Analysis of the alternatives for rehabilitating the Bacanga dam.  
 
A
safety assessment study was conducted in accordance with the criteria and procedures 
of OP 4.37, due to: (i) the relevance of the operation on the lake and the present and 
future conditions of land use and occupancy on the basin, and the quality of its waters; 
(ii) its use as an important part of the street system connecting the city to the harbor; and 
(iii) the visibly poor conditions of the dam and floodgate system  
 
The assessment pointed to the following main conclusions: (a) deterioration of the 
floodgate system; (b) deterioration of the supporting structure of floodgates and the 
spillover structure; (c) subaquatic erosion near to the supporting structure of the 
floodgates.  
 
This study also examined three alternatives for rehabilitating the dams:  
 
Page  9
•
Alternative 1: Rehabilitation of the structure of the dam and the supporting 
structure of the floodgate system by installing three new hydraulically operated 
“segmented” floodgates  
 
•
Alternative 2: Rehabilitation of the structure of the dam and the supporting 
structure of the floodgate system by installing six new flat hydraulically operated 
floodgates  
 
•
Alternative 3: Installation of a new floodgate structure at another location within 
the body of the dam.  
 
The three alternatives maintain the same daily automatic operational capacity, as 
foreseen in the study, aimed at reducing flooding and improving water quality.  
Alternative 2 was selected as involving the lowest installation costs.  
 
In addition, the alternative of not rehabilitating the floodgate system (and the possibility 
of the floodgates breaking down) was analyzed. This alternative would result in the 
possibility of the water reaching a level of between 4 and 4.5 meters in the Bacanga Lake 
basin, producing serious risks of flooding in currently existing urban areas.  According to 
this study, around 9450 households could be affected, in addition to a large number of 
commercial and service establishments and small industries.  
 
3) 
Analysis of the alternatives for treatment and final disposal of wastewater from 
the Project areas so as to contribute to improved quality of the waters in the lake.  
 
The overall conception of the treatment and final disposal system involved analyzing 6 
alternatives, as follows:  
 
•
Alternative A - a secondary ETE located downstream from the dam near to the 
river mouth, with disposal into the estuary;  
 
•
Alternative B - an ETE with preliminary treatment located downstream from the 
dam near to the river mouth, and a subaquatic outlet channel;  
 
•
Alternative C - a secondary ETE located immediately downstream from the dam 
and with disposal into the estuary;  
 
•
Alternative D - a secondary ETE located upstream from the dam and with 
disposal into Bacanga Lake;  
 
•
Alternative E - transporting the sewage to the existing Bacanga ETE (right bank) 
with the expansion of its capacity and the effluents being disposed of in the estuary.  
 
Alternative E above was chosen mainly from the point of view of the costs involved in 
investment, operation and maintenance up to 2030.  
 
All the sewage collected on the left bank will therefore be directed for treatment in the 
Bacanga ETE, together with the wastewaters collected on the right bank. This will 
involve increasing the capacity of this ETE.  
 
The Bacanga ETE consists of an Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket Reactor (UASB) 
followed by disinfection by ozonization. This treatment process involves low installation 
and operational costs, operating simplicity and pollution-removal compatible with the 
receptor bodies.   
Page  10
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
Regional Environmental Assessment Report and a Resettlement Policy Framework 
have been prepared by the Borrower, making full reference to, and fully taking into 
account, the safeguards triggered under the Project.  
 
The Environmental Assessment aims to comply with the Bank’s environmental policy. 
Once the basic designs are concluded, updating of the Regional Environmental 
Assessment Report will be conducted. This will be submitted to the World Bank for 
analysis and approval. Furthermore, specific environmental studies will be prepared in 
advance of the State of Maranhão environmental licensing process, in accordance with 
current State legislation in force. These studies will also be sent to the Bank for analysis 
and approval.  
 
The preliminary environmental license, the installation license and the operation license 
will be required before construction work commences. Submittal to the Bank of the 
preliminary license will be a condition for the bidding of works and installation license 
for signature of works construction contract.  
 
The service provider will have the capacity to implement safeguard-related measures 
and the Project will provide the necessary technical assistance and the resources to 
implement the appropriate mitigating measures. The Municipal Environmental 
Supervision Institute (IMCA) was created in 1998 with a mandate to plan, supervise and 
execute the environmental policy of São Luis in a sustainable and participative manner. 
The activities of the institute relevant to the Bacanga Basin project include: (i) licensing 
the localization, installation, operation and extent of the civil works, developments and 
activities that are considered to be effectively or potentially liable to pollute or despoil the 
environment or that in any way could cause impacts on the environment; (ii) undertaking 
technical studies related to environmental zoning; (iii) setting environmental guidelines 
for the preparation of projects concerned with the parceling of urban land and for 
overseeing the various activities and developments related to the collection, recycling, 
handling and disposal of waste.  
 
In December 2006 an important series of environmental laws was approved and ratified 
by the São Luis Municipal Government. These established the authorities and basic rules 
required to run the municipal environmental system of which the executive body is the 
Municipal Environmental Supervision Institute (IMCA).  The Municipal Council 
(COMUMA) serves as a consultative and deliberative organ and the Fund is intended to 
be responsible for managing the resources generated in the System. This scheme is in 
accordance with the model recommended by the national system - SISNAMA - under 
which the municipalities are entitled to take action on environmental matters concurrently 
with State and Federal bodies within their areas of competence.  
 
The Institute can assume immediately its function as a licensing entity, although a need 
exists for institutional strengthening and capacity-building in order for it to comply fully 
Page  11
with its mandate. It is clear that a number of gaps require filling within its institutional 
structure, such as the need to create a specific environmental licensing unit and an 
independent supervision and monitoring structure - both of which would be of significant 
benefit to the project. The Institute could avail itself of a specific strengthening plan to 
address questions related to environmental licensing and the management of conservation 
areas, both of which could receive support and funding under the Bacanga Basin project. 
This proposal is contained in the Environmental Management Plan 
–
EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
a) Municipal Government of São Luis (PMSL) and its agencies responsible for 
environmental licensing and control.  
 
b)  Residents and civil society organizations of the target Bacia do Bacanga region of 
city. Consultations (described above) were carried out with civil society, generally, and 
with focus groups of residents in the Bacia do Bacanga regions specifically, following 
prior disclosure of Regional Environmental Assessment Report.  
 
During the Project implementation, the updated REA should be submitted again for 
consultation. Regarding specific actions that address urban upgrading and activities of 
water supply, sewage services and drainage (WSS), the Project will include considerable 
social participation. Additionally, the Project will include social supervision of works, 
carrying out surveys with the community, so as to correct any unsatisfactory outcomes.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/01/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/01/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  12
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
No 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  13
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ming Zhang 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr David N. Sislen 
 
Comments:  Acting Sector Manager 
