Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3082 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/08/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P106427 
Project Name: Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
54.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the project are: (a) to improve the quality of urban transport services in the 
Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region by enhancing the development of a fully integrated urban 
transport system; and (b) to substantially improve the level of service provided by the suburban 
railway while reducing the operating subsidies from the State through the substantial 
participation of the private sector in its operations and management. There were no changes in 
the Project Development Objectives which will remain the same in the proposed additional 
financing requested by the Borrower.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Same as the original project.  
 
The proposed additional loan would help finance the costs associated with the devaluation of 
the US$ and Korean Won (currency of one of the biggest contracts financed by the loan) in 
relation to the Brazilian Real and shortages in counterpart funds, which caused a financing gap.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region.  
Page  2
Rail Right-of-way of Central - Companhia Estadual de Engenharia de Transportes e Logistica, 
operated by Concessionaire Supervia  
 
The original project was rated as a Category B by LATEN. No EMP was required but 
independent consultants (Toronto Transit Consultants) were hired to verify whether there was 
potential resettlement. There was no involuntary resettlement or expropriation in the project. The 
main aspects to be monitored and mitigated had to do with day-to-day operational activities of 
the system, the prevention of "dengue" and other diseases in the vegetation that grows in the 
right-of-way, the reduction of work accidents and in the shops and the need for an educational 
campaign. Also clauses were introduced in the LA to ensure that contractors working in the 
railway facilities would properly dispose of their residues.  
 
The award of the concession was preceded by an environmental audit required by the State 
under model terms of reference provided by the Bank and undertaken by independent 
environmental consultants. On the basis of such report undertaken in the context of the Rio State 
Reform and Privatization project,  the concessionaire (Supervia) agreed to undertake a plan to 
mitigate the impact of the disposal of residues (oil, grease, sewage), to disinfect the vegetation to  
prevent dengue, to educate the staff in adequate practices to prevent operations and shop 
accidents. The reports prepared by Supervia are monitored by the project team through 
supervision consultants.  
 
The results insofar as disposing of residues, cleaning the right-of-way  which before the 
concession was littered with trash and the reduction in work accidents has been notable since the 
concessionaire took over in 1998.  
 
The additional financing required does not trigger any new safeguard policies since it is to 
cover the devaluation of the US$ in relation to the Real and  Korean Won. The beneficial aspects 
of the project to the right-of-way and to the RJMR will continue because passengers have 
switched from road-based modes to the rail system.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower has the institutional capacity required through the Project Management 
Implementation Group and consultants.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Madalena Franco Garcia (LCSTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
n/a   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
To control "dengue", is part of the responsibilities of the concessionaire under the EMP and 
is being undertaken periodically by RODAGRO.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/08/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
11/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
