Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/13/2007 
Report No.:  AC3269
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P106427 
Project Name:  Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
54.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective of the project are: (a) to improve the quality of urban transport 
services in the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region by enhancing the development of a 
fully integrated urban transport system; and (b) to substantially improve the level of 
service provided by the suburban railway while reducing the operating subsidies from the 
State through the substantial participation of the private sector in its operations and 
management. There were no changes in the Project Development Objectives which will 
remain the same in the proposed additional financing requested by the Borrower.   
 
3. Project Description 
Same as the original project.  
 
The proposed additional loan would help finance the costs associated with the 
devaluation of the US$ and Korean Won (currency of one of the biggest contracts 
financed by the loan) in relation to the Brazilian Real and shortages in counterpart funds, 
which caused a financing gap.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region.  
 
Rail Right-of-way of Central - Companhia Estadual de Engenharia de Transportes e 
Logistica, operated by Concessionaire Supervia  
 
The original project was rated as a Category B by LATEN. No EMP was required but 
independents consultants (Toronto Transit Consultants) were hired to verify whether 
there was potential resettlement. There was no involuntary resettlement or expropriation 
in the project. The main aspects to be monitored and mitigated had to do with day-to-day 
operational activities of the system, the prevention of ?dengue? and other diseases in the 
vegetation that grows in the right-of-way, the reduction of work accidents and in the 
shops and the need for an educational campaign. Also clauses were introduced in the 
bidding documents to ensure that contractors working in the railway facilities would 
properly dispose of their residues.  
 
The award of the concession was preceded by an environmental audit required by the 
State under model terms of reference provided by the Bank and undertaken by 
independent environmental consultants. On the basis of such report undertaken in the 
context of the Rio State Reform and Privatization project,  the concessionaire (Supervia) 
agreed to undertake a plan to mitigate the impact of the disposal of residues (oil, grease, 
sewage), to disinfect the vegetation to  prevent dengue, to educate the staff in adequate 
practices to prevent operations and shop accidents. The reports prepared by Supervia are 
monitored by the project team through supervision consultants.  
 
The results insofar as disposing of residues, cleaning the right-of-way  which before the 
concession was littered with trash and the reduction in work accidents has been notable 
since the concessionaire took over in 1998.  
 
The additional financing required does not trigger any new safeguard policies since it is 
to cover the devaluation of the US$ in relation to the Real and Korean Won. The 
beneficial aspects of the project to the right-of-way and to the RJMR will continue 
because passengers have switched from road-based modes to the rail system.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Madalena Franco Garcia (LCSTR) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no safeguard issues or potential large scale negative impacts in the original 
project or in this additional financing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Completion of the original project through this additional financing is going to have long 
term positive impacts as more passengers will switch from road to rail based modes. This 
will eventually reduce automobile and bus emissions.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternatives were considered for the additional financing since the trains will be 
running on an existing rail right of way and the objective is to complete the orginal 
project   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower supervises the rail concessionaire who has ensured that the rail right-of-
way is cleaned and that the maintenance residues are properly disposed.The Borrower has 
a
Project Management Implementation Group supported by the Trends-Enefer 
Consortium which provides the necessary expertise in specialized areas.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are the users of the railway system. In the original project dwellers 
of communities around the rail right-of-way were also consulted. An effort was made to 
educate those dwellers not to dump garbage in the rail right-of-way.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/12/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/12/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Pest management was started well after the approval of the original project due to the 
start of a "dengue" epidemic. The concessionaire Supervia hired the firm Rodagro which 
sprays the right-of-way twice a year. More spraying is done if a specific focus of dengue 
is identified. The pesticides used are Gliz 480 N A- # 3608/95 and Arsenal N A -#715/93. 
The firm and the pseticides are registered with IBAMA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
N/A 
Page  5
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
11/08/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Madalena Franco Garcia 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
11/09/2007 
Comments:   
