Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1621 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P070867 
Project Name: Caatinga Conservation and Management - Mata Branca - (GEF) 
Task Team Leader: Claudia Sobrevila 
GEF Focal Area: Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (34%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (33%);Sub-national government administration (33%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P);Land administration 
and management (P);Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.20 
 Local 
Communities 
0.80 
 
UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
0.06 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
13.06 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's global environmental objective and its development objective are the same: to 
contribute to the preservation, conservation, and sustainable management of the biodiversity of 
the Caatinga Biome in the states of Bahia and Ceara, while improving the quality of life of its 
inhabitants, through the introduction of sustainable development practices.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project design is the result of a long and participatory preparation process that involved the 
governments of both states; key partners such as federal government, International organizations 
(FAO, IFAD, UNDP), national  NGOs, academic and, social organizations; and specialists in the 
Caatinga's biodiversity and ecosystems, agriculture and land management, and monitoring and 
evaluation.  The three components represent an operational response to the following critical 
Page  2
issues: (a) fragile ecosystems and loss of biodiversity; (b) knowledge gaps; (c) redundancies, 
conflicts, and gaps in the policy and legal frameworks; (c) inadequate financial and human 
resources; (d) insufficient social capital at the local level; and (e) insufficient participation of key 
stakeholders, including the private sector  and local governments, in decision making processes.  
 
Description of components:  
 
Component 1: Integrated Ecosystem Management (Total amount: US$ 6.7 million; GEF 3.2 
million) This component promotes the adoption of an integrated ecosystem management (IEM) 
approach for the biome in Bahia and Ceara. It seeks to change attitudes and behaviors toward 
conservation, and to foster a policy and regulatory framework supportive of the IEM approach.  
Proposed policy reforms under this component include (a) development of a market framework 
as an underlying incentive for the transition toward IEM; (b) support for the consolidation and 
expansion of the states systems of protected areas, and for improving their management; (c) 
development of capacity for assessment and monitoring; (d) support for efforts toward the 
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity important to agriculture; (e) support for 
institutional strengthening of the relevant actors, including civil society stakeholders; (f) support 
for specific state efforts such as Cear??s Forest Fire Monitoring and Prevention Program 
(PREVINE), and Bahia's Charcoal Extraction Surveillance Program to reduce threats to the 
biome; (g) development of capacity for designing and monitoring pilot projects; and (h) 
strengthening the capacity of agencies, NGOs, and indigenous and quilombola (African-
Brazilian) communities to effectively implement activities aimed at protecting ecosystems.  
 
A
Strategic Environmental Assessment(SEA) will be carried out at the regional level to analyze 
policies, plans and programs affecting the Caatinga to ensure that environmental concerns have 
been addressed and trade-offs have been evaluated; and to ensure that environmental 
considerations are mainstreamed into the early phases of planning and decision making. The 
assessment will inform programs to strengthen the policy and legal frameworks of the two states.  
 
GEF funding will concentrate on subcomponent 1.2 (Integrated Management of Protected 
Areas), where the incremental impact of technical assistance will be greater, given the states? 
lack of experience with protected area systems. Government counterpart funds will complement 
GEF resources by financing operational and recurrent costs.  The State Governments will finance 
higher proportions of subcomponents 1.1 and 1.3, given their importance for sustainability 
beyond the life of the project.  
 
Component 2: Adoption of Integrated Ecosystem Management Practices (Total US$ 12.1 
million; GEF US$ 5.1 million)This component supports implementation of cost-effective and 
replicable IEM demonstration projects that will focus on: (a) improvement of soil and water 
conservation practices; (b) identification and dissemination of new technologies for sustainable 
natural resources management; (c) recovery of vegetation in protected areas and critical 
landscapes, and recovery of natural habitats; (d) replacing harmful agricultural and pasturing 
practices with improved methods and technologies; and (e) protecting the culture of indigenous 
peoples in priority areas while ensuring the recovery and sustainable use of natural resources.  
 
Page  3
Projects will fall into five categories: (a) rehabilitation of degraded protected areas; (b) 
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity; (c) water and land resources management; (d) 
development of sustainable and cost-effective productive systems; and (e) cultural recovery.  
Potential activities may include reforestation of riparian vegetation; development of small 
ruminant grazing corridors; community co-management of protected areas; introduction of agro-
forestry techniques; development of local drought management plans; fire awareness and control 
programs; and pilots to demonstrate sustainable land and water management practices.  
 
This component will also address issues critical to the long-term sustainability of conservation 
efforts, including: (a) adequate planning and regular flow of financial resources; (b) incentives 
for establishing conservation partnerships; (c) monitoring and evaluation; (d) continuity of 
actions to prepare communities for more complex projects; and (e) engagement of the local 
population and local governments.  
 
Subprojects will be financed through grants that will complement investments made by 
institutions implementing the subprojects. At least 18 subprojects are expected to be 
implemented in each state, with estimated costs ranging from US$ 5,000.00 to US$ 200,000.00. 
Final selection of subprojects will be made by a formal committee with representatives of the 
Management Teams, MMA/IBAMA, State Secretariats of Environment, Agriculture and Water 
Resources, university/research institution and civil society organizations.  Municipalities in the 
project areas, and potential beneficiaries, will be informed previously about dates, objectives, 
themes, eligibility, selecting criteria and other conditions at least three months before selection.  
 
The subprojects will be selected according to the following criteria:  
 
Policy priorities  
 
Supports GEFs biodiversity priorities and has global benefits  
 
Supports the 1988 Constitution on biodiversity conservation  
 
Supports the goals of the Convention on Biological Diversity  
 
Supports the goals of the National Policy to Combat Desertification  
 
Supports the objectives established by PROBIO  
 
Supports the goals defined by the MMA Caatinga working group  
 
Contributes to the integration of the states? development, environmental, and poverty reduction 
goals, including fire abatement, water and land resources management, and municipal 
development  
 
Contributes to the global environmental objectives of Mata Branca.  
 
Operational priorities  
 
Supports the development objective of the project  
 
Integrates with other state policies and actions  
 
Has demonstrated local ownership  
 
Complements key initiatives in the Caatinga by other government, private sector, and civil 
society actors.  
 
The areas of intervention of the subprojects:  
 
Page  4
The subprojects will be implemented in biodiversity-rich areas in both states. The activities 
developed will generate global environmental benefits. Specific sites for the activities will be 
chosen according to the following criteria: Biome Relevance, Biodiversity Relevance, Land Use 
Patterns, Social Capital and Community Counterpart, Local Political Viability, Conservation 
Area, and Expected Outcomes.  
 
The subproject areas complement efforts to create and consolidate protected areas to be 
undertaken in Component 1. These areas are:   
 
1-The meso-regions in Bahia have been chosen due to their importance for the Caatinga 
biodiversity (all are PROBIO areas) and the threats to which they are exposed. Subprojects in 
these areas will ensure that the threats are mitigated.  
 
The subprojects area in Ceara will be concentrated in the Inhamuns region, comprised of the 
municipalities of Crates, Independencia, Parambu, Aiuaba, Quiterian?polis, Novo Oriente and 
Taua.  
 
The project will select local communities according to a landscape management approach, 
aimed at creating a biological corridor. The existence of protected areas, native vegetation cover 
and areas in a process of land degradation will be considered in the selection of the sites for the 
subprojects.  
 
Component 3.  Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project Management (Total amount US$ 4.36  
million; GEF US$ 1.7 million). This component responds to three key sector issues: lack of 
effective monitoring of policy impacts; insufficient knowledge sharing and dissemination of 
improved technologies; and the need to build managerial capacity for IEM.  It seeks to build 
implementation capacity for Mata Branca by establishing a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system that would track progress toward achieving the project?s global environmental objectives.  
The system would utilize two GEF Tracking Tools for Biodiversity Focal Area: a) Strategic 
Priority One: Catalyzing Sustainability of Protected Areas and, b) Strategic Priority Two: 
Mainstreaming Biodiversity in Production Landscapes and Sectors.  
 
Each state has established a Management Team (MT) to coordinate and execute all the 
activities of the project.  Under the overall coordination of the MTs, this component will support:  
 
o
Development of an M&E system that is cost effective, measurable, reviews meaningful 
trends, and reveals the state of biodiversity in the project area.  The system will provide the 
framework for answering two questions: i) has the activity met its objectives and ii) what 
accounts for its level of performance?  Financing will be provided to develop and implement the 
system, construct a baseline, and implement a management information system (MIS).  
 
o
Dissemination of project findings and lessons learned on effective ecosystem 
management strategies and mechanisms;  
Page  5
o
Effective project management, by strengthening the capacity of the Management Teams 
(MTs) in both states to coordinate and implement all project components.  
 
o
Given its higher proportion of operational and recurrent costs, the state Governments will 
finance this component. GEF will provide incremental support for development of the M&E 
system, for which the Governments have relatively weaker capacity.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project's area of intervention will be in selected areas of the Caatinga biome in the states of 
Bahia and Ceara.  The main selection criteria for the areas of intervention are based on Biome 
and Biodiversity Relevance (according to regions identified as priorities for the conservation of 
the biodiversity of the Caatinga by PROBIO) and Socioeconomic Conditions. In Bahia, they are 
the PROBIO priority areas number 32, 40, 47, 56. In Ceara, they are PROBIO priority areas 
number 4, 6, 7, 9.  
 
The states of Bahia and Cear? together encompass about 50 percent of the Caatinga biome - 
with approximately 12 million inhabitants in both states (70 percent of Cearas population and 50 
percent of Bahias).  The Caatinga has undergone severe habitat destruction and has survived 
mainly as small patches in relatively remote areas.  Only one percent of its territory is preserved 
as strict conservation units. The inhabitants of the Caatinga are the poorest in Brazil: the region 
is marked by low educational levels, high infant mortality and life expectancy rates, and a 
paucity of social and physical infrastructure and basic services.  
 
The Caatinga is severely threatened by accelerating economic processes, such as conversion of 
woodland to pasture, charcoal production for cooking fuels, firewood collection, and expansion 
of infrastructure and irrigation perimeters. Desertification is advancing quickly, caused by the 
removal of vegetation for pasture and crops, overgrazing, soil erosion, and the use of slash-and-
burn as the prevalent agricultural system by smallholder farmers and ranchers. Another major 
driving force that has contributed to the present environmental and socioeconomic situation has 
been the historical rural policies, which gave priority to mono-cropping and extensive cattle-
raising. The same processes that cause habitat degradation also cause significant greenhouse gas 
emissions and reduced net carbon sequestration. Consequently, a perverse cycle of 
environmental degradation/poverty/environmental degradation has been set in place, and if left 
unaddressed, may become irreversible.  
 
Despite its severe conditions, the Caatinga is a remarkably rich repository of biological 
diversity, provided by a highly heterogeneous mosaic of types of vegetation, home to at least 
1,200 vascular plants and a considerable number of endemic species: of the 598 registered 
arboreal and shrub species 180 are endemic. Also endemic are at least 185 fish species, 44 
lizards spp, 9 spp of amphibeans, 47 spp of snakes, 4 turtle spp, 3 crocodylia spp, 350 bird spp 
and 80 mammal spp. Of the ten most endangered birds in the world, two are endemic to the 
Caatinga: the indigo macaw and the little blue macaw.  The most frequent species are 
Caesalpinaceae, Mimosaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Fabaceae and Cactaceae, with the genus Senna, 
Mimosa and Pithecellobium exhibiting the largest number of species. The most abundant plants 
found in the Caatinga area are Caesalpinia pyramidalis, Mimosa spp. and Croton spp., which are 
the pioneer species in the process of secondary succession resulting from anthropogenic action.   
 
Page  6
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Both state agencies responsible for project implementation - CAR in Bahia and SOMA in Ceara 
-
have good knowledge of the requirements of the Bank's safeguard policies and a good 
understanding about procedures.  Both agencies have worked with other state agencies in other 
Bank-financed projects, such as the Integrated Water Management and land-based poverty 
reduction projects, which applied different safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Ms Maria-Valeria Pena (LCSPP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment has been prepared, which includes, for each state: (i) an 
analysis of the political and legal framework, in the environmental and other sectors, that affects 
the Caatinga; (iii) assessment of possible environmental impacts and mitigation measures; and 
(iii) an Environmental Operational Framework that outlines the environmental procedures, 
criteria, and mitigation measures for the demonstrative subprojects. The Environmental 
Assessment also includes a report on stakeholder consultations and measures to address the 
Natural Habitats and Forests policies. The EA has been posted in the Info Shop and a summary is 
provided in Annex 10-A.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
No adverse or irreversible impacts on natural habitats are foreseen. Nonetheless, the 
Environmental Section of the Operational Manual will outline mitigation measures to ensure no 
harm to natural habitats will occur, in accordance with Bank policy.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
No adverse or irreversible impacts on the Caatinga' dry forests are foreseen. Nonetheless, the 
Environmental Section of the Operational Manual will outline mitigation measures to ensure no 
harm to natural habitats will occur, in accordance with Bank policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project does not foresee any negative impacts on Indigenous Peoples or Quilombolas. 
The project has been designed so that the areas of intervention in both states include areas in 
which indigenous and quilombo communities are located, in order to include these groups as 
beneficiaries of the project.  According to Bank Policy OD. 4.20, an Indigenous Peoples 
Framework for each state are has been prepared by each state.  These have been posted in the 
Info Shop and a summary is presented in Annex 10-C.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No physical resettlement will take place under the project.  Because the project is attempting 
to modify land uses and consolidate protected areas management, a Process Framework for the 
states of Bahia and Ceara? Has been  developed to comply with OP/BP 4.12. The document 
outlines measures to address alternative livelihood issues related to the possible restricted access 
to the extraction of  native plants such as the Carnauba tree oil and foliage or others. The process 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
framework has been posted in the Info Shop and is presented in Annex 10-B.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/19/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
All safeguard-related studies that may be needed will be delivered to the Bank by August 
30th, 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Claudia Sobrevila 
02/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
08/02/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
02/27/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
