Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3081 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P106038 
Project Name: BR  São Paulo Trains and Signalling 
Task Team Leader: Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
540.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
470.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan Bank for Internaitonal Cooperation (JBIC) 
540.00
1,010.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
B.  Project Objective:  
 
The proposed development objective is to increase the peak –hour carrying capacity of the São 
Paulo Metropolitan Trains Company (CPTM) and of the São Paulo Metro Company (CMSP) in 
order to improve the level-of-service provided to the users in a cost efficient manner.  
 
This objective will be met by (i) financing equipment critical for increasing the peak-hour 
passenger capacity of both systems to improve frequencies and facilitate the integration of the 
urban transport system allowing transfers between buses, suburban trains and the metro thereby 
facilitating the mobility of the low-income population and their access to employment areas; (ii) 
to develop and formulate pricing, regulatory and funding policies which improve cost-recovery 
and increase long-term financial sustainability of the State and municipal governments, and the 
operating agencies involved and (iii) to design urban transport strategies and actions to mitigate 
the impact of rising transport costs on the mobility of the poor.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would comprise two components:  
Page  2
(a) an Infrastructure and Equipment component to help acquire (i) forty trains (Electrical 
Multiple Units-EMUs) of eight passenger cars each for CPTM; and (ii) seventeen trains (EMUs) 
of 6 cars each for the São Paulo Metro; (iii) signaling , telecom and electrical equipment and 
associated infrastructure for CPTM; (iv) signaling and telecom equipment and associated 
infrastructure for the São Paulo Metro; and.  
 
(b) an Institutional and Policy Development component to help in (i) consolidating the Regional 
Transport Coordination Commission (CDTI) for the São Paulo Metropolitan Region (SPMR) 
;(ii) updating the integrated Transport Policy, Land Use and Air Quality Management strategy 
(PITU) for the SPMR to meet both transport and air quality targets and to introduce sound cost-
recovery, tariff, regulatory and subsidy policies; (iii) providing an action plan to review the 
funding of the urban transport system in the SPMR in view of the adoption of the Bilhete-Único 
;and (iv) the project management and supervision of the project including the acquisition and 
reception of the trains.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in the Metropolitan São Paulo Region in Brazil involving the São Paulo 
Metrorail System serving primarily the Municipality of São Paulo and the Sao Paulo Suburban 
Train Company serving the metropolitan area (see Map in PCN).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has implemented several projects with Bank and IDB financing and has developed 
an in-house to oversee preparation of specialized plans and frameworks.   Both the Metro and 
CPTM systems are undergoing a major period of improvement and expansion of service to better 
serve the area.  These plans have been subject to intensive environmental and social planning, 
under the guidelines of both the World Bank and IDB.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSTR) 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
EIAs were conducted for all segments of the CPTM and Metro projects currently under 
implementation and local environmental licenses have been sought and are in effect.  The Bank 
is reviewing the EIA documents and the conditions attached to the licenses for consistency with 
Bank policy.  Relevant conditionalities will be integrated into the project operational manual and 
the Bank will assure that relevant disclosure policies are followed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Project financing will not contribute directly to resettlement, but the reactivation of Line C of 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
CPTM is part of the overall system expansion of which the current project is part.  Therefore 
OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.  Most of the resettlement has been completed under a Resettlement 
Action Plan prepared using IDB guidelines.  The Bank will insure that the process has been 
appropriate under Bank guidelines and will assure that appropriate monitoring and evaluation be 
carried out.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/26/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/26/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
n/a   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge M. Rebelo 
07/24/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
