Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/09/2006 
Report No.:  AC2574
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bulgaria 
Project ID:  P099894 
Project Name:  ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE REHABILITATION PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Henry G. R. Kerali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 3, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
116.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
29.00
29.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to assist Bulgaria to reduce 
road transport costs by improving the condition and quality of its roads network during 
the first years of EU accession. The proposed project objectives will be achieved by:  
 
a. 
Improving the condition of selected Class I, II and III roads and thereby reducing 
road user costs.  
 
b.
Enabling the NRIF to prepare well-articulated multi-year maintenance and 
rehabilitation programs through the development and use of an improved road 
management system.  
 
c. 
Improving the NRIF's capacity to manage effectively road maintenance, 
rehabilitation, and investment programs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The total Project cost is estimated at EUR 112.5 million, with EUR 90 million from the 
proposed Bank Loan. The project includes two components:  
 
Component A: Rehabilitation and periodic maintenance of selected roads (EUR 107.0 
million). This component comprises civil works for the rehabilitation and repair of 
selected Class I, II, and II roads during the period 2007-2009.  The list of rehabilitation 
Page  2
works was developed by NRIF and is part of a long term investment plan aimed at 
clearing the historical backlog of road maintenance. Under this component, an estimated 
456 kilometers of roads will be rehabilitated, including 129 kilometers of Class I roads, 
206 kilometers of Class II roads, and 121 kilometers of Class III roads. The road sections 
to be rehabilitated under the project are grouped into eight lots, and the works will be 
procured in as many contracts. The proposed road sections are distributed throughout the 
country and were selected on the basis of economic and other social benefits. The 
proposed rehabilitation and periodic maintenance would improve ride quality leading to 
lower operating costs for road users, guarantee structural soundness of the road for a 
prolonged period and prevent collapse, leading to lower life-cycle cost for the road asset.  
 
Component B: Technical assistance for the NRIF (EUR 5.5 million). This comprises 
consulting services, studies, and the provision of equipment aimed at three different types 
of assistance: (i) to implement road works under the project and to improve the NRIF's 
capacity to implement road projects regardless of funding sources; (ii) to develop the 
capacity of the road sector institutions to reorganize and to clarify their roles following 
EU accession, to improve road sector budgeting, planning and programming, with 
particular focus on the use of EU Cohesion and Structural Funds, and to improve the 
efficiency of road maintenance practices; and (iii) to modernize and update the road 
management system including the traffic databases and road data collection equipment. 
These are activities needed to gradually bring the NRIF's operations and performance to 
the level of EU standards.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project includes institutional reforms to strengthen the capacity of NRIF to manage 
and finance the road network rehabilitation and maintenance program in Bulgaria, and 
civil works related to the rehabilitation and maintenance of mainly Class II and III roads, 
and selected Class I roads totaling about 456 km. The project location for these roads is 
spread all over the country and covers road network sections proposed by the 
Government in a rehabilitation and maintenance program for 2007-2009.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the World Bank's safeguard policies and procedures, including 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the project has been classified as a Category 
B
for environmental assessment purposes. Rehabilitation works of existing road 
infrastructure generally do not generate significant impacts on the environment as the 
works are usually conducted within the existing road boundaries. Under Bulgarian 
regulation and EU directives, such types of works are not subject to mandatory 
environmental impact assessment.  
 
The project will not have any land acquisition and the scope of civil works will be 
limited to rehabilitation and maintenance of roads within the existing right-of-way.  
 
No major impacts on PCR may be expected during the project implementation, yet 
attention should be paid to the possibility of built PCR being affected by dust and 
vibration during construction, and roadside PCR being affected by road widening or 
realignments.  
 
There will be some adverse impacts of project relating to the hydrology, drainage, 
additional dust and noise emissions, and increased pollution loads (e.g., suspension solids 
in run-off water) in the project area mainly during the construction period. However, the 
design of the project offers an opportunity to introduce mitigation actions, especially with 
regard to drainage- and erosion-associated negative environmental impacts but also with 
regard to the way road maintenance and construction activities are undertaken in this 
project and in the future in the operations of NRIF. Identified environmental impacts will 
relate principally to civil works during the road maintenance and rehabilitation activities, 
and could be managed through strong environmental supervision and use of adequate 
local and international technical construction standards.  
 
Positive socio-economic impacts will include reduced vehicle operating costs as the 
vehicles will be able to travel at a faster speed, which in turn would reduce time, transport 
Page  4
cost and the wear and tear of the vehicles; improved access to local services, markets, 
health and education facilities; improved tourism income generation due to easier and 
faster access; short-term jobs created during the construction period; and improved flood 
control through the drainage facilities to be installed or rehabilitated as part of road 
design. In addition to the road traffic safety program, the road design and new road 
conditions will play a major role in reducing road accidents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term (indirect) negative impacts will be confined to those arising from increased 
traffic and travel speeds along the rehabilitated roads.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is prepared by NRIF to ensure that 
maintenance and rehabilitation protect the population and environment from key risks 
related to road rehabilitation works such as noise, soil erosion on steep slopes, protection 
of waterways, passage of animals through any protected areas (if relevant), etc. The EMP 
also includes a check on potential impacts on Physical Cultural Resources (PCR).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EMP was disclosed by the NRIF before project appraisal. The document will remain 
available for further comments by the public.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/04/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/04/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
12/04/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
12/04/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
12/04/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
12/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
12/04/2006 
Comments:   
