Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2387 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bulgaria 
Project ID: P099894 
Project Name: ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Henry G. R. Kerali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 23, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 23, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
116.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
29.00
29.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to assist Bulgaria to reduce 
transport costs by improving the overall quality of its roads network during the first years of EU 
accession. The proposed project objectives will be achieved by:  
 
(i) 
improving the condition of Class II and III roads, and selected Class I roads;  
 
(ii) 
enabling REA to establish well-articulated multi-year maintenance and rehabilitation 
programs through the development and use of an improved road management information 
system; and  
 
(iii) 
improving REA's capacity to manage effectively road maintenance, rehabilitation, and 
road safety improvement programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would include two main components:  
 
(i) Support to the Government's program for rehabilitation and maintenance of Class II, III, and 
selected Class I roads. Initial estimates, based on visual observation and past financing patterns, 
show that the needs of the Class II and III roads are very large, although not presently 
quantifiable (probably more than US$100 million per year over the next ten years) to bring the 
Page  2
secondary road network to maintainable condition. The Government has prepared a rehabilitation 
and maintenance program for the period 2007-2009 to be supported by the Bank. The program 
includes road sections selected using engineering, economic and social criteria. It covers 440 km 
of mainly Class II and III roads, and selected Class I roads and has an indicative cost estimate of 
EUR 107 million. The program includes rehabilitation and periodic maintenance required to 
reduce the backlog of maintenance to prevent further deterioration, as well as the improvement 
of selected road sections known to be "accident black-spots".  
 
(ii) Institutional development of REA.  This component would assist REA in strengthening its 
managerial and technical capacity to develop and implement road maintenance, rehabilitation 
and construction programs. This will allow the Government to adopt a programmatic approach in 
achieving its road infrastructure goals where different sources of funding such as EU grants, IFIs, 
REA's own revenues, and the State budget could be combined. The component is targeted at both 
the planning and implementation of programs.  On the planning side, the component would 
provide training, and consultant services for the development of a modern road management 
system incorporating road and traffic databases covering all public roads, and the supply of 
necessary equipment. On the implementation side, the component would provide training, and 
consultant services to assist REA during implementation of projects and programs to make these 
more efficient and less fragmented. During project preparation, other services, such as training, 
study tours, and policy development workshops may also be included. It is envisaged that 
training in the use of the road management system will be used to develop the first, budget 
constrained, multiyear road maintenance and rehabilitation program. Indicative cost estimates of 
this component are EUR 5.5 million.  
 
The project would cover the period 2007-2009, the total project cost would be EUR 112.5 
million, and the Bank loan amount would be around EUR 90 million.  The proposed project 
would be structured as a specific investment loan (SIL) operation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project includes institutional reforms to strengthen the capacity of REA to manage and 
finance the road network rehabilitation and maintenance program in Bulgaria, and civil works 
related to the rehabilitation and maintenance of mainly Class II and III roads, and selected Class 
I
roads totaling about 440 km. The project location for these roads is spread all over the country 
and covers road network sections proposed by the Government in a rehabilitation and 
maintenance program for 2007-2009.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The REA has been recently reorganized in a "semi-autonomous" Government Agency 
responsible for the main road network in the country.  However, the agency needs further 
support in strengthening its capacity to implement road works adequately and monitor their 
rehabilitation and routine maintenance activities according to EU standards. Capacity needs are 
mainly at the local level with a call for appropriate staff and training necessary to carry out sound 
environmental monitoring and safeguard compliance - an Environmental Management Plan will 
be developed to provide the implementing agency and the local authorities with the appropriate 
guidelines needed to undertake good practice environmental management of activities proposed 
under the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While initially considered a possible "country system pilot" for safeguard policy issues under 
OP 4.00, the extent of gap-filling required to ensure equivalence and acceptability is expected to 
be too significant to align with the project preparation schedule and rather limited life of the 
Bank's probable assistance strategy with Bulgaria.  Therefore the project will be processed 
conventionally with respect to environmental safeguards.  
 
The project is classified as environmental category B since it will provide investments 
mainly for rehabilitation and maintenance activities of existing Class II and III roads, and 
selected Class I roads.  
 
A
solid Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared before appraisal to ensure 
that maintenance and rehabilitation protect the population and environment from key risks 
related to road rehabilitation works such as noise, soil erosion on steep slopes, protection of 
waterways, passage of animals through any protected areas (if relevant), etc..   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
See Environmental Assessment above.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The EMP will also include a check on potential impacts on Physical Cultural Resources 
(PCR). No major impacts on PCR may be expected during the project implementation, yet 
attention should be paid to the possibility of built PCR being affected by dust and vibration 
during construction, and roadside PCR being affected by road widening or realignments.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Policy Framework for Land Acquisition will be prepared by the Government as a 
condition for project appraisal; although the project does not expect any land take and the scope 
of civil works will by limited to rehabilitation and maintenance, some minor land acquisition 
may be likely particularly for remediation works related to improving "accident black spots".   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/02/2006 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
-
An informal follow-up safeguards meeting will be required before QER (10/02/06)  
 
-
EMP and Policy Framework for land acquisition will be prepared and disclosed in a public 
consultation before appraisal (10/23/06)   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
07/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
