Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2049 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/21/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bulgaria 
Project ID: P094018 
Project Name: Trade and Transport Facilitation II Bulgaria 
Task Team Leader: Paulus A. Guitink 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 12, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (60%);Other domestic and international trade (40%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Export development and 
competitiveness (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to enhance regional trade and transport through 
optimizing the use of Trans-European Network corridors, with a focus on the core network, i.e. 
Corridors IV (Kapitan Andreevo-Sofia-Vidin), Xc (Kapitan Andreevo-Sofia-Kalotina), and VII 
(Danube River) for transit and trade.  The project will seek to achieve this objective through: (i) 
removing remaining border crossing bottlenecks at the future external EU borders on all three 
corridors; (ii) modernizing rail transport on Corridors IV and Xc; (iii) establishing a Border 
Police communication system on Corridors IV and Xc; (iv) improving freight information flows 
along Corridors IV and Xc; and (v) building the public-private sector capacity to address trade 
facilitation priorities in partnership.  Improvements in trade facilitation practices are strongly 
correlated with increases in trade and GDP.  The project is intended to be part of a regional 
program that may cover all other countries in Southeast Europe, creating synergies, particularly 
on information flows and corridor optimization, to achieve greater facilitation of legitimate trade 
and increased revenues.  
 
The main indicators of performance for the regional program would include: (i) decreased 
transit time on the rail corridors IV and Xc on the Istanbul-Budapest route; (ii) reduced 
Page  2
processing time at border crossings of targeted corridors, and reduced variation in processing 
time, and (iii) reducing the modal imbalance between truck and rail transport, in line with the EU 
transport policy (Van Miert High Level Commission, November 2003).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total project cost is estimated at EUR 55 million.  Bank financing would be around EUR 
40.9 million.  Grant funding would be sought for the Trade Capacity Building component, with 
contribution from the participating Bulgarian private sector representatives.    
 
The project design and 
identification of the investment needs are based on the “border process”.  
The organization that would absorb the investment could be any organization involved in that 
process. These are border police, customs, rail infrastructure company, phyto-sanitary and 
veterinary controls, etc. The effects/benefits of any investment will appear in other organizations. 
For example, investment in customs infrastructure will no doubt benefit train operators and their 
customers, rail infrastructure manager (increase of border capacity or reduction of capacity use 
elsewhere on the corridor) and the customs organization itself.  
 
For all listed potential investment items it is necessary to collect information regarding effects 
(quantitative and qualitative) on all organizations involved as well as on the transport market and 
eventually on national economy.  
 
The project would have the following components:  
 
(a) Improving Future EU External Border Crossings on Corridors IV, VII, and Xc- would focus 
on assisting National Customs Agency (NCA) to further improve its infrastructure required for 
the control of future external borders of Bulgaria as well as better management of Corridor VII, 
once it joins the EU. It would consist of reconstruction and repair of selected inspection 
warehouses on above corridors to speed up the inspection process and make it more efficient, 
and provision of equipment to expedite inspection.    
 
(b) Improving Rail Performance- would focus on enhancing efficiency and quality of railway 
service on Corrridor IV and Xc by: (i) modernizing priority facilities at the future external border 
crossings in Dragoman and Svilengrad, and concomitantly establishing conditions for inter-
modal container transport; (ii) financing a series of interventions on the track section on Corridor 
Xc; (iii) finalizing the network communications system on the corridors in the section Kalotina-
Sofia and (iv) ensuring rail transport security.  
 
(c) Establishing a Border Police Communication system on Railway Corridor IV-Xc. Given the 
corridor approach of the TTFSE II, and the significance of rail Corridor IV-Xc for trade relations 
between Asia and Europe, a component aiming at decreasing passenger and freight processing 
time, and improving communication within border police, and between border police and other 
agencies along the rail corridors IV and Xc is foreseen.  The component supports implementation 
of a modern communication system for data exchange, including scanning of passports on the 
move instead of processing them at the border. The component is fully consistent with the 
Strategy of the National Border Police Service (2004-2006).  
 
Page  3
(d) Improving Freight Information Flows - would support information flows among border 
agencies, across borders, within border agencies, and between those agencies and traders or 
transport operators, where gaps remain . The component would include technical services to 
define technical protocols for these exchanges, with particular attention to their secure 
transmission. The component would include selected software and hardware upgrades to allow 
data processing, sharing, access and storage.  The component may cover in a second phase the 
development of a single window processing environment.  
 
(e) The Trade Capacity Building. Following up on the original TTFSE trade facilitation 
component, this component (requiring an estimated % of the resources) would cover: (i) support 
to BULPRO, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Bulgarian Freight 
Forwarders’ Association (NSBS), the Bulgarian road transport association (AEBTRI), and the 
Bulgarian Industrial Association in structuring the trade and transport facilitation agenda, 
through a detailed review, and in sustaining a united dialogue with the Government; (ii) regular 
measurement of performance at border crossing points and clearance facilities as experienced by 
users; (iii) training for mid-level managers on logistics and supply chain management concepts, 
and expansion of the TTFSE training programs for border agency staff and private sector ; and 
(iv) expansion of the TTFSE website to cover other modes and offer national content in 
Bulgarian and English.  This component would build on activities from other donors. Grant 
funding with matching by the Bulgarian partner would be sought to finance this component.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in the Republic of Bulgaria.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Active dialogue and inter-ministerial cooperation at high level Government regarding actual 
implementation of core border crossing reforms is at the core of achieving improved trade and 
transport facilitation. To accomplish this, it is proposed that the Ministry of Finance (MOF) as 
representative of the Borrower and main project implementation agency  continues to emphasize 
the importance of inter-agency cooperation and supporting activities within the ISCBC. The 
ISCBC is the main body in charge of border issues and includes all Government agencies with a 
role at the border; its Chairman is the vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Transport.  
 
MOF proposed, and the Bank team agreed, that implementation of TTFSE II be carried-out by 
the TTFSE Project Implementation Team (PIT) located in MOF. The PIT has the necessary 
knowledge, experience, and skills to coordinate day-by-day preparation and implementation; 
however, its capacity should be strengthened with additional staff.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anders O. Halldin (ECSIE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This safeguard policy will be triggered as the project activities include infrastructure 
rehabilitation and maintenanc
e
and an EMP will be developed at the time of project appraisal. As 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the overall regional program gets developed, it may be possible for this project to be considered 
a
“country systems” pilot for ECA if this program is approved by the Board. In this case, the 
PAD will have to include an environmental “equivalency analysis”.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The EMP will include provisions for chance finds.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Uncertain at this time; it does not appear that the project involves any restrictions of access or 
land acquisition, but these aspects will be scrutinized with the Feasibility study.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/20/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.  
 
A
QER will be held in early FY06. A formal follow-up Safeguards Consultation Meeting 
would be expected by that date, to resolve uncertainties in the project.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paulus A. Guitink 
12/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/22/2005 
Comments:  Cleared at the PCN stage for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
 
Comments:   
