Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2403 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bulgaria 
Project ID: P099895 
Project Name: MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
Task Team Leader: Sudipto Sarkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
105.94 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
25.68
25.68 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objective is to improve the provision of water and wastewater supply.  This 
objective will be met through: a) preparing projects eligible for EU Structural funds; b) updating 
land use plans in the coastal municipalities.  The land use plans will review the water and 
wastewater investment needs; c) rehabilitating the water network and supporting institutional 
improvements in RWCs; and d) rehabilitating and completing dams to ensure adequate water 
supply.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have three components:  
 
Component 1 (Cost - US$ 6.63 million; Bank financing - US$ 5.96 million): Technical 
Assistance where: projects will be prepared for EU Structural Fund financing and institutional 
strengthening will be provided at the central and local levels; and land use plans at the coastal 
municipalities will be updated;  
 
Page  2
Component 2 (Cost - US$ 69.85 million; Bank financing - US$ 55.89 million): Water 
Distribution Networks will be rehabilitated and institutional strengthening will be provided to 
Regional Water Companies (RWCs); and  
 
Component 3 (Cost - US$ 60.63 million; Bank financing - US$ 48.50 million): Water 
Resources will be managed through the construction and rehabilitation of water supply dams.  
Bank financing will be contingent on the alternative analysis and meeting safeguard 
requirements.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 1: Sites for project preparation are still to be determined. Land use plans will be 
updated in 12 municipalities (Shabla, Kavarna, Balchik, Varna, Dolni Chiflik, Byala, Nessebar, 
Pomorie, Burgas, Sozopol, Primorsko, and Tsarevo)  
 
Component 2: Six RWCs in: Dobrich, Razgrad, Sliven, Smolyan, Stara Zagora, and 
Targovishte.  
 
Component 3: Four dam sites: Studena Dam, Neikovtsi Dam (and Tryavna municipality), 
Plovdivsti Dam, and Luda Yana dam.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower, through the Ministry of Regional Development and Public Works (MRDPW), has 
satisfactorily implemented the Bank's Water Companies Restructuring and Modernization 
Project (closed in 2002).  In parallel to the preparation of the Municipal Infrastructure 
Development Project, the MRDPW is also preparing a transport project with the Bank and 
currently implementing a number of projects with the EU and other International Financial 
Institutions.  Based on this project preparation and implementation experience, MRDPW has 
gained sufficient experience to address safeguard issues related to this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed completion of dams raises the overall EA category to "A", but the other 
investment components of the project (completion of water treatment plants and rehabilitation of 
distribution networks) are Category B. For these investments, solid EMPs including specific civil 
works contract clauses (e.g., application of technical standards) will be developed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Adequate protection and maintenance of ecosystems downstream of the dams will be 
assessed to determine the relevance of this safeguard   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
It is unclear at this stage whether this safeguard will be triggered.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Given the possibility that proposed water companies might implement projects in cities with 
historic districts this safeguard might be triggered   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition may be required for component 3.  The impacts of the dam completion on 
resettlement will need to be fully assessed during project preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Due to the investments in component 3, this safeguard is triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
All three components could potentially trigger this safeguard.  Notification is required and 
will be facilitated through basin commissions.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/01/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
.
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sudipto Sarkar 
07/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/13/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
07/07/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
