Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2536 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bulgaria 
Project ID: P100657 
Project Name: Social Inclusion Project 
Task Team Leader: Christian Bodewig 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social risk mitigation (P);Social safety nets (S);Vulnerability assessment and 
monitoring (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives for the Social Inclusion Project are to (i) reduce child 
poverty and (ii) promote social inclusion by increasing enrollment and learning outcomes for 
children from poor and marginalized backgrounds, in particular Roma, in kindergarten, 
preschool and primary education.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Social Inclusion Project is proposed to support the development of an effective social 
inclusion program aimed at promoting school readiness of children from marginalized 
background as well as of children with special needs. The program would be rolled out gradually 
over the next 4-5 years, with the loan providing bridge financing for reimbursement from 
European Social Funds from year 2 of implementation. The SIP would be underpinned by 
rigorous impact evaluation and thereby significantly contribute to the evidence base of the 
Ministry of Labor and Social Policy and Ministry of Education and Science. The SIP will have 
(i) a short-term impact in reducing child poverty through provision of targeted cash benefits to 
low-income parents of children 0-2 and (ii) a long-term impact in fostering the inclusion of 
Page  2
children from marginalized backgrounds, in particular Roma, in the education system and 
breaking the inter-generational poverty trap resulting from early school drop-outs. Its preventive 
services would contribute to the ongoing de-institutionalization process by reducing the flow of 
new children into residential institutions - typically children deprived of parental care and 
children with special needs. Equally, preventive ECD interventions would contribute to inclusion 
of children with special needs into mainstream education. Because of its focus on disadvantaged 
children and the cross-sectoral nature of the intervention, the program will be under the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy, but requires coordination with the 
Ministry of Education and Science, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of 
Regional Development. The SIP would have the following proposed components:  
 
Component 1: School readiness program for children from marginalized backgrounds and 
children with special needs ($37m). The SIP would support the development of a multi-sectoral 
school readiness program targeted on low-income families including the following possible 
elements:  
 
a) 
Early Childhood Development (ECD) programs aimed at parenting skills: The ECD 
component would focus on developing pre-and post-natal parenting skills programs for parents 
of children aged 0-2. The programs would cover a menu of nurturing parenting, cognitive skills 
development, preventive health care, hygiene and nutrition for children.  
 
b)
Enhancement of preschool/kindergarten services to promote enrollment and attendance, 
in particular among vulnerable communities. The project would support the Government in 
identifying gaps in preschool provision and in developing mechanisms to support municipalities 
in enhancing their services and promoting access for children from poor and marginalized 
backgrounds as well as children with special needs.  
 
c) 
Development of alternative forms of child care and kindergarten services: In addition, 
efforts would be made to develop alternative and informal provision of kindergarten services, 
e.g. through certified childminders and kindergarten teachers who would offer services in 
underserved areas without the formal creation of a new municipal kindergarten. It would also 
explore ways to enhance private sector provision of services. This enhancement of childcare 
services and corresponding outreach activities to get further children enrolled could make use of 
teachers and teaching assistants from ethnic minorities.  
 
d)
Demand incentives through cash transfer conditionality: The project would explore ways 
to incentivize parents from marginalized backgrounds to (i) participate in the parenting program 
as well as (ii) send their children to kindergartens and preschool.  
 
Component 2: Training ($5m). Creating the conditions to provide early childhood services 
requires capacity building and training for social workers and municipality staff. Moreover, 
increased enrollment in kindergartens of children from marginalized background as well as 
children with special needs may require specific training of kindergarten staff. Additional 
staffing needs in kindergartens may be met by retraining school teachers laid off as part of the 
Government's school network optimization program currently under way. Staffing will also draw 
on members of minorities where possible. The project would finance training programs for 
qualifying staff in participating municipalities. Training and capacity building needs would be 
identified through a needs assessment during project preparation.  
 
Component 3: Impact Evaluation ($5m). The SIP would support the development of a rigorous 
impact evaluation mechanism for the social inclusion program to inform program design and 
report on program effectiveness. The project would also explore opportunities to raise evaluation 
Page  3
capacities in the Ministries of Labor and Social Policy and Education and Science for activities 
in addition to the SIP.  
 
Component 4: Capacity-building to access ESF ($3m). The SIP would support capacity-
building activities for ESF-eligible beneficiaries such as municipal authorities in developing 
projects to access EU funding. This could for example focus on areas complementary to the 
proposed SIP agenda, e.g. programs that support deinstitutionalization and alternative types of 
care.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country wide.  The project is demand driven and the location of investments will depend on 
demand.  The project would be rolled out across the country in three stages, to ensure fiscal 
sustainability, facilitate reimbursement from ESF and allow for evaluating the impact. 
Specifically, it is proposed to make participation in the program available to municipalities on an 
application basis and conditional upon municipal agreement to implement the proposed 
programs. In the first stage, the SIP would finance the program in a number of municipalities that 
have been randomly selected out of the pool of those that have applied to participate. The non-
selected municipalities would form the control group for testing the impact of the interventions 
and would be able to opt in during the second stage of the program with a 2-year delay. The full 
transition to a national-level program would take place in stage three. The SIP would provide 
bridge funding. Building on an evaluation of the pilots, the program would be gradually rolled 
out across the country with increasing use of European Social Funds.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The individual activities under this project are expected to have minimal or no environmental 
risks, and the project is categorized as "FI" with potential Category C and B sub-projects.  Local 
environmental requirements are deemed adequate, and where required by local legislation, 
environmental assessments of activities containing construction works will be carried out by 
local experts licensed by the Ministry of Environment and reviewed by the Supreme Expert 
Environmental Council.  
 
In addition the project intends to:  
 
(i) develop, under the project, a manual for the environmental screening of the activities that 
will guide the communities and experts in the review;  
 
(ii) analyze the aggregate investments on a regular base to identify, and mitigate if necessary, 
any cumulative effect of similar investment on the environment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Anna Georgieva (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Full Environmental Assessment is not needed for this project. The environmental chapter of 
the operational manual will be disclosed prior to Appraisal.  If OP4.12 is triggered, resettlement 
framework should be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Since older school buildings with historic value might theoretically be renovated, refurbished 
or replaced under the project, provisions in the Environmental Management Framework will be 
taken regarding the identification and protection of cultural property. However if it is determined 
during project preparation that cultural property will not be affected OP 4.11 will not be 
triggered.  It is expected that operationally the project will place an exclusive criteria that will 
rule out any projects physically affecting cultural property.  This will be confirmed during 
appraisal and will be reflected in the Project Operational Manual.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The civil works are likely to be rehabilitation works. If civil works should involve acquiring 
land or displacing people, OP 4.12 will be triggered. It is likely the project will not support sub-
projects if they entail land acquisition or displacing people. However, this will be confirmed 
during project preparation.  It is expected that there will be an exclusive criteria that will rule out 
any projects involving resettlement.  This will be confirmed during appraisal and will be 
reflected in the Project Operational Manual.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/18/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christian Bodewig 
11/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/13/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Arup Banerji 
11/13/2006 
Comments:   
