Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/01/2007 
Report No.:  AC2749
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bulgaria 
Project ID:  P100657 
Project Name:  Social Inclusion Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christian Bodewig 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social risk mitigation (P);Social safety nets (S);Vulnerability assessment and 
monitoring (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
52.53 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
95.09 
 Local 
Communities 
30.79
125.88 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Government of Bulgaria aims to promote intergenerational social inclusion by 
developing and rolling out nationally a school readiness program to equalize starting 
conditions of children entering primary school. It is anchoring this program in the 
Operational Program ?Human Resources Development? which guides the use of 
financing for Bulgaria from the European Social Fund (ESF). In support of this policy 
agenda, the proposed project development objective for the Social Inclusion Project is to 
promote social inclusion through piloting interventions aimed at enhancing the school 
readiness of children below the age of 7, targeting low-income and marginalized families, 
including children with a disability and other special needs.  The SIP will contribute to 
the sustainability of the school readiness program by being closely tied to the 
mechanisms set up for the absorption of European Social Fund financing   
 
3. Project Description 
The Social Inclusion Project is proposed to support the development of an effective social 
inclusion program aimed at promoting school readiness and inclusion of children from 
marginalized backgrounds as well as of children with special needs and help with the 
Page  2
absorption of European Funds. The school readiness program aims at a long-term impact 
in fostering the inclusion of children from marginalized backgrounds as well as children 
with special needs in the mainstream education system and breaking the inter-
generational poverty trap resulting from early school drop-outs and special and 
segregated schooling. Its preventive services are also expected to contribute to the 
ongoing de-institutionalization process by reducing the flow of new children into 
residential institutions - typically children deprived of parental care and children with 
special needs. The proposed integrated parent-focused services can also be structured in 
such a way as to facilitate the reinsertion of initially abandoned children from institutions 
back into their natural families.  Equally, preventive ECD interventions will contribute to 
inclusion of children with special needs into mainstream education. Because of its focus 
on disadvantaged children and the cross-sectoral nature of the intervention, the program 
will be under the responsibility of the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy, but requires 
policy coordination with the Ministry of Education and Science, Ministry of Health, 
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Regional Development.  
 
Project Components:  
 
Component I: Integrated social and childcare services.  
 
Component I consists of an integrated set of municipal sub-projects that include social 
and child care services as well as infrastructure investments and training for social and 
child care service providers.  
 
a) 
Subcomponent I.1: Support to parents of 0-3 year olds covers provision of parent 
and family-focused social services by trained service providers sub-contracted by the 
municipality. It will be offered in municipality-provided facilities, such as school or 
kindergarten buildings or facilities of other existing or new social services. Given that 
project component I addresses a clientele with very diverse needs, it is key to ensure the 
referral of beneficiaries to individually adequate interventions (such as offered by the 
municipal health services, the employment agency, the child protection department, the 
social assistance department and others) and to check up on progress. To this end, all 
persons involved in delivery will be informed and equipped to refer parents to the 
services they need, whether available under this project or through established public 
channels, e.g. active labor market programs, therapeutic assistance for disabled children 
and others.  
 
b) 
Subcomponent I.2: Integrated care for 3-6 year old children covers a menu of 
options for municipalities to enhance access to formal kindergarten or child care services 
for children from marginalized backgrounds and special needs, including additional 
health services and measures to better align supply and demand of child care. It also 
includes measures to support incentives on demand (low income parents to seek child 
care) and supply (municipalities to promote access of low income children to child care). 
Formal kindergarten and preschool services would be offered in existing kindergartens 
and schools, while alternative child care services would be offered in private or municipal 
facilities.  
 
Page  3
c) 
Subcomponent I.3: Infrastructure and material investments. This sub-component 
allows participating municipalities to finance, (i) small infrastructure rehabilitation in 
existing or transformed municipal kindergarten or child care service buildings as well as 
educational materials, and (ii) to finance the construction of new child care centers in 
underserved areas, based on a set of identification and targeting criteria. Building works 
will include measure to promote physical access for people with a disability, in line with 
the Law on the Integration of People with Disability and the Law on Territorial 
Management. The content of the services provided at these centers will depend on the 
demands of the municipality and can comprise kindergartens or alternative services. 
Depending on the demand for such investments, the project will finance new childcare 
infrastructure up to 50 percent of the overall project volume.  
 
d) 
Subcomponent I.4: Training for municipal officials, service providers and 
kindergarten staff is an essential precondition to effective social and child care service 
provision.  
 
Component II: Capacity-building.  
 
Supporting the design and launch of a national school readiness program, the Social 
Inclusion Project will also finance necessary capacity-building activities at the central 
and municipal level, including local government capacity building and impact evaluation 
for services supported under SIP.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As mentioned in Question 3 above, Subcomponent I.3: As mentioned in Question 3 
above, Subcomponent I.3: Infrastructure and material investments will allow for 
participating municipalities from around the country to finance, (i) small infrastructure 
rehabilitation in existing or transformed municipal kindergarten or child care service 
buildings as well as educational materials, and (ii) to finance the construction of new 
child care centers in underserved areas, based on a set of identification and targeting 
criteria. Depending on the demand for such investments, the project will finance new 
childcare infrastructure up to 50 percent of the overall project volume.  
 
The environmental safeguard was addressed due to the possible environmental impact 
of the small infrastructure activities.  
 
Construction activities under SIP involve the rehabilitation of buildings or parts of 
buildings or construction of a limited number of new buildings.  The new construction 
will consists of normally no more than one building per participating municipality, with 
an expected total of sites not to exceed 20.  The buildings themselves are expected to 
have a foundation area of less than 400 sq meters, and to rise to up to 4 floors maximum.  
 
The design of the SIP project will not allow the concentration of project resources in a 
single type of investment.  Moreover, the total amount of SIP financing of infrastructure 
would not be more than US$ 25 million, which is a relatively small amount of 
infrastructure investment for Bulgaria.  
Page  4
Local environmental requirements are deemed adequate, and where required by local 
legislation, environmental assessments of activities containing construction works will be 
carried out by local experts licensed by the Ministry of Environment and Waters and 
reviewed by the Supreme Expert Environmental Council. In addition the project  
 
has developed a questionnaire for the environmental screening of the activities that will 
guide the communities and experts in the review; and  
 
will conduct and analysis of the aggregate investments on a regular basis to identify, 
and mitigate if necessary, any cumulative effect of similar investment on the 
environment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Anna Georgieva (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not be investing in activities that have cumulative effect - there will be 
no road construction, nor is there expected to be multiple site construction in the same 
municipality.  However, to ensure that cumulative effects of a single type of investment 
be avoided, the SIP will include in its annual reports, based on data from the MIS, 
summary tables and analysis of the approved subprojects during the past period by type.  
The tables and analysis will also include regional break-down and analysis.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No adverse impacts are expected.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
There are no significant environmental issues and Bulgaria's environmental laws and 
requirements are compatible with the Bank's policies and those of the EU.  It is expected 
that the execution of the infrastructure subcomponent will not cause any substantial 
environmental impact.  For the purpose of controlling and preventing any particular 
situation, waste resulting from health services and wastewater of sewerage systems where 
buildings are constructed would be treated and/or disposed of in an adequate manner, 
according to national regulations.  Infrastructure design and equipment would take into 
consideration elements to mitigate negative impact.  Used materials, garbage and 
products of the construction phase would be disposed of in authorized and controlled 
places. All necessary precautions will be taken to ensure that potentially toxic substances 
such as asbestos or lead from paint will be handled in a safe and environmentally sound 
manner, based upon positive experiences already gained in undertaking environmental 
reviews and monitoring environmental aspects of subprojects under other Bank-funded 
project in Bulgaria.  Furthermore, the construction plan will take steps to minimize waste, 
dust, and debris from construction and to safely dispose of construction wastes.  Only 
licensed contractors will undertake such contracts.  A guide for the formulation and 
evaluation of environmental aspects, with sections on diagnosis, interpretation and 
prevention of situations, forms a part of the Operational Manual.  
 
Three factors ensure that the activities implemented under the SIP project will not be 
environmentally damaging interventions:  
 
-
Bulgaria has a strong policy for enforcing environmental regulations, in particular 
since Bulgaria?s accession to the EU on January 1, 2007;  
 
-
The SIP will finance only small infrastructure construction and rehabilitation 
subprojects, with minor environmental impacts;  
 
-
The SIP will benefit from experience accumulated under the Bulgaria Social 
Investment and Employment Promotion (SIEP) project and the recently closed Bulgaria 
Child Welfare Project in the area of implementing sub-projects according to highest 
standards of environmental scrutiny.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Environment and Water, civil society 
organizations and communities in which the infrastructure activities will be performed.  
All disclosure issues have been considered and the disclosure on safeguard policies met.  
Community involvement in the assessment of the environmental impacts of sub-projects 
will be ensured via:  
 
(i) disclosure and dissemination of information about the envisaged project activities 
with potentially hazardous environmental impact.  The SIP management in the MLSP is 
responsible to provide the relevant information to communities prior to consultations 
with the local stakeholders.  The information should be provided in a timely manner and 
in a form that is meaningful for, and accessible to, the groups being consulted.  
 
Page  6
(ii) public consultation, soliciting people?s views on proposed actions and engaging 
them in a dialogue.  Interaction with people and eliciting feedback will allow the affected 
population to influence the decision-making process by raising issues which should be 
considered in developing the scope of sub-projects, project design, monitoring of 
environmental impact, risk mitigation and analysis of alternatives where applicable.  The 
process of consultation on environmental issues should be documented.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/13/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/13/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  7
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christian Bodewig 
02/26/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Anna Georgieva 
02/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Anna Georgieva 
02/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
 
Comments:   
