Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2491
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bulgaria 
Project ID:  P094018 
Project Name:  Second Trade and Transport Facilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Henry G. R. Kerali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (60%);Other domestic and international trade 
(40%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Export development and 
competitiveness (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
52.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
17.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
17.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to facilitate trade by improving the capacity, 
efficiency and quality of services at future EU external border crossings with particular 
focus on the Trans-European Transport Network.   
 
3. Project Description 
The total Project cost is estimated at EUR 54.6 million, with EUR 40.9 million from the 
World Bank loan and EUR 13.7 from the State Budget excluding any additional grant 
funding.  The project includes five components: (i) improvement of physical capacity and 
working conditions at future EU external border crossings with particular focus on the 
Trans-European Transport Network; (ii) construction of the access road to Kapitan 
Andreevo border crossing point; (iii) sharing of relevant border crossing data, and 
streamlining operational procedures of border crossing agencies; (iv) project 
implementation; and (v) support to trade capacity building for the trade community.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Environmental Safeguards are triggered because of two project components:  
 
(i) Upgrading the physical infrastructure of selected border crossings which includes 
upgrading the infrastructure and improving traffic management at border crossings on the 
key Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) Xc and IV corridors at Kapitan 
Andreevo (border with Turkey) and Kalotina (border with Serbia) in compliance with the 
EU Integrated Border Management (IBM) guidelines; and   
 
(ii) The construction of a 3.4 km access road linking the planned Maritsa Motorway 
with the Kapitan Andreevo border crossing point, which is a remaining bottleneck on 
TEN-T corridors IV and Xc.  Currently, the traffic to and from the border crossing at 
Kapitan Andreevo passes through the middle of the village of Kapitan Andreevo, causing 
large vehicle congestion during peak periods and generating large amounts of pollutants 
from exhaust gases and noise problems. The proposed road is a green field project to 
avoid border bottlenecks, improve traffic flows and road safety by diverting the current 
heavy traffic through narrow roads of Kapitan Andreevo village to this new by-pass.  An 
integrated design of the access road and the border crossing facilitates provides adequate 
border area traffic management and avoids potential bottlenecks following the expansion 
of the crossing point.  
 
The 3.4 km access road component (item (ii) above) has been rated Category A.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Pre-Environmental Impact Assessment (PEIA) of the project identified the potential 
environmental impacts (on air, groundwater, surface water, soil and fauna) during the 
construction and execution of the physical infrastructure upgrading and the construction 
Page  3
of the 3.4 km bypass. The described impacts are common environmental effects related to 
construction road works and will need safeguarding procedures integrated in the 
construction contracts. Special attention will be required to prevent dust generation and 
soil and groundwater pollution during the civil works.  
 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been developed for the two border 
crossing points at Kapitan Andreevo and Kalotina. It recommends preventive actions and 
mitigation measures to address the environmental impacts of the operations proposed 
under the project component described in item (i) above.  
 
For the 3.4 km access road, during the design stage at the initiation of project 
implementation, a full EIA will be developed and associated EMP will be prepared 
accordingly, integrating updated environmental data and presented in a consultation 
meeting to stakeholders and the public before finalization. After the development of the 
full EIA, the EMP will be attached to the civil works contracts and include guidance to 
provide consistent technical standards on proper construction procedures to ensure the 
protection of public health and the village's environment.  The contractors will follow the 
local construction standards and will be responsible to ensure that all local existing 
regulatory standards and requirements are met.  
 
As a result of Project implementation, allowing for a more efficient control, handling of 
passing vehicles, and reduced waiting time, the air emission from vehicles is anticipated 
to be reduced.  
 
Since the construction of the Bypass will also involve land acquisition a land acquisition 
policy framework has been prepared by the Government and disclosed.  
 
Because the final alignment of the proposed road section is not determined at appraisal, 
and based on available information at the appraisal stage, it is not possible to determine 
whether World Bank's Operational Policies 4.04 on natural Habitat and 4.11 on Physical 
Cultural Resources will be triggered. The planned full EIA should assess these issues. If 
the full EIA determines that the Project triggers the Natural Habitats safeguard policy, 
various measures should be included in the project implementation plans to conserve 
biodiversity, limit damage to natural habitats and avoid degradation of natural habitats. If 
the full EIA determines that the Project triggers the Physical Cultural Resources policy, 
the project implementation plans should include: (i) various measures for the 
management of the physical cultural resources concerned; (ii) adequate provisions for the 
treatment of chance finds during project implementation; (iii) measures to strengthen 
relevant institutional capacity; and (iv) a monitoring system to track progress of these 
activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The overall Project aims to enhance regional trade and transport through optimizing the 
use of Trans-European Network (TEN-T) corridors, with a focus on the Corridors IV 
(Kapitan Andreevo-Sofia-Vidin), and Xc (Kapitan Andreevo-Sofia-Kalotina), for transit 
Page  4
and trade. Specifically, the proposed investments at Kapitan Andreevo and Kalotina 
border crossing points including upgrading of the infrastructure (e.g., reconstruction and 
repair of selected facilities such as treatment of sanitary wastewater and storm water from 
the border crossings, management of solid waste parking places for waiting vehicles and 
access roads; implementation of "one-stop" inspection stations) are all intended to 
improve local traffic management and efficiency in freight control procedures given the 
need to speed border crossing procedures to reduce vehicle pollution. Furthermore, the 
investments supported in Kapitan Andreevo will facilitate cross-border co-operation by 
reduction of travel time as well as improved road safety and reduced traffic accidents 
rate. No significant indirect or long term impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For item (ii) above, six variants of the Kapitan Andreevo village bypass were proposed 
for analysis including different levels of technical and economical feasibility. Among the 
six analyzed variants the current proposed bypass was assessed to be the most effective 
from technical, environmental and social point of view.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has already prepared:  
 
(a) Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for the two border crossing points 
proposed under the Project that examine the environmental issues and impacts 
surrounding the new construction and to outline appropriate mitigation measures (item (i) 
above).  
 
(b) A Preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment (PEIA) of item (ii) above.  
 
(c) A Land Acquisition Policy Framework (LAPF) for item (ii) above.  
 
(d) Terms of Reference for the planned full Environment Impact Assessment for item 
(ii) above.  
 
The Project will be implemented by a Project Implementation Team (PIT) within the 
Ministry of Finance with close collaboration with the Bulgaria Customs Agency and the 
Roads Executive Agency. The PIT has hired an environmental and social safeguard 
specialist during project preparation. Also, the PIT staff has extensive experience in the 
implementation of World Bank projects, including solving related safeguards issues.  
 
The Road Executive Agency (REA) will be in charge of constructing the road access 
(item (ii) above). REA has a good history and experience implementing projects funded 
by the EU and complying with the EU environmental standards.  REA has a department 
specializing in environmental assessment issues as well as in land acquisition.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key Stakeholders are the national government departments and agencies, including 
the Ministry of Finance, Customs, border police, the Road Executive Agency, the local 
agencies such as municipalities and the private sector such as transporters, freight 
Page  5
forwarders, chamber of commerce, exporters and importers, etc. in addition land owners, 
NGOs, etc.  
 
During project preparation, working meetings were held in order to provide the 
stakeholders concerned as well as the larger public with an opportunity to effectively 
influence the course of preliminary environmental impact assessment process and review 
the preliminary results.  
 
Public meetings for the preparation of the draft preliminary Environmental Impact 
Assessment (PEIA) were held on August 3-4, 2006 with stakeholders and representatives 
from the Government, municipal and Mayor's authorities. The Draft PEIA report was 
made publicly available in Bulgarian and English on August 10, 2006, and the discussion 
of PEIA with interested parties took place on August 16, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/14/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/15/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/07/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
Page  6
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
09/15/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
09/15/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
09/15/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
09/15/2006 
Comments:  Approved. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
09/15/2006 
Comments:  Approved. 
