Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  35321 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/16/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burkina Faso 
Project ID: P084027 
Project Name: Decentralized Urban Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader: Sylvie Debomy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 12, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P);Access to urban services and 
housing (S);Other urban development (S);Decentralization (S);Municipal finance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.70
1.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to strengthen the capacities of the local governments 
of the main cities of Burkina Faso to plan, finance, implement, and manage infrastructure and 
municipal services for their populations.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Decentralized Urban Capacity Building Project will create the necessary conditions for the 
local governments in Burkina Faso to address the needs of a fast growing urban population in 
terms of access to sustainable infrastructure and municipal services. These conditions will be 
created by strengthening urban management tools and management capacities of local 
governments; increasing local financial resources mobilization, improving predictability and 
increasing intergovernmental fiscal transfers and promoting private sector contribution to local 
economic development and delivery of infrastructure services.  
 
The five main secondary centers of Burkina (Bobo Dioulasso, Koudougou, Ouahigouya, 
Banfora, and Kaya) experience a population growth between 2.5% and 3.2% per year, higher 
than the national average. Their combined budgets represent 51% of the budgets of urban 
Page  2
municipalities in Burkina Faso. In order to avoid spreading the project resources out too thin, the 
project will focus on these cities. These cities have been selected because of their existing 
potential for economic development, their demographic importance and their strategic locations 
with respect to the capital city. The project will also provide support to the Municipality of 
Ouagadougou to foster the sustainability of achievements realized under the Urban Environment 
Project (P000297, closed June 2005).  
 
Execution of the project will take place through the signing of city contracts between the 
municipalities and the central government. The main features of the contracts will be developed 
following a participatory process including the population, the business community, the civil 
society and the local governments. Municipalities will agree to carry out a set of institutional 
reforms and capacity building activities aimed at increasing locally generated funds, create the 
enabling environment for local private sector to thrive, and improve their service provision 
capacity in order to benefit from basic infrastructure financing channeled via the upcoming 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) 7-9 series.  
 
The project would have four components: (i) Urban Management, Planning and Programming 
Tools; (ii) Financial Resources Mobilization; (iii) Institutional Strengthening and Capacity 
Building; and (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation.  
 
The components are designed to be tightly aligned with interventions financed by other donors 
and with the Administration Capacity Building Project (PRCA) and PRSC.  
 
Component 1: Urban Management, Planning and Programming Tools (around US$4 million): 
This component will support development of programming and planning tools that will be used 
by the municipalities to better target utilization of own resources and finances that will be 
available through the upcoming series of PRSCs (7-9).  
 
Concrete activities under this component are:  
 
•
Carrying out of municipal audits for cities targeted by the project. This includes financial 
and organizational audit and urban audit to provide a description of the status of urban 
management, finances, and stock of infrastructure.  
 
•
Street addressing, as a basis for developing urban management systems and strengthening 
resource mobilization.  
 
•
Land development. Strengthening of regulatory framework and simplification 
ofprocedures for obtaining construction and occupancy permits and getting access to land. This 
could include the involvement of the private sector in plot development and sale.    
 
Component 2: Financial Resources Mobilization (around US$3 million): Mobilization of 
resources in the municipalities is critical to enabling the municipalities to deliver infrastructure 
and services to the inhabitants. This will be achieved by increasing their financial autonomy and 
relying more upon their own revenues while at the same time improving the reliability and the 
predictability of intergovernmental transfers and the collection of shared revenues. This 
component will address the incentive systems at the heart of any fully functional system and 
support the operationalization of the financial transfers foreseen by the decentralization law - 
Page  3
“Code general des collectivites territoriales”. Increasing revenues will also enable municipalities 
to sustain the expenses linked to maintenance of infrastructure investments to be carried out 
under the PRSC 7-9 series.  
 
This component will work on two levels:  
 
•
On the macro level by strengthening the intergovernmental transfer mechanismsas well 
as local taxation.  
 
•
On the city level by increasing the local tax base and improving tax collection by linking 
it to a system of street addressing, as well as implementing of municipal adjustment programs 
carried out under city contracts signed between the targeted cities and the government.  
 
The linkage with the PRSCs and PRCA is especially important in terms of establishing the 
transfer mechanism and relating municipal resource mobilization to the transfer of funds from 
the Central Government. The Decentralized Urban Capacity Building Project will support the 
efforts made by existing Bank financed operations to support the Government in establishing 
these mechanisms.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (around US$2 million): This 
component will increase the capacity of municipalities and supporting structures to carry out 
their mandates and strengthen private sector participation in service delivery.  
 
At the municipal level this includes:  
 
•
Updating organigrams of the technical and financial services and preparing job 
descriptions.  
 
•
Setting in place performance contracts as well as evaluation mechanisms and incentive 
structures.  
 
•
Establishing human resource departments and training plans in the areas of urban 
management, financial management, accounting, procurement, and computer literacy.  
 
•
Finalization and implementation of the integrated accounting software of the 
municipalities (CICL).  
 
•
Development of budget planning, procedure manuals, implementation of technical and 
financial audits.  
 
•
Development of information sharing such as web pages and connection to the internet.  
 
•
Strengthening of the mechanisms for participation in infrastructure and service delivery, 
anchored in the Social Works Unit (Maitrise d’OEuvre Sociale), implemented in Ouagadougou 
and Bobo Dioulasso under the Urban Environment Project, and the rolling out of the experiences 
to other project cities.  
 
Local elected representatives will be provided with training in the above mentioned issues, as 
well as delegated contract management and the financial relations between the Government and 
municipalities.  
 
The component will also provide support (in complement to the PRCA) to the central and 
deconcentrated services intervening in the above mentioned areas. The Association of 
Page  4
Municipalities of Burkina Faso (AMBF) will receive support to benchmarking and diffusion of 
best practices, as well as elaborating guides on technical, financial and economic issues.  
 
Finally the component will support a reform process aimed at creating the enabling 
environment for the local private sector to develop and expand. This specifically includes 
consolidation of the achievements of the Urban Environment Project in relation to private sector 
participation in solid waste management in Ouagadougou and Bobo Dioulasso, and the 
expansion of the experiences to other targeted cities.  
 
Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation (around US$1million): This component will monitor 
progress towards meeting the objectives of the project and benchmark performance achieved by 
all municipalities. Local governance, contribution of urban centers to national GDP and poverty 
characteristics in each commune will also be monitored and reported. Indeed, the lack of 
adequate capacity at the central government level to monitor and support local governments is a 
common problem that should be overcome to ensure that decentralized functions are adequately 
carried out. If accountability is key to improved public service performance, information is key 
to accountability.  
 
Assessing and monitoring finances and financial ratios of sub-national governments, 
intergovernmental fiscal transfers and also the quantity and quality of urban services are tasks to 
be performed. Specific indicators will be developed to monitor progress towards MDG targets 
that are relevant to the project (especially in terms of environment).  
 
City contracts will be a tool to monitor the progress of the municipalities and government in 
meeting their obligations under the project. They will clearly stipulate the expected obligations 
and results in terms of improved municipal management and institutional and financial support 
of the Government in order to further the development of the municipalities and lay the 
foundations for improved infrastructure and service delivery.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
While no physical works will be carried out, the focus of the project is on the six main cities of 
Burkina Faso: Ouagadougou, Bobo Dioulasso, Banfora, Ouahigouya, Koudougou, and Kaya. 
Furthermore, the AMBF will be involved in the project, and thus municipalities that benefit from 
AMBF intervention will receive technical assistance.  
 
The project is not likely to have any environmental impact on natural habitats or any other areas 
cited above.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Given that the project concerns capacity building, no physical investment will be implemented 
and as such none of the World Bank safeguard policies will apply.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTEG) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sylvie Debomy 
02/16/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/16/2006 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
02/16/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
