Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2194
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P098956 
Project Name:  Post-Primary Education 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Joseph Kamano 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 22, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (65%);Vocational training (25%);Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Gender (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
22.90 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.10
2.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Sec
ond
Post Primary Education Project’s (PEPP2) development objective is 
tosupport the GoBF strategy to increase the number and quality of students graduating 
from secondary school at reduced costs for parents, with increased equity of access by 
gender and by area (rural-urban).   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of the following four components:  
 
Increase Access to Secondary Education (US$21.7 million): supports the expansion of 
post-primary education, particularly lower secondary education through: (i) the increase 
of secondary education services; (ii) the promotion of greater autonomy of communes in 
management and cost-sharing of lower secondary schools; and (iii) the increase of equity 
in lower secondary education, especially for girls and for children from low-income 
families (reduced schooling fees and free tickets for the school canteen).  
 
Improve the Quality of Post-Primary Education (US$19.25 million): This component 
aims to consolidate and scale up achievements from the first Post Primary Education 
Page  2
Project and to support and maintain Government reforms for improving the quality and 
efficiency of secondary education.  In particular, this component will contribute to 
improving learning and teaching in post-primary through the implementation of a new 
curriculum, the strengthening of teachers’ education (pre and in-service); providing 
pedagogical materials, monitoring students learning outcomes and providing new 
learning opportunities for tertiary education students using information and 
communication technologies  
 
Institutional Strengthening of MESSRS (US$9.25 million): This component aims at 
improving post-primary education service delivery through enhanced sector planning and 
managerial capacities of MESSRS at the school, the regional and central levels.  This 
component will provide support for: (i) educational planning; (ii) financial and personnel 
management; (iii) education operations coordination; and (iv) studies.  
 
Expand Vocational Education and training –VET- (US$2.5 million): This 
componentwill support the elaboration of a national policy on VET as well as the 
expansion of the sub-system based on pilot experiences conducted by an NGO (OSEO) 
and other providers. The component will finance: (i) preparatory studies and workshops; 
(ii) revision of the curriculum; (iii) re-qualification of training staff; (iv) learning 
assessment; (v) construction and equipping of two VET schools; and (vi) setting up of an 
apprenticeship fund.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Country wide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts of the second post-primary education project 
(PEEP2) are not severe.  Construction of schools (equivalent to 400 classrooms) and 
eight regional directorates of secondary education as well as provision of water and 
sanitation for the new schools are the only safeguards issues and impacts associated with 
the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
If the safeguard function is not properly carried out, potential impacts could include 
among others: soil erosion, loss of vegetative cover, water pollution due to poor drainage 
at the construction site, public safety concerns due to construction traffic, health impacts 
such as malaria due to standing water at the construction site, and soil and groundwater 
pollution due to improper waste disposal, contamination of drinking water sources as a 
result of: (i) locating latrines too close to the groundwater table; (ii) placing latrines too 
close to the water points in the schools.  
 
The ESMF and RPF formulated standards methods and procedures specifying how 
school infrastructure subprojects planning will systematically address environmental and 
social issues in the screening and categorization, setting, design, implementation, 
operational phases and maintenance of the subproject lifecycle.  It includes: (i) 
systematization of environmental and social impact assessment for all identified sub-
projects before investment; (ii) procedures for conducting sub-project-specific EIAs, be 
they Limited Environmental Impact Assessment (LEIA) or Full Environmental Impact 
Assessment (FEIA) as applicable; (iii) capacity strengthening and awareness raising 
campaigns targeted at relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and 
monitoring of project safeguard measures; and (iv) roles and responsibilities for 
environmental control and monitoring.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Additional environmental work will be conducted during project implementation to 
ensure that any potential safeguard issues are appropriately addressed and monitored after 
construction. Funding for such work will be provided under the proposed project. More 
specifically, the following areas will be covered: (i) review of biophysical characteristics 
of the environment in relevant urban and rural areas, and highlight major constraints that 
need to be considered; (ii) assessment of potential environmental and social impacts of 
relevant activities and recommend mitigation measures as appropriate, including cost 
estimates; (iii) assessment of the need for liquid and solid waste collection, disposal, and 
Page  4
management, and make recommendations accordingly; (iv) review of national 
environmental policies, legislation, and regulatory and administrative frameworks in 
conjunction with World Bank's safeguard policies, and make recommendations as 
appropriate; (v) assessment of existing environmental assessment and management 
capacity, as well as capacity to implement proposed mitigation measures, and make 
recommendations as appropriate, including potential capacity building and training needs 
and their costs; and (vi) proposal for institutional arrangements for environmental 
management, including environmental assessment procedures, monitoring indicators, and 
a
budgeted monitoring plan as appropriate under the proposed project.  Borrower will 
contract out necessary technical assistance to ensure enforcement as well as proper 
monitoring and evaluation of the project environment and safeguard plan.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include: students, teachers, parents, local communities and 
construction workers.  Consultations will take place before and during construction of 
schools during which the impact the environment impact is the potential the largest. 
Community awareness campaign and subsequent mobilization will take place during that 
time.  Documentation will be circulated when this is appropriate and relevant.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  5
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Joseph Kamano 
04/13/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
04/13/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
04/13/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maurizia Tovo 
04/13/2006 
Comments:   
