Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2127
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P084027 
Project Name:  Decentralized Urban Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sylvie Debomy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Access to urban services and 
housing (S);Other urban development (S);Decentralization (S);Municipal finance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.70
1.70 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to  strengthen the capacity of six major 
communes of Burkina Faso (Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou, Banfora, 
Ouahigouya and Kaya) to finance and deliver infrastructure and municipal services to 
their populations.  This would be achieved through the combined impact of two types of 
interventions:  
 
(i) 
Implementation of Municipal Support programs to (a) improve the programming, 
financing, and implementation mechanisms of service delivery; (b) improve financial 
management and local resource mobilization; and (c) rationalize municipal management 
and infrastructure maintenance.  
 
(ii) 
Support to cross-cutting activities supporting decentralization: (a) establishment 
of sustainable transfer mechanisms to finance urban infrastructure and (b) strengthening 
the capacity of national agencies to support decentralized urban and municipal 
development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes the following three components:  
Page  2
Component 1: Municipal Support Program (US$4.3 million).  
 
This component will strengthen the technical and financial capacity of the communes of 
Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou, Banfora, Ouahigouya, and Kaya to 
program, finance, deliver, and manage infrastructure and urban services. This will be 
supplemented by activities targeted at the remaining regional capitals.  This component 
has three sub-components, which will define the Municipal Support Program of the city 
contract:  
 
Sub-component 1.1. Strengthening programming and urban management capacity 
(US$3.1million).  
 
Activities under this sub-component include the following: (i) Municipal audits for the 
six primary cities of the project (Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Banfora, Ouahigouya, 
Koudougou and Kaya) for a first generation of municipal contracts, updating the audits 
for a second generation of municipal contracts, and subsequent municipal audits for the 
remaining regional capitals; (ii) Updating or development of city plans (12 regional 
capitals, excluding Ouagadougou); (iii) Evaluation and updating of the Urban 
Information System, linking it to collection of the Taxe de jouissance; (iv) Completing 
and consolidating the implementation of the street addressing system where it exists, full 
street addressing operations in Banfora and Koudougou, and study for the 
implementation of street addressing in the remaining seven regional capitals; (v) Training 
for the municipal departments and elected officials in their areas of responsibility; (vi) 
Consolidation of solid waste management in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso; (vii) 
Support to the identification of community projects included in the PIP; (viii) Logistical 
support to the six targeted municipalities (furniture, office and IT equipment); and (ix) 
Support to the elaboration of the PMPs and regular monitoring and evaluation by 
consultants.  
 
Sub-Component 1.2. Strengthening Financial Resource Mobilization (US$680,000).  
 
The capacity of the communes of Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou, Banfora, 
Ouahigouya and Kaya to mobilize financial resources for service delivery will be 
strengthened through: (i) Further support to implementation of the residential tax in 
Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso (implemented in under the Urban Environment 
Project) and rolling out the residential tax to Koudougou, Banfora, Ouahigouya and 
Kaya; (ii) Strengthening collection of the CSI in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso and 
support to censuses in Koudougou, Banfora, Ouahigouya and Kaya.  
 
Sub-Component 1.3. Strengthening administrative and financial management of the 
municipalities (US$600,000).  
 
This will be implemented through: (i) Computerization of financial management and 
training; (ii) Diagnostic of economic infrastructures management and support to the 
improvement of revenue generated from the infrastructures; and (iii) Development of a 
Page  3
training module on budget preparation and financial analysis, workshops and on-site 
training, and preparation of a budget and financial management manual.  
 
Component 2: Support to urban development institutions (US$2.6 million).  
 
This component will support cross-cutting activities that aim at strengthening financial 
mechanisms to support decentralization and capacities of stakeholders involved in 
supporting the municipalities in their effort to provide services to their populations. This 
component includes:  
 
Sub-component 2.1. Transfer mechanisms and financing local investments 
(US$600,000).  
 
Operationalizing transfers and monitoring the progress in local investments will be 
implemented through: (i) A comprehensive review of the financial framework for 
decentralization and periodic technical assistance; (ii) Strengthening the local finance 
observatory in MATD and publishing of an annual municipal finance ratio guide; and 
(iii) Support to establishing the instruments and procedures of the FPDCT, including 
logistical support, training, and communication.  
 
Sub-component 2.2.  Urban planning (US$1.4 million).  
 
The capacities of the relevant ministries and other institutions to support the 
municipalities in carrying out urban planning will be strengthened through: (i) 
Modification and simplification of the development process and content of urban master 
plans, and information technology support to the Ministry of Urban Planning and 
Housing (MHU); (ii) Support to the implementation of specific activities of the national 
housing policy and strategy for safeguarding of public land reserves. Development of a 
strategic plan for the Caisses populaires in the social housing sector; (iii) Extending the 
pilot operation on issuance of land ownership documents (PUH and TF); and (iv) Setting 
in place an observatory of local economic development in MEDEV in support of the 
policy for development of  secondary centers.  
 
Sub-component 2.3.  Institutional Strengthening (US$630,000).  
 
General support to the national level institutions involved in urban development, by: (i) 
Training and logistical support to the DGDCL and permanent secretariat of the MATD; 
(ii) Implementation of and training on the monitoring and evaluation systems for all 
regional capitals, MATD, MFB, MHU and MEDEV, including surveys to monitor results 
and evaluations of beneficiary impacts; (iii) Support to the Association of Municipalities 
of Burkina Faso (AMBF) to carry out training programs and implement street addressing 
;
and (iv) Support to private sector development through training of SMEs, consultant 
firms, and local economic groups.  
 
Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (US$1.7 million).  
 
Page  4
The objective of this component is to strengthen national capacity to coordinate 
programs, monitor performance of communes and institutions involved in decentralized 
urban development. Activities include:  
 
Sub-component 3.1.  Project management (US$1.1 million).  
 
Overall support to project management via: (i) Technical assistance to the departments 
of MATD involved in project management; (ii) Equipping the MATD with suitable 
information technology and office equipment, and logistical means to carry out the 
management of the project; (iii) Operating expenses of the MATD coordination team; 
(iv) Quarterly meetings of the steering committee; and (v) Periodic technical assistance to 
ministries as well as municipalities in contract management.  
 
Sub-component 3.2. Monitoring and evaluation (US$405,000).  
 
The quality of the monitoring and evaluation of the project will be assured by financing: 
(i) Workshops at project launch, mid-term review, and closure; (ii) Evaluation of 
municipal contracts (performance of all parties) and regular implementation progress 
workshops; (iii) Hiring of consultants for the regular evaluation of the project; and (iv) 
Communication, publication and maximizing use of project experiences.  
 
Sub-component 3.3. Audits (US$140,000).  
 
Annual financial audits of project accounts.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
While no physical works will be carried out, the focus of the project is on the six main 
cities of Burkina Faso: Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou, Banfora, 
Ouahigouya and Kaya. The project will also provide limited support to seven other 
regional capitals (Dedougou, Dori, Gaoua, Fada, Manga, Tenkodogo, Ziniare).  
Furthermore, the AMBF (association of municipalities) will be involved in the project, 
and thus municipalities that benefit from AMBF intervention will receive technical 
assistance. The project is not likely to have any environmental impact on natural habitats 
or any other areas cited above.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sylvie Debomy 
03/07/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/07/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
03/07/2007 
Comments:   
