Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3199 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/15/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burkina Faso 
Project ID: P108791 
Project Name: International Institute for Water and Environmental Engineering 
Task Team Leader: William Experton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (70%);Vocational training (30%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
33.00
38.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the 2IE project is to support the development of 2IE as a regional center of 
excellence with the aim of increasing the number of highly skilled professionals in the areas of 
water, environment and infrastructure engineering by:  (i) increasing the capacity of the 2IE 
campuses in Kamboinse and Ouagadougou to train and board; and (ii) improving the quality of 
training programs, particularly at master and doctorate levels.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The three year project has two components:  
 
Increasing the capacity of 2IE from 620 students to 1000 students (US$ 20 million) by: (i) 
developing the new campus in Kamboinse; (ii) improving the pedagogic infrastructure and 
equipment; and (iii) increasing the boarding and training capacity in both campuses, and 
rehabilitating infrastructure at Ouagadougou.  
 
Improving the quality of training programs, particularly at master and doctorate levels (US$ 14 
million), by: (i) enhancing the regional role of 2IE by increasing the mobility of teachers, 
Page  2
improving the partnership with English speaking institutions, and upgrading the communication 
and multimedia equipment; (ii) reinforcing the capacity of teaching staff through training, 
research activities and international partnerships; (iii) increasing the dissemination of knowledge 
and technology in the areas of water and environment by developing distance learning and access 
to information and learning contents on line; and (iv) strengthening the partnership with the  
private sector and employers and encouraging business creation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
2IE has one existing campus in Ouagadougou.  This campus will be rehabilitated with Modern 
conference room, cafeteria, scientific bloc and accommodations for students.  
 
The second campus will be built in Kamboinse. The site was given by the Government of 
Burkina to 2IE and will help accommodate more students.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The component designed to increase the capacity of 2ie will draw on Burkina Faso's technical 
standards and capabilities for the construction of classrooms and the provision of water and 
sanitation and apply environmental guidelines during construction activities.  
 
2ie trains environment engineers, experiment and do research about protecting safe drinking 
water and environment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmenal Category is B.  The Environmental Assessment is being prepared because 
of the potential impact that the construction of the new campus will have in the environment. 
The draft EA has been reviewed and the final document will be available before appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Government of Burkina Faso has given a piece of land to 2IE.  Part of the land will be 
used by the students to experiment. Twenty (20) farmers have been allowed to use a small 
section of the land to cultivate peanuts.  However, when there are resettlement concerns or 
restriction of access to sources of livelihood, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared 
following the requirements of the RPF.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/09/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Internaitonal Institute for Water and Environment Engineering will prepare and submit 
an Environmental Assessment prior to appraisal. The EA will be disclosed at HQ (InfoShop) 
as well as in the Country Office (PIC).  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William Experton 
11/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/15/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
11/15/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
