Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC2186
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P078091 
Project Name:  Burkina Faso Energy Access  Project 
Task Team Leader:  Koffi Ekouevi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 28, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (70%);Renewable energy (25%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
38.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.30
2.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective 
is to support the Government’s efforts to expand 
access to and use of energy services to improve living conditions in selected rural, peri-
urban, and urban areas. The detailed objectives include:  
 
•
assist the Government to implement its rural electrification strategy to enhance 
productivity and the impact of health and education programs;  
 
•
support community-based sustainable woodfuels supply management and 
introduce alternative household fuels to reduce unsustainable pressure on forest resources 
and illnesses induced by indoor air pollution;  
 
•
strengthen key sector institutions to create a favorable investment environment for 
more cooperatives and private sector participation in energy service delivery initiatives.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed financing from IDA will support the following three components.  Details 
on each of the component is described as follows:  
 
Component 1: Increasing Access to Electricity Services in the Urban, Peri-Urban and 
Rural Areas (US $26.7 million)  
Page  2
This component will finance (i) the extension and reinforcement of SONABEL’s 
distribution network; (ii) the provision of off-grid energy services to remote areas from 
the national grid; and (iii) facilitate information, education, and communication 
campaigns towards populations. It will finance the extension and reinforcement of 
SONABEL’s distribution network capitalizing on the Bobo/Dioulassou/Ouagadougou 
transmission lines under financing by the on-going Power Sector Development Project. 
Priority will be given to urban centers and peri-urban areas. Distribution networks will be 
upgraded where they exist and mini-grids connected to the national grid will be 
constructed in areas with high unmet demand. Besides households, schools, clinics, local 
administration facilities in these areas will be connected. Under investment subsidies to 
be provided through the Fonds d’Electrification Rurale (as output based aid-OBA-) for 
the initial investments, stand alone mini-grids will be constructed in 121 communities.  
 
Component 2: Wood-fuels Supply Management and Inter-fuel Substitution Initiatives 
(US $6.8 million)  
 
This component will finance community-based wood-fuels supply management, inter-
fuel substitution initiatives and related information, education, and communication 
campaigns. It will finance the implementation of sustainable community-based forest 
management systems over a minimum area of 441,000 ha (270,000 ha new zones; 
171,000 ha where management plans have to be completed and approved) within a total 
period of five years. It will also finance the establishment of private sector and/or NGO-
based improved stoves local production facilities, distribution channels and marketing 
systems capable of commercially disseminating 250,000 improved stoves within five 
years.  
 
Component 3 Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Harmonization 
(US $5.4 million this component will finance institutional strengthening of energy sector 
public agencies (national and decentralized agencies) to support scaling up of energy 
service expansion. It will also finance capacity development of energy service providers 
as well as outreach, partnerships, and harmonization initiatives.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The physical activities will be carried in the urban, peri-urban and rural areas of Burkina 
Faso. It will also include capacity-building and technical assistance for the public sector 
and for the private sector entities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASTE) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 is triggered.  The QER project requires in its 
Component 1: Increasing Access to Electricity Services in the Urban, Peri-Urban and 
Rural Areas, the building of new infrastructure as well as a new routing along the Bobo-
Dioulasso/Ouagadougou axis, that might result in (i) new land acquisition for the project 
and therefore loss of property for communities; and (ii) potential restriction of access to 
sources of livelihood due to displacement of population.  Given that the specific sites or 
impacts will not be known until during project execution, a resettlement Policy 
framework consistent with OP 4.12 has been prepared and disclosed in-country and at 
Bank InfoShop before project appraisal.  The project is not expected to have a large scale 
irreversible impact on potential affected population.  
 
Similarly, due to the difficulty inherent in defining what the real environmental impacts 
of envisioned sub-projects are and determining what mitigation measures to put in place, 
the Borrower prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), 
to comply with the triggering of OP 4.01.  
 
The project impacts include but are not limited to the following:  
 
•
Soil erosion, loss of biodiversity both fauna and flora, due to project activities  
 
in resources areas, as a result of project activities.  
 
•
Sedimentation of water bodies due to land clearing and poor rehabilitation of 
borrow  pits;  
 
•
Risk/exposure to electric shock;  
 
•
Movement of heavy equipment to work sites, which may pose danger to public;  
 
•
Improper waste disposal; and  
 
•
Weak institutional capacity.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project might require land acquisition and relocation of some households. In line 
with OP 4.12, the borrower, through the Ministry of Mining, an RPF which involves (i) 
an assessment of the country regulatory and institutional framework for land acquisition 
and compensation; (ii) likely categories of affected assets and parties, as well as  the 
scope of impacts; (iii) a gap analysis and a compensation framework consistent with OP 
4.12 and the national legislations; (iv) a consultation framework to enable the 
participation of affected populations in the preparation of specific resettlement plans; (v) 
(vi) an institutional framework to implement the resettlement policy framework (vii) a 
Monitoring and Evaluation framework and a budget source.  
 
During project implementation, specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be 
prepared, as needed, consistent with the approved RPF to mitigate land acquisition and 
loss of economic activities issues.  The borrower will benefit from external expertise and 
Bank technical assistance as useful.  
 
The ESMF formulated standards methods and procedures specifying how subprojects, 
whose location, number and scale are currently unknown, will systematically address 
environmental and social issues in the screening and categorization, siting, design, 
implementation, as well as operational and maintenance phases. It includes: (i) 
systematization of environmental and social impact assessment for all identified sub-
projects before investment; and (ii) procedures for conducting sub-project-specific EIAs, 
be they Limited Environmental Impact Assessment (LEIA) or Full Environmental Impact 
Assessment (FEIA) as applicable; (iii) capacity strengthening and awareness raising 
campaigns targeted at relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and 
monitoring of project safeguard measures; and (iv) roles and responsibilities for 
implementing and monitoring environmental measures.  
 
The two safeguard instruments, together, include provisions to strengthening the 
capacity of the various institutions and actors involved, as well as promoting coordination 
and synergy among the various actors in attending to the potential environmental and 
social impacts.  Together, these safeguard instruments, are considered both as a planning 
tool and a means for a harmonious integration of the project in its bio-physical and social 
environment and as a way to maximize positive effects on the same environment in the 
country   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key actors include: Project Implementation Units (PIUs), involving relevant project 
stakeholder groups in public and private agencies, such as representatives from: Ministry 
of Mines and Energy, FDE, SONABEL, and COOPEL, NGOs and other relevant 
institutions.  One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster 
participation of all relevant stakeholders. This approach will be sustained throughout 
project implementation.  The environmental and social assessment studies, namely the 
ESMF and RPF, were also carried out according to the same principle, using broad-based 
public consultation approach, involving the above stakeholder groups.  The objective was 
to raise awareness of project activities and impacts and foster ownership on their part.  
 
Prior to disclosure in-country and at Bank InfoShop, a stakeholder workshop was 
organized by the Project Implementation Units (PIUs), involving relevant project 
stakeholder groups in public and private agencies, such as representatives from: Ministry 
of Mines and Energy, FDE, SONABEL, and COOPEL, NGOs and other relevant 
institutions.  This approach was utilized with the intention of presenting the results of the 
studies, fostering ownership and garnering input from these stakeholders in order to 
improve quality and soundness of the of the instruments.  Recommendations from both 
ASPEN and stakeholders' workshop have been reflected in the final safeguard reports, 
prior to disclosure.  These recommendations and relevant provisions from the two set of 
safeguard instruments will be reflected in Project Implementation Manual (PIM).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Koffi Ekouevi 
06/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
06/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
06/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
