                                                                                    40411

                          INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT !STAGE


 Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated: 07/19/2007

 I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data

 Country: Burkina Faso                        I Project ID: PO87630
 Project Name: Ouagadougou Transport Modal Shift
 Task Team Leader: Amal Talbi
 Estimated Appraisal Date: October 3, 2005      Estimated Board Date: September 17, 2007
 Managing Unit: AFTU2                           Lending Instrument: GEF Medium Size
                                                Project
 Sector: Roads & hiehwavs
 Theme: Pollution management and environmental health
 IBRD Amount :0.0
 IDA Amount : 0.0
 GEF Amount : US$880,000
 PCF Amount :0.0
 Other financing amounts by source:
 Government of the Burkina Faso (Ministry of Envkonment) US$50,000
 Others (CAI-SSA): US$100,000
 Environmental Category: C
 Simplified Processing                Simple [ x]                  Repeater [ ]
(Is this a transferred project        Yes [ x]                     No [ 1


 B. Project Objectives [from section2 of PCN]
 The project development objective is to establish a policy environment conducive to encouraging
 a shift in transport mode from individual to public lransport in the city of Ouagadougou.

 C. Project Description [from section3 of PCW]
 Urbanization is taking place at a high rate in Burcina Faso. The number of urban centers with
 populations over 10,000 inhabitants is expected to grow from 64 in 2000 to 250 by 2025.
 Ouagadougou, in particular, hosts a disproportior~atelyhigh share of the urban population of
 Burkina Faso. According to available data, by 2015 the population in the Greater Ouagadougou
 area will attain 1.5 million inhabitants, up from 600,000 in 1985. With an annual population
 growth rate of 4.8 percent in the capital city since the end of the 1990s, the ability of transport
 institutions in Ouagadougou to manage urban transport needs is stressed beyond capacity.

 Individual transport is the norm, with motorized two-wheeled vehicles making up most rides.
 The number of these vehicles is significant but n3t easy to estimate. Over 400,000 two-stroke
 mopeds were sold in Burkina Faso between 1991 and 2000, and the total number in circulation is

estimated to grow by 25,000 per year with a large share of these mopeds being sold in
Ouagadougou.

Component 1: Institutionalframeworkand strategy

The project will produce outputs at the strategic level by conducting an institutional assessment
and elaborating a strategy and investment plan to induce a shift of mode of transport. To
complement the strategy, the project will finanze targeted physical works to evaluate the
feasibility of selected investment proposals.

The project will provide support to the imp1ement;itionof the decree establishing CETUO', and
elaborate a strategy and its implementation plan based on the information on urban transport
available in CETUO, the Ministry of Transport, the city of Ouagadougou, and SOTRACO'. The
strategy will provide a set of scenarios to reduce congestion in Ouagadougou and identify
incentives for the shift from individual to public trsnsport that will translate in reduction of GHG
emissions. The strategy will be prepared by a team including transport economists, specialists on
environmental, legal, financial, and social aspects, ;iswell as urban transport and civil engineers.

The Government will endorse the strategy and investment plan that will be prepared following
appropriate consultation of key stakeholders. In particular, to ensure a full commitment, in
addition to the Ministries of Transport and Environment and the city of Ouagadougou,
representatives of the Ministry of Finance should be regularly informed on progress and will
provide feedback. Through the strategy and in7iestment plan, the project will support the
Municipality of Ouagadougou and the central Government in the process of clarifying the
institutional framework, which is a prerequisite for any sustainable investment.

At the project level and based on the investment plan, the most cost-effective activities with a
high impact on reducing congestion will be selected for pilot implementation, financed by the
proposed GEF project. Consultants will conduct a social and environmental assessment of those
activities and provide draft proposals for studies and draft bid documents for works in order to
speed up the implementation of those activities. Potential activities to be financed by the project
(to be confirmed after elaboration of the investment plan3)include the following:

        Adoption of a new traffic circulation plan. 11 cost-effective means of improving transport
        fluidity, identified in the action plan.
        Materializing road surfaces along a selectec.route (by painting or placing physical
        elements).
        Improving some of the critical cross-roads and intersections to improve mobility.
        Improving access conditions around the ends of a selected line and its main stops.




1CETUO: Conseil Exe'cutifdes Transports Urbains de Ouag!idougou ;Executif Council of Urban Transport in
Ouagadougou
 SOTRACO: Socie'te' de Transport Cornmunde Ouagadougclu;transport society of Ouagadougou
 And with the condition that they do not have any negative environmental or social impact.

Any of the activity above will be implemented after the full completion of the investment plan
only if it does not have any negative environmental or social impacts (displacement, land
acquisition, etc.).

During the elaboration of the strategy and investment plan, the key stakeholders in urban
transport will be extensively involved in giving fe1;dback. Regular workshops will be held with
stakeholders to gather their views and collect lessons learned. Stakeholders will comprise: (i)
SOTRACO; (ii) the consumers'             association ("Association des consommateurs");         (iii)
representatives of shops and street vendors; (iv) the taxi drivers' association ("Syndicat de taxi");
(v) the Parents Teachers Associations ("Asso"ations             des parents-e'l2ves") ; (vi) traffic
enforcement staff of the police; (vii) municipal employees and politicians; (viii) staff of line
ministries; and (ix) garage mechanics and mechanics for two wheel vehicles ("Association des
garagistes"). For example, the stakeholder analysis will provide information on impact of
various options of the investment plan, such as the economic consequences for shops along the
line and for taxi drivers and the incentives for a change of transport culture.

The investment plan will take into account the env lronmental and social aspects of the identified
investments. Specifically, the environmental categories of the investments and the fiduciary
responsibilities on conducting the environmental evaluations or the resettlement action plans will
be assessed. At this stage there is no preparatic~nof a follow up full size Bank project to
implement those investments. Consequently, these investments will be implemented when
Ougadougou city will find the financing source.

Component 1 Outcome: Clear institutional frainework, a developed strategy and related
investment plan enabling a shift from individual to public transport.

Component2: Capacity building of the relevant authoritiesto manage traffic

Effective reforms of the urban passenger transport sector in Ouagadougou requires a sponsoring
body to set the goals for reform, coordinate different activities, and monitor progress towards
achievement of those goals. Assessment of the ir~stitutionalsetting (under Component 1) will
provide information on the appropriateness of the present setting and provide a plan for
strengthening the capacity of institutions involved in transport such as the Ministry of Transport
and the Ministry of Environment. Among the are2.s to strengthen are: urban mobility, pollution
control, statistics, monitoring and evaluation, and transport regulation.

Under the five-year action plan, it is planned to develop an urban transport observatory to be
used as a decision making tool for urban mobility planning. The project may provide support to
this observatory and to CETUO, provided that its legal status is clarified.

Component 2 Outcome: Strengthened capacity of stakeholders and transport institutions to
improve transport efficiency.



Component 3: Increased awareness on transport-related environmental issues (to be
financedby the Clean Air Initiativefor Sub-Saharan-Africa)

  This component will promote a better understanding of the characteristics of air pollution, its
  principal sources, and related health effects; devehp a consensus among concerned stakeholders
  around a plan of immediate and longer term actioiis to improve air quality; and strengthen local
  capacity for air quality management through improved understanding of issues and technologies.
  The capacity to quantify C02emissions will be strengthened.

  This sub-component will address the issue of air quality monitoring and increased awareness by
  developing a simple air quality management model; supporting stakeholder consultation;
  gathering information on emissions; costing of public transport; and formulating an action plan
  for air quality monitoring.

  Component 3 Outcome: Increased awareness of transport-related environmental issues (financed
  by Clean Air Initiative for Sub-Saharan Africa).

  D. Project location (if known)
  Ouagadougou city

  E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safegu.ardPolicies [fromPCN]




  F. Environmental and SocialSafeguards Specialists
  Mr. Warren Waters


  11.SAFEGUARDPOLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
  - --
   -. --  -- - -  --- -    -- ---

I Safermard Policies Triwered                                      Yes         No     I   TBD     1
I Environmental            00

                   Assessment (OPBP 4.01)                                      X


  Natural Habitats (OPBP 4.04)                                                 X
  Forests (OPBP4.36)                                                           X
  Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
  Physical Cultural Resources (OPBP 4.11)                                      X
  Indigenous Peoples (OPBP 4.10)                                               X
  Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP4.12)                                         X

  Safety of Dams (OPBP4.37)                                                    X
  Projects on International Waterways (OPBP7.50)                               X
  Projects in Disputed Areas (OPBP 7.60)                                       X

  111.SAFEGUARDPREPARATION PLAN

  A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
      would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: 711812007

C. Tinie frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing4 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. NIA


IV. APPROVALS


  Task Team Leader:                              Ms. Amal Talhi
IApproved by:                                                                                                                       I
    egional ~gfe~uardsCoordinator:               Mr Warren Waters




4Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

