Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/26/2007 
Report No.:  AC2602
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P098378 
Project Name:  Community Based Rural Development Project, Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Emmanuel Y. Nikiema 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P104700 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (28%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (25%);Water 
supply (22%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (15%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.41 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.09 
 Local 
Communities 
8.10 
 Financing 
Gap 
79.50
93.69 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
In support of the National Program for Decentralized Rural Development, Communes 
Rurales plan and implement local development activities in a participatory and 
sustainable manner.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Strengthened Capacity for Decentralized Rural Development (US$54.5 
million).  
 
Phase II will greatly modify both the content and target audiences for its capacity 
development activities. These will be geared toward achieving the component's stated 
objectives of (i) rural communes and villages formulating and updating their 
development plans and investment programs in a participatory manner; and (ii) rural 
communes and villages receiving quality support from service providers.  
 
Page  2
Component B:  Land Tenure Reform (US$2.0 million).  
 
The project will support the government in organizing workshops and seminars at all 
levels (village, commune, department, province and national) and with all stakeholders 
(farmers, village chiefs, private sector, parliamentarians) to discuss the proposed 
provisions in the policy so as to arrive at a final legal text. This consultative process will 
be lead by the Direction G?n?rale du Foncier Rural et des Organisations Paysannes 
(DGFROP) but with active support of the project.  
 
Component C: Local Development Financing (LDF) (US$80.0 million)  
 
This component will provide the necessary resources for rural communes to undertake 
development activities in a timely and transparent manner.  
 
Component D: Program Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$13.5 million)  
 
This component's objectives are for the project components to be effectively 
coordinated, monitored and evaluated, and for donor approaches to local development to 
be harmonized.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
From an environmental and social safeguard point of view, the Burkina Community-
Based Rural Development Project (CBRD 2) is a Category B project.  That is, the 
environmental and social impacts of the project, for the most part, are expected to be 
Page  3
minimal, site-specific and manageable to an accepted level. There are two Bank 
Safeguard policies applicable to the project. These include: Environmental Assessment 
(OP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
At the time of the environmental and social assessment of the project, the range, scale, 
locations and number of sub-projects, as part of the CBRD 2 initiatives were unknown.  
The difficulty inherent in defining what the real environmental and social impacts of 
envisioned sub-projects are and determining what mitigation measures should be put in 
place, requires the development of an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), a social safeguard instrument used 
to addressing potential land acquisition or loss of economic activity issues on the part of 
individuals or group of individuals in project intervention zones.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This is a second phase APL, lessons were drawn from the first phase implementation and 
reflected in the updated safeguard procedures.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Because, the second phase of the CBRD is repeated operation, it was deemed sufficient 
that the Borrower update existing safeguard instruments, elaborated as part of first phase 
preparation, drawing from lessons learned - both positive and negative.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Prior to disclosure in-country and at Bank InfoShop, a stakeholder workshop was 
organized by the project implementation unit (PIU), involving relevant project 
stakeholder groups in government agencies, the private sector, representatives of 
professional organizations, farming organizations; civil society; and NGOs.  This 
approach was be utilized with the intention of presenting the results of the studies, 
fostering ownership and seeking input from these stakeholders in order to improve 
quality and soundness of the of the instruments.  Recommendations from both ASPEN 
and stakeholders' workshop have been reflected in the final safeguard reports, prior to 
disclosure.  These recommendations and relevant provisions from the two set of 
safeguard instruments will be reflected in Project Implementation Manual (PIM).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/02/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2006 
 
Page  4
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/02/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emmanuel Y. Nikiema 
01/17/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
01/17/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
01/17/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
01/17/2007 
Comments:   
