Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2385 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/22/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burkina Faso 
Project ID: P098378 
Project Name: Community Based Rural Development II 
Task Team Leader: Emmanuel Y. Nikiema 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 12, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (28%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (25%);Water 
supply (22%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (15%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
8.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
72.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective of PNGT2 Phase 2 is to consolidate and scale up the achievements of 
PNGT2 with respect to local governance, access to basic social services and sustainable 
management of natural resources in rural communes and villages of Burkina Faso.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The first phase of PNGT2 (2000 to 2006) achieved impressive results, including: i) 
approximately four thousand villages establishing village committees and building local capacity 
for planning, implementation and monitoring; ii) providing nearly 5 million person/days of 
training to build local capacity; iii) disbursing USD39 million for 12,000 micro-projects; iv) 
supporting policy reform related to decentralization in Burkina, resulting in the adoption of the 
revised Law on Local Communities in late 2004, the establishment of rural municipalities, and 
the first municipal elections in late April 2006. Phase 2 of this APL will further consolidate these 
Page  2
accomplishments, and move forward the Government's decentralized rural development 
program.  
 
COMPONENT 1: CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Commune and Village Capacity Development: Given the recent creation 
of the rural communes and village development councils, capacities must be developed of these 
nascent institutions to ensure ownership of their new roles, adherence to their mandate, and 
assumption of responsibility for the management of local investments. This component will (i) 
inform and train the members of the village development and commune councils on how to 
efficiently play their role and provide them with the necessary tools to manage these local 
governance institutions; (ii) sensitise and inform all stakeholders on the objectives and strategy 
of the project, and on the methods of participation of local communities in its implementation; 
(iii) train the staff and other parties of the communes in the planning, implementation, 
monitoring and maintenance of communal infrastructures; (iv) assist rural communes in the 
preparation and implementation of their development plans; (v) prepare all rural commune 
stakeholders to assume ownership of the project.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Capacity Development for Decentralization Reform - The effective 
functioning of local governments requires the active engagement of diverse stakeholders at 
national and sub-national levels, and includes the State, the private sector and civil society). In 
order to strengthen capacities for this support, this sub-component will (i) conduct studies 
necessary to optimise project management and policy reform; (ii) ensure intra- and inter-
communal dialogue; (iii) strengthen the capacities of the various parties supporting the 
implementation of the decentralization process, including service providers at commune level, 
and facilitating agencies in the realm of strategic planning at village and commune levels; (iv) 
acquire requisite equipment for program implementation; (v) and implement strategic 
communication activities.  
 
Sub-component 1.3: Capacity Development for Sustainable Natural Resource Management - 
Under the law governing local governments (CGCT), rural communes are divided into three 
territorial spaces: housing, production and conservation. Within this framework, the project will 
support:  
 
-
The demarcation of development spaces defined within rural communes;  
 
-
The development of plans and rules for the management of natural resources in the 
demarcated zones;  
 
-
The dissemination of proven technologies for the management of natural resources.  
 
The project will also support the development of a national policy for land tenure in rural areas. 
Once developed, the project will support:  
 
-
The dissemination of the policy and texts governing land management and development 
within rural communes;  
 
-
Rural populations to take ownership of the land tenure policy;  
 
-
National reflection on the status and improvement of the land policy.  
 
COMPONENT 2: COMMUNE AND VILLAGE INVESTMENT FACILITY  
Page  3
Improving the socio-economic conditions, increasing the productivity of the primary capital of 
the rural communes, and increasing incomes requires putting in place various infrastructure and 
socio-economic investments. This project component aims at strengthening the financial 
capacities of grass-root organizations and interest groups by making available to them the 
financial resources necessary to support: (i) the socio-economic infrastructures; (i) the activities 
contributing to the improvement of the productive potential of natural resources (iii) income 
generating activities for specific groups (women, entrepreneurs...) in order to increase the level 
of income and boost the local economy; (iv) activities identified related to sustainable natural 
resource management.  
 
The Facility will provide investment envelopes to participating communes and villages, based 
on a population-based formula. Specific to safeguards, this component will not finance the 
purchase of land.  Any land acquisition will be done on a voluntary basis. In the event that 
exceptional cases require resettlement, the project shall update its Resettlement Policy 
Framework. The ESMF shall also be updated in order to mitigate any negative localized social or 
environmental impacts associated with the sub-projects.  
 
COMPONENT 3: COORDINATION, MANAGEMENT, MONITORING AND 
EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT  
 
This component will support (i) the coordination and efficient administrative, technical and 
financial management of the programme and (ii) the monitoring and evaluation of the 
performance and impacts of the program.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project's coverage is anticipated to be nationwide, though the current financing gap may 
require the scope of this coverage to be more modest than anticipated by government. The 
project anticipates direct support to a similar number of villages that participated in the first 
phase (3,000), and will likely once again support construction works, though the exact nature and 
location of these works are not yet determined due to the demand-driven nature of the project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
During implementation of the first phase of the APL, the borrower clearly demonstrated his 
ability to address prospective safeguard issues through the enforcement and application of the 
ESMF.  Furthermore, project design clearly demonstrated itself to be an effective mechanism to 
improve social dynamics within communities, particularly with respect to the inclusion of 
women, youth, and marginalized groups.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered because the project anticipates having limited environmental 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and social impacts related to sub-projects such as the construction and rehabilitation of feeder 
roads, health care facilities, vaccination parks, and small scale agricultural activities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Though the project will not finance land acquisition, which must be done on a voluntary 
basis, exceptional cases may require land acquisition and resettlement. Therefore, OP/BP 4.12 
has been triggered.  
 
Since the locations and potential negative localized impacts of the future sub-projects will 
not be known at appraisal, the Borrower will prepare an update to the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that were 
completed during Phase 1 preparation in 2002. These Frameworks outline strategies for 
identifying and mitigating potential negative environmental and social impacts at the sub-project 
planning stage. The RPF outlines the policies and procedures to be followed in the event that 
sub-projects require exceptional cases of land acquisition. The ESMF outlines the environmental 
and social screening process for sub-projects.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/10/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF that functioned for the first phase of CBRDP (2001-present) will be 
updated by Government.  These updates will be furnished to IDA by November 10, 2006, 
and will be disclosed at the Infoshop and in-country by December 5, 2006.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emmanuel Y. Nikiema 
08/22/2006 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/22/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
08/22/2006 
Comments:   
