Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2125 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/10/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burkina Faso 
Project ID: P078091 
Project Name: Burkina Faso Energy Access  Project 
Task Team Leader: Koffi Ekouevi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 24, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (70%);Renewable energy (25%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
38.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed Energy Access Project is to support economic 
growth and poverty alleviation by: (a) increasing access - by the rural and urban populations and 
by the economic and social sectors - to electricity services, and ensuring a sustainable supply of 
biomass-based energy; (b) promoting  least-cost and sustainable solutions through supply and 
demand-side energy management and through participation of the private sector and the 
communities; and (c) supporting the development of renewable and low carbon energies  (Global 
Environment Facility and Carbon Credits). The project would therefore support the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy, the World Bank Country Assistance Strategy and the Government energy 
sector strategy.  
 
The proposed project complements the Power Sector Development Project (PSDP) which is 
under implementation. The PSDP focuses on increasing the supply of electricity to Burkina 
notably through interconnections with the neighboring countries, and energy efficiency and 
demand side management measures that should reduce energy costs to the end-users.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project would have four main components. The main objectives of each 
component are the following:  
 
(a) Increasing access to electricity services in the urban and peri-urban areas part of 
SONABEL's perimeter;  
 
(b) Increasing access to electricity services in the rural areas, in the perimeter managed by the 
institutions in charge of rural electrification;  
 
(c) Ensuring  the availability of biomass-based energy (wood fuels and charcoal) on a 
sustainable basis, and supporting substitution to other energies such as LPG and kerosene;  and  
 
(d) Improving the overall performance of the energy sector by reducing  the energy costs borne 
by the end-users, testing new ideas, improving sector planning and knowledge, and monitoring 
project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The physical activities will be carried in the urban areas and in the rural areas of Burkina Faso. It 
will also include capacity-building and technical assistance for the public sector and for the 
private sector entities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While there is reasonable borrower capacity, demonstrated with the implementation of numerous 
projects in virtually all sectors, the proposed project is set out to strengthening the safeguard and 
energy sector management capacities at the national and at the local levels, as articulated in the 
ESMF and RPF.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Due to the difficulty inherent in defining what the real environmental impacts of envisioned 
sub-projects are, and determining what mitigation measures to put in place, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed.  The ESMF will formulate 
standard methods and procedures along with institutional arrangements for screening, review, 
approval and implementation and monitoring of subprojects? specific EMPs, including the 
preparation of environmental clauses to be inserted in contractors? bidding documents.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project will intervene in peri-urban and rural areas. The ESMF will identify potential 
sensitive habitats that would require special consideration in planning, design and 
implementation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Project intervention in wooded rural and peri
-
urban areas may result in potential tree cutting 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
to establish right of ways for transmission lines.  The ESMF will determine such potential and 
propose appropriate mitigation measures.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although, the BFEAP is not expected to have a large scale irreversible impact on potential 
affected population, its execution may entail the extension of existing lines (from the PSDP) and 
may involve construction of new infrastructure as well as a new routing of power lines to reach 
those areas.  Given that the specific sites or impacts will not be known until during project 
execution, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 has been prepared 
by the Ministry of Mining and Energy. The RFP will be used as a guide to conduct specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as needed, as they relate to land acquisition and loss of 
economic activities issues, as well as compensation measures to minimize negative impacts on 
Project Affected People (PAPs).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/16/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An environmental management framework and a social framework are under preparation and 
should be disclosed by February 28, 2006.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Koffi Ekouevi 
05/10/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
05/10/2007 
Comments:   
