Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2046 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/15/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burundi 
Project ID: P064557 
Project Name: Education Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Marcelo Becerra 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project has as its main development objective to
 support Burundi’sstrategy to 
reach the Millennium Development Goals in education, delivering a free quality primary 
education for all by 2015. The project represents a first stage – four years in length – in the 
framework of a long term strategy that includes the development of post-primary education. In 
order to achieve this objective the proposed project will support specific actions to: (i) increase 
access and completion at primary level through “free” education, providing new school 
infrastructure and furniture, supporting girls enrollment and reducing repetition rates; (ii) 
improve quality through reforming pre-service and in-service teacher training, developing a new 
curricula and distributing books for all students at primary level (iii) build the capacity of the 
MINEDUC to plan, manage, monitor and evaluate the provision of education services; (iv) 
develop a partnership between the state and the community in school management; and (v) 
develop sustainable strategies for secondary and higher education. In addition, the project will 
test new pilot mechanisms in the areas of literacy programs and health and nutrition policies. 
Specific actions will be introduced to support vulnerable groups.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project will have the following four components: (i) improving access and equity; 
(ii) improving quality; (iii) strengthening management and planning capacity of MINEDUC’s 
central and decentralized services; (iv) supporting the development of suitable strategy for post-
primary education subsectors.  
 
The proposed implementation period is 4 years: total amount of US$20 million for the IDA 
Grant will be part of the wider Program (“Support Program of Reconstruction of the Education 
System”), which will be supported by other donors. The amount of donor support is not yet 
confirmed, but it could be, in principle, another US$20 million.  
 
Component 1  
 
Improving access and equity (Estimated cost: U$S 6 million)  
 
The objective of this component will be to facilitate free and equitable access to primary 
education. It will support a sustainable increase in the rate of access to first grade and 
continuation through the primary level by guaranteeing service supplies in terms of facilities, 
stimulating demand for girls, and enforcing school management and maintenance, introducing 
initiatives for community participation. The component will have four main pillars: (i) the 
construction of classrooms, latrines and access to potable water as well as the provision of school 
furniture with the objective of ensuring service supply at primary level, starting with the most 
disadvantaged regions in terms of enrollment and facilities. This program will be implemented 
with the participation of School Management Committees (SMC); (ii) introduction of specific 
policies giving incentives to targeted groups, mainly girls; (iii) introduction of a school 
maintenance program through a decentralized and community based approach whereby a 
“Capitation Grant” will be transferred directly to schools and managed by the SMCs; (iv) support 
to the development and enhancing of the SMCs.  
 
Component 2  
 
Improving quality (Estimated cost: U$S 8 million)  
 
The objective of this Component will be to improve the quality of primary education in order to 
increase student acquisitions and reduce repetition rates. The Project will provide support for: (i) 
pre-service and in-service teacher training reform, including the provision of in-service training 
and the training of trainers; (ii) reforming inspectors and pedagogic advisors’ functions; (iii) the 
development of new curricula (the introduction of a curricula by competences will be evaluated); 
(iv) the introduction of a student evaluation system; (v) the development and capacity building of 
book and pedagogic materials’ management, including the provision of  school books (math and 
language) for all students at primary level; and (vi) the introduction of a pilot program on school 
health and nutrition.  
 
Component 3  
 
Strengthening management and planning capacity of MINEDUC’s central and decentralized 
services (Estimated cost: US$2 million).  
 
The objective of this component will be to reinforce the capacity of MINEDUC and its 
decentralized structures necessary for successful program planning, activity management, 
Page  3
monitoring and evaluation. The project will reinforce decentralized services of the MINEDUC 
which currently cannot carry out their missions due to lack of means and overlapping functions 
with central services. A readjustment and clarification of central and decentralized structures will 
be supported. Specifically, implementation of key quality and equity strategies will be enhanced 
significantly by improving the reliability, validity and dissemination of information at central 
and decentralized levels of the Direction of the Planning.  
 
Component 4  
 
Supporting the development of post-primary formal and non-formal education (Estimated cost: 
U$S 2 million)  
 
The objective of this component will be to build capacity for the monitoring, evaluation and 
analysis to develop and carry out strategies and action plans for secondary and higher education, 
including technical and vocational sub-sectors. The component will support the Government 
through technical assistance and building consensus processes with the aim of improving: (i) 
relevance of graduates in terms of job placement; (ii) internal efficiency; (iii) fiscal sustainability 
of secondary, technical-vocational and higher education. The component will also support the 
introduction of new and innovative pilot literacy programs.  
 
Project Management is estimated at U$S 1 million (5% percent of IDA cost) and “non-
allocated” funds in U$S 1 million as well. However, the Project Management cost will be 
defined during Project’s preparation, since it will depend of the possibility of harmonized 
procedures with donors and in-depth evaluation of the capacity at MINEDUC.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project activities will take place at education facilities nation-wide, with particular attention to 
those serving vulnerable populations. The number and location of urban and rural schools have 
yet to be decided.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Several Bank Projects are currently in execution the Republic of Burundi. The Borrower has 
successfully implemented school rehabilitation programs through the IDA-financed Second 
Social Action Project (P081511) as well as other infrastructure activities in Health, Orphans and 
HIV/AIDS's projects. In most cases the projects under implementation have had a positive 
impact in its respective sectors.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is supporting construction of classrooms, latrines and access to potable water, 
which might have minor adverse impacts. These can be readily mitigated by the application of 
guidelines for good practice in design and construction.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Whether the project will involve land acquisition will be determined early in preparation so 
that a Resettlement Policy Framework can be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF (if needed) will be prepared, approved and disclosed "prior to 
Appraisal" in the country and in the Bank's InfoShop at HQ. The SMU has agreed to accept 
transfer of the safeguard responsabilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marcelo Becerra 
02/15/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
02/15/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
