Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/16/2007 
Report No.:  AC2629
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burundi 
Project ID:  P064557 
Project Name:  Education Support Project revised to Education Sector Reconstruction 
Proj. 
Task Team Leader:  Marcelo Becerra 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (90%);Secondary education (10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the project are to improve the capacity of schools to 
educate a rapidly increasing number of primary-level students and of the government of 
Burundi to carry out policy analysis, strategic planning and program implementation.  
 
The first objective responds to the well-justified and urgent priority that the government 
gives to providing immediate and direct support to schools in order to cope with the rapid 
expansion of participation in primary school.  This rapid expansion has been caused by 
pent-up demand in the immediate post-conflict period and the abolition of school fees.  
Failure to provide timely assistance to schools as the system expands could result in the 
slowing or even reversal of this trend toward full primary enrollment.  In this context, the 
overwhelming majority of project funding is focused on these urgent goals, which are 
normal in a post-conflict reconstruction environment. The second objective responds to 
the equally well-justified priority that the government gives to rapidly building its 
capacity to plan and manage the education sector, which will help the completion of an 
in-depth action plan that will increase the likelihood of attracting more external funding 
for its programs, including request for Fast-Track-Initiative?s endorsement. Project 
Page  2
specific indicators and benchmarks for monitoring the achievement of these objectives 
are discussed in the section on the results framework (Annex 3).  
 
The Education project contributes to the higher level objectives of ISN and PRSP. A 
key element in the consolidation of the country?s economic growth, poverty reduction 
and mitigation of existing high social risk is to build human capital. The provision of a 
better quality of education is a strategic action for generating a skilled labor force, a 
necessary condition for economic growth. The project will assist Burundi in mitigating 
the current post-conflict context and facilitating the ?free school? policy in the education 
sector to reach MDG by 2015 and, at the same time, it will provide the building blocks 
for a solid development of a medium and long-term sector program.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1. Expansion of School Facilities (U$S 8.15 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to contribute to the expansion of primary 
participation on an equitable basis in order to reach universal completion by 2015. It will 
support a sustainable increase in the rate of enrollment by expanding school infrastructure 
through supporting the MINEDUC?s school infrastructure triennial plan (2007-2009). 
The contribution of this component will be focused on the eight most disadvantaged 
provinces in terms of enrollment rates and facilities, providing the construction of about 
220 new classrooms, the rehabilitation of around 200 classrooms, the construction of 60 
lodges for teachers, the construction of 40 wells and the provision of school furniture and 
relevant instructional equipment to all schools involved in project?s support.  
 
Component 2. Support for Teaching and Learning (U$S 6.6 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to contribute to maintain or improve student 
acquisitions through supporting: (i) the introduction new in-service programs and devices 
to train of teachers, schools directors and inspectors; (ii) the provision textbooks and 
pedagogic materials for all students at primary level and three subject textbooks for lower 
secondary students, setting up its management mechanisms; and (iii) the measurement of 
learning outcomes undertaking a rapid assessment of reading competency in a sample of 
primary schools throughout Burundi each year of the project.  
 
(i) 
Sub-Component 2.1. Training of teachers, schools directors and inspectors (U$S 
2.4 million). This sub-component aims to increase teaching quality through introducing 
new in-service programs and devices to train of teachers, schools directors and 
inspectors. The sub-component will support four activities: (i) the training of about 2.950 
unqualified primary teachers; (ii) the in-service training of all teachers; (iii) the training 
of 2.200 school directors and 149 inspectors; (iv) the technical assistance to develop new 
programs and the acquisition of necessary equipment to carry out the proposed training 
activities.  
 
(ii) 
Sub-component 2.2. Provision and management of textbooks and learning 
materials (U$S 4.0 million). This sub-component aims to contribute to improve learning 
outcomes through: (i) providing one textbook of reading in French and Kirundi for each 
Page  3
student at 3rd., 4th., 5th., and 6th. Grades in primary level; (ii) one textbook for three 
students at lower secondary level (?Colleges?) in Mathematics, Biology, Kirundi, French 
and English; (iii) one textbook and one guide for all primary and lower secondary 
teachers; (iv) the development and capacity building in textbooks and learning materials? 
procurement and management.  
 
(iii) 
Sub-component 2.3. Measurement of learning outcomes (U$S 0.16 million). This 
sub-component aims to introduce an instrument to measure learning outcomes through 
introducing rapid assessment of reading competency, which will allow evaluating the 
impact of the measures aimed to improve or maintain quality. The rapid reading 
assessment will be carried out each year of the project. The results of the first year of the 
project will allow establishing a baseline in year one and start introducing corrective 
measures.  
 
Component 3. Building capacity in MINEDUC (U$S 4.0 million).  
 
The objective of this component is to improve the capacity of the Government of 
Burundi to carry out policy analysis, strategic planning and program implementation. 
Building Government?s capacity to plan and manage the education sector, which will in 
turn increase the likelihood of attracting more external funding for its programs, 
including membership in the Fast-Track-Initiative.  
 
(i) 
Sub-Component 3.1 Institution building and strategy development (U$S 2.95 
million). This component aims to improve the capacity of the government of Burundi to 
carry out policy analysis, strategic planning and program implementation. Building 
MINEDUC?s capacity to plan and manage the education sector, which will in turn 
increase the likelihood of FTI?s membership. To address this objective the sub-
component will support three activities: (i) the technical assistance to assist MINEDUC 
in developing the policies and reforms to improve the quality of education, build 
institutional capacity in management and planning and elaborate policy notes and action 
plans for health and nutrition and for each sub-sector in particular secondary, technical-
vocational and higher education; (ii) the acquisition of most urgent equipment for the 
DPE, DBP and BP and motorcycles for all regional inspectors; (iii) training, workshops 
and study tours to complement activities described in (i).  
 
(ii) 
Sub-Component 3.2. Project Management (U$S 1.05 million). This sub-
component aims to create capacity at the Executive Secretariat of the Steering Committee 
will be strengthened thereby enabling it to effectively: (i) coordinate the work of those in 
charge of component implementation; (i) effectively management IDA financing; (ii) 
handle procurement and financial management; (iii) monitor project implementation and 
results framework.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project has national coverage (Republic of Burundi)   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Page  4
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential adverse environmental and social impacts (soil and water pollution, soil erosion, 
loss of vegetation, generation of asbestos wastes, air pollution, traffic accidents, loss of 
economic assets) might result from activities related to the construction and rehabilitation 
of schools and teacher accommodations.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The planned construction and rehabilitation activities will not lead to indirect and/or 
long-term impacts as the potential impacts described above will be limited, and 
appropriate mitigation measures will be implemented.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project was prepared in support of the Government's long-term education program. 
This program includes the construction and rehabilitation of schools and teacher 
accommodations which will be carried out by ABUTIP who has been recognized by the 
Bank for its satisfactory record in this regard. Any potential adverse environmental and 
social impacts will be addressed through appropriate mitigation measures. Thus, it was 
not necessary to develop project alternatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In an effort to address potential adverse environmental and social impacts of future 
construction and rehabilitation activities, the Borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF). The ESMF oultines an environmental and social screening process to be applied 
by qualified personnel at the time the construction and rehabilitation of schools and 
Page  5
teacher accommodations are planned. It furthermore includes Environmental Guidelines 
for Contractors and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESMP 
outlines the institutional responsibilities and cost estimates for the implemeentation and 
monitoring of mitigation measures, including the safe disposal of asbestos. The RPF 
outlines the policies and procedures to be applied in the event that any of the project 
activities involve land acquisition, and thus the potential loss of livelihoods. While 
ABUTIP has an Environmental Specialist on board, it has been recommended that the 
relevant project implementation agencies - after providing environmental management 
training - appoint Environmental Focal Points who would coordinate their activities with 
ABUTIP's Environmental Specialist. The Executive Secretariat will oversee the 
implementation of the ESMF and RPF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The people consulted in the studies carried out during preparation comprise: (i) Non 
governmental actors: students currently in schools, children ages 6-16 not in school, 
Parents Associations, local leaders, teacher unions, national NGOs, international NGOs, 
school management committees, ABUTIP ; (ii) Governmental: Municipal Development 
Committees (CDC), Provincial Education Department Staff, School Inspection Staff, 
teachers, school principals. The people interviewed and surveyed were from the regions 
of Bujumbura, Rutana and Citiboke.  
 
The ESMF and RPF were prepared in consultation with key stakeholders such as the 
Project Coordination Committee, representatives of relevant government institutions at 
the national and provincial levels, NGOs, ABUTIP, parents associations and committees, 
and provincial educational facilities.  
 
The ESMF and RPF were disclosed prior to Project Appraisal in : Second-Vice 
Presidency, Ministry of National Education and Culture, Ministry of Lands, Tourism and 
Environment, Ministry of Development Planning and National Reconstruction, Ministry 
of Solidarity, Human Rights and Gender, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Public Works, 
ABUTIP,  Provincial Education Department, Library of University of Burundi, and 
Library of the World bank in Burundi. They were also disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop 
in Washington, D.C.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/20/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/24/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/16/2006 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/24/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marcelo Becerra 
01/12/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
01/12/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
01/12/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
01/16/2007 
Comments:   
