Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2612 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/13/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burundi 
Project ID: P097974 
Project Name: Multi-Sector Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader: Ventura Bengoechea 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 19, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (60%);Water supply (40%) 
Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to help improve sustainable access and 
delivery of electricity and water services in urban areas by helping Regideso to restore its 
viability and the quality and continuity of services in the face of the increasing demand of people 
and economic agents. The PDO focuses on Regideso as, to date, the development partners focus 
on rural areas.  Hence, the comparative advantage of the proposed project is to provide the right 
balance between emergency measures and long term planning.  The project addresses a critical 
issue by meeting the Government's priority to fill the current gap between supply and demand, 
and at the same time launching long term planning activities, studies, and improving the 
operational capacity of the main institution in order to avoid or at least effectively reduce future 
gaps.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would comprise three components: (i) emergency/short term activities to 
reduce the supply and demand gap in the electricity sector; (ii) emergency/short term activities to 
reduce the supply and demand gap in the water sector; and (iii) strengthening the capacities of 
both Regideso and MEM, as well as the partnership between the utility and the Government.  
Page  2
From an institutional perspective, the first two components focus on Regideso, while the third 
one focuses on Regideso and the MEM.  
 
The proposed implementation period is [5] years; the amount of the IDA grant would be US$30 
million.  The allocation of funding between the components would be the following: US$20 
million for the first component, US$10 million for the second component; and US$2 million for 
the third component. These amounts and distribution will be confirmed at the pre-appraisal 
mission.  
 
Component 1: Emergency/short term activities to fill the supply demand gap in the electricity 
sector (estimated cost US$ 20 million).  
 
This component will focus on increasing, in the short term, the production capacity by 
rehabilitating hydropower plants and network, conducting technical studies and preparing 
bidding documents for future plant/generating units. Specifically, the following activities are 
planned under this component:  
 
1.1 Supply and installation of thermal generators (estimated cost US$7 million) of a total 
capacity ranging from 5 to 10 MW. The type of fuel will be selected based on economic analysis 
to be conducted by Regideso. These generators would function during the shortage period and 
will be kept as back up in the future.  
 
1.2
Rehabilitation of hydroelectric power plants (estimated cost US$2 million).  
 
1.3
Rehabilitation of network (estimated cost US$7.5 million) that would comprise 
rehabilitation of critical substations for the functioning of the network, medium and low voltage 
networks cells, renewal of the obsolete electricity meters.  
 
1.4
Bidding documents (estimated cost US$1.5 million) for the Kabu 16 power plant (20 MW), 
including an update of the technical design. In parallel, potential financing sources (including the 
private sector) for this power plant will be sought so that the procurement process can be 
initiated as soon as the bidding documents are available.  
 
1.5
A
study on renewable energies (estimated cost US$0.5 million), with a focus on energies 
that have a significant potential such as hydroelectricity, and cogeneration based on bagasse and 
peat.  
 
1.6
A
demand management program (estimated cost US$1.5 million) focusing on energy 
savings by households and public customers.  
 
Component 2: Emergency/short term activities to fill the supply-demand gap in the urban water 
supply sector (estimated cost US$ 10 million).  
 
This component will focus on reducing leakage, selective rehabilitation of production facilities 
and networks, extensions in the poor areas and preparing technical studies and tender documents 
for some secondary centers. Specifically, the following investments and studies are planned 
under this component:  
 
2.1
Leakage reduction program (estimated cost US$3 million) that will comprise the purchase 
of specific equipment (leak detection equipment, water flow meters, regulator pressure/pressure 
reducing valves), equipment for the standardization of the connections and the supply of 
specialized services.  
Page  3
2.2 Rehabilitation of water treatment plants (estimated cost US$2 million).  
 
2.3
Rehabilitation of distribution networks (estimated US$2 million).  
 
2.4
Extension of distribution networks (estimated US$2.4 million) with a focus on the northern 
district of Bujumbura that is characterized by a high number of displaced people.  
 
2.5
Studies of rehabilitation and extension (estimated US$0.4 million) with a focus on the urban 
centers that could not be considered in the emergency operations.  
 
2.6
An assessment of the development of urban sanitation services (estimated cost US$0.2 
million), including the identification of suitable technical options and of institutional 
arrangements for the effective delivery of services.  
 
Component 3: capacity building for Regideso and MEM (estimated cost US$ 2 million)  
 
This component will help improve the operational and commercial performance of Regideso, 
the planning and monitoring capacities of the MEM, as well as the effectiveness of the public-
public partnership between Regideso and the Government. The detailed identification of this 
component will be finalized when the information in relation with the envelope that the 
Government will provide will be known. The following activities might be considered:  
 
3.1
Strengthening capacity of financial and business management, and accounting standard 
(including equipment and software) of Regideso.  
 
3.2
Upgrading the operational and customer management of Regideso.  
 
3.3
Strengthening MEM's capacity in formulating policies and sectoral strategies and in 
monitoring sector development.  
 
3.4
Strengthening the contractual relationship between Regideso and the Government (MEM, 
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Planning) and the regulatory framework of the electricity 
and water supply sectors.  
 
3.5
Promoting energy saving on the demand and the supply side and improving the efficiency 
of the production, distribution and use of electricity.  
 
3.6
Improving the management of public sector consumption of water and electricity services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Bujumbura, Burundi   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower institutional capacity in addressing safeguards issues will be further assessed, and 
the Government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank's Safeguards Specialist on the 
project team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not anticipated to cause any irreversible damage to the environment, or to 
forcibly displace beneficiaries from their land. However, re
habilitation works on power plants, 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
substation networks, water treatment plants and distribution networks, have the propensity to 
generate potential site specific environmental and social impacts. To this end, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will have to be prepared by the borrower. This 
ESMF will have to be disclosed in Bujumbura and the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is stated that there will be extension of water distribution networks toward northern 
Bujumbura. These planned interventions are not expected to lead to new land acquisition or 
restriction of access to sources of livelihood. However, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared as due diligence. This will have to be disclosed before appraisal   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/12/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
All of the borrower's  safeguards instruments (ESMF and RPF) are expected to start 
tentatively in late December 2006. The completed studies will be disclosed in the Infoshop 
prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ventura Bengoechea 
12/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/07/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Catherine D. Farvacque-Vitkovic 
12/07/2006 
Comments:   
