Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/06/2006 
Report No.:  AC2494
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burundi 
Project ID:  P095211 
Project Name:  Community and Social Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Valerie Marie Helene Layr 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 27, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Decentralization 
(S);Other social development (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to establish and operationalize a decentralized, 
participatory and transparent financing mechanism that empowers local governments and 
communities for better and equitable local service delivery. The project will achieve its 
objective through community empowerment, capacity building (planning, managerial, 
financial, and technical), investments in socio-economic projects and social cohesion 
activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has three main components :  
 
Component A: Capacity Building - US$ 5.5 million.  
 
This component aims at empowering the stakeholders for the decentralization process, 
focusing on (i) enhancing the capacities of communes and communities in the process of 
local development and (ii) strengthening capacities towards augmenting social cohesion 
and inclusion. This component will be fully subcontracted to facilitation agencies (FA) 
(NGOs or consulting firms recruited through national bidding process) with performance 
Page  2
and results based contracts. Each would set up local animation teams to work at the 
commune and community levels.  
 
To achieve these objectives, this component will be divided in two sub-components:  
 
-
Sub-component 1.1: Facilitation for local development  
 
The Project will provide capacity building activities to address the technical and 
fiduciary skills needed at the community and commune levels to undertake participatory 
planning and to initiate, prepare, implement, manage and monitor subprojects. 
Strengthening will aim also at establishing an accountability mechanism and high 
transparency in use of funds. Trainings would cover participatory assessment, 
procurement, participatory monitoring, local governance, safeguards, etc. Capacity 
building will be also provided to strengthen the capacities of the Department of 
Decentralization of the Ministry of Interior, at the central and decentralized level. It will 
focus mainly on monitoring and evaluation of facilitation activities at the commune and 
community level.  
 
-
Sub-component 1.2.: Strengthening social inclusion and cohesion.  
 
The project will finance a wide range of capacity-building activities destined to 
strengthening social inclusion and cohesion. In particular, the project will support and 
finance activities on information, education and communication (IEC) on the 
marginalized groups, including training, sensitization and organizational support. The 
marginalized population groups retained for the Project are as follows: orphans; 
households affected by HIV/AIDS; destitute women; the Batwa people; displaced and 
returned people; handicapped people; and the youth.  
 
These activities will be deployed at three levels:  
 
(i) 
the actors of local governance, such as members of the communal councils and 
communal administrators, in order for the marginalized groups to be better understood 
and better supported through local planning and decision-making, and through the 
implementation of development subprojects;  
 
(ii) 
the organizations that represent or support the marginalized groups (such as 
ONGs and grassroots committees) in order to strengthen their support and assistance 
activities towards the marginalized population groups; and  
 
(iii) 
the associations of marginalized groups, in order to strengthen their own 
organizational capacities, their participation and their responses to their specific 
problems.  
 
Component B: Financing Subprojects for Local Development ? US$ 30 million.  
 
This component will finance collective interventions as identified in communal 
development plans or arising from the participatory planning process by communes and 
communities if no communal development plan is in place yet. It has two 
subcomponents.  
 
-
Sub-component 2.1.: Financing public subprojects.  
 
The project will provide financial support to the communes and communities to 
implement demand-driven public subprojects. The financial support will be provided 
Page  3
through a grant and complemented by a contribution from the beneficiaries. The 
commune would be in charge of the implementation of the subprojects, although it can 
delegate implementation and management responsibilities to a community when the 
subproject benefits to that community. All subprojects will be approved by the 
Communal Council but relevant technical services must give their clearance to ensure the 
consistency of the project with sectoral policies and national quality criteria, as well as 
the availability of human resources and equipment if needed. Communes and 
communities will have an open menu of activities, including capacity-building activities, 
as long as they don?t belong to the negative list. Eligibility criteria and procedures of use 
are described in the Project Implementation Manual. The subprojects could fall into the 
following sectors: health, education, transportation, water and sanitation, culture and 
sport support, collective economic infrastructure (e.g. markets, slaughterhouses, bus 
station).  
 
-
Sub-component 2.2.: Subprojects to strengthen social inclusion and cohesion  
 
This subcomponent aims at strengthening social inclusion and cohesion through the 
implementation of subprojects targeted to the marginalized population groups, in the 
participating communes and communities. The marginalized population groups retained 
for the Project are as follows: orphans; households affected by HIV/AIDS; destitute 
women; the Batwa people; displaced and returned people; handicapped people; and the 
youth. These are the most vulnerable people in the current social context of Burundi. 
They are simultaneously the most critical to augment social inclusion and cohesion at the 
community level.  
 
The project will finance three major tyES of subprojects: (i) subprojects targeted to 
specific needs of marginalized groups, such as schooling and housing; (ii) professional 
and vocational training, and alphabetization programs, targeted principally to the most 
vulnerable people; and (iii) provision of community services for counseling and 
assistance (particularly services of juridical assistance and psychosocial counseling 
destined principally to the marginalized groups). No local contribution will be requested. 
In most cases, the communes will contract specialized organizations or consultants to 
implement the subprojects, since marginalized groups require adequate methods, 
approaches and sufficient operative legitimacy (e.g. ONG, local associations, or 
specialists, depending on the cases).  
 
Component C: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Communication ? 
US$ 3.9 million.  
 
The project will finance spending related to technical, administrative and financial 
management, strengthening of the capacity of the structures involved in the coordination 
of the implementation of the project.  An integrated system of monitoring and evaluation 
will be set up. The project will implement communication and informative strategies.   
 
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will focus on 8 provinces (Bubanza, Cankuzo, Kirundo, Makamba, 
Muramvya, Muyinga, Mwaro and Ngozi, representing 50 rural communes) as other 
similar projects are supporting the remaining provinces. However, it is possible that the 
Project complements their activities if needed.  
 
The Project will finance collective subprojects identified by communes and 
communities. Most of them may include constructions but their exact location can not be 
determined beforehand because of the demand-driven dimension of the Project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTS3) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is not expected to have large scale impacts. It will have limited 
environmental and social impacts related to some subprojects, such as construction and 
rehabilitation of health facilities, feeder roards and water and sanitation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have negative environmental impacts. The minor potential 
negative environmental impacts may result from the implementation of certain subproject 
activities, particularly community infrastructures (schools, small-scale health canters, 
rural road segments) and the activities related to such constructions. Negative 
environmental impacts may include land erosion, water and air pollution, and pollution 
from medical waste.  
 
Page  5
With regard to the social sector, the Project could create negative impacts such as 
conflicts related to land in case of expropriation and involuntary resettlement, social 
exclusion and equity issues.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As the exact location, scale, and materials/technologies to be financed under the 
PRADECS were not known at appraisal, the Recipient has prepared an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
and an Indigenous People's Development Plan (IPDP) to identify and mitigate potential 
negative environmental and social impacts of future sub-projects.  
 
1) The ESMF The Environmental and Social Management Framework provides the 
project with due analysis, recommendations and operative guidance to prevent the 
environmental impacts, and to mitigate them if prevention is not possible. It includes: (i) 
a
clear description of project components; (ii) a brief baseline information pertaining to 
policy, legal, and administrative and institutional framework, within which the project is 
to be implemented; (iii) an analysis of potential positive and negative impacts; (iv) an 
environmental management plan (EMP) with clear institutional arrangements, roles and 
responsibilities for screening, implementing and monitoring sub-projects, along with their 
capacity building requirements to effectively mitigate project negative impacts, as well as 
enhance its positive ones; (v) a monitoring plan and (vi) a budget to cover the EMP.  
 
2) The RPF outlines the policies and procedures to be followed in the event that sub-
projects require land acquisition.  
 
3) The IPDP provides information supplementary to the ESMF and the RPF. An IPDP 
has been prepared to ensure that PRADECS will respect the rights, interests, dignity and 
culture of the Batwa population as well as to ensure that they will benefit from the 
project. The IPDP was elaborated in a participatory manner through: (i) discussions with 
Batwa individuals or Batwa households; (ii) taking into account the point of view of 
organization supporting the promotion of the Batwa population; (iii) meetings with 
administrative authorities and local elected officials; and (iv) discussions with technical 
services and international and national NGOs. The IPDP includes (i) a baseline, (ii) an 
evaluation of possible impacts of the project, (iii) activities to be conducted to ensure 
similar benefits towards Batwas than towards other communities, (iv) monitoring and 
evaluation arrangements and (v) a budget.  
 
All subprojects will have to complete an environmental and social evaluation form, 
which will be part of the subproject application. Based on the environmental analysis 
conducted during project preparation, it appears that the most requested subprojects 
would be classified in the environmental and social categories B (moderate risk) or C (no 
Page  6
risk). To prevent or mitigate these risks, some mitigating measures have been proposed in 
the Environmental and Social Management Framework. These measures will be taken 
into consideration at 3 levels: (i) during preparation of subproject applications, (ii) during 
the monitoring of the subproject execution; and (iii) throughout the whole Project's 
management. For subprojects classified in the category A, an environmental impact study 
would be conducted, but this type of project is unlikely under the Project.  
 
An Executive Secretariat will have the responsibility for implementing the Project. It 
will include a socio-environmental specialist in charge of the main following aspects:  
 
(i) 
Social participation, in particular participation necessary for planning (communal 
and collinaire development plans) and for the execution and management of micro 
projects;  
 
(ii) 
Involvement and participation taking into account priority marginalized groups of 
the PRADECS : displaced populations and returnees, youth, orphans, woman head of 
household, household affected by HIV/AIDS, the Batwa population and the handicapped;  
 
(iii) 
Quality control of the environmental and social dimensions of subprojects, 
through support to provincial and local actors in terms of monitoring of environmental 
and social analyses, of control of the implementation of prevention and mitigation 
measures and the review of environmental and social aspects in the monitoring and 
evaluation system of PRADECS.  
 
Furthermore, the Project will contract an environmental consultant for a period of 2 
months per year: (i) train the socio-environmental specialist of the Executive Secretariat 
and other staff involved with environmental aspects; (ii) prepare and disseminate guides 
and other tools for environmental evaluation of communal micro projects  and to set up 
prevention and mitigation measures for negative impacts; (iii) verify in the field 
environmental aspects of the PRADECS by suggesting improvements; and (iv) prepare 
activities and materials necessary for the environmental training of communes.  
 
Finally, the Project will rely on the decentralized staff of the Ministry of Environment at 
provincial level. In every province there are personnel from the Ministry of Land 
Management, Environment and Tourism, whether specialists on forestry, protected areas 
or rural engineering. They are very competent resource persons to participate in the 
environmental monitoring of the project. For every province, the Ministry of Land 
Management, Environment and Tourismand the Project's Executive Secretariat, in 
consultation with the Governor, will select an environment officer for project's 
environmental monitoring purposes. They will receive adequate training and will be 
provided with travel costs (per diem) during field visits.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Land Management, Environment and Tourism, 
the Ministry of Interior and Public Security, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of 
Education, the Ministry of National Solidarity, Human rights and Gender, the Ministry of 
Public Works and Equipment,local governments, health care staff, sanitation workers, 
Batwa populations and potentially affected persons. Consultations were conducted by the 
Page  7
teams in charge of the preparation of the safeguards documents. They occured from July 
until end of October 2006 and included: (i) field visits and meetings with local 
authorities, local NGOs, technical services, marginalized groups (Batwas, women, 
orphans, youth, handicapped, rapatriates; (ii) meetings / workshops with specialized 
associations, public services. The ESMF, RPF and IPDP were disclosed via newspaper in 
Burundi and at Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/27/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  8
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Valerie Marie Helene Layrol 
12/06/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
12/06/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
12/06/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francois G. Le Gall 
12/06/2006 
Comments:   
