Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/22/2006 
Report No.:  AC2312
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P100084 
Project Name:  Avian and Human Influenza Control and Preparedness Emergency 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Guzman P. Garcia-Rivero 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASRD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (50%);Animal production (50%) 
Theme:  Other communicable diseases (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Natural 
disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
3.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
2.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Consistent with the GPAI, the Project's overall development objective is to support the 
implementation of the Cambodia Comprehensive AHI National Plan contributing to 
minimize the threat posed to humans and the poultry sector by AHI infection in 
Cambodia, and to prepare for, control, and respond if necessary to a human influenza 
pandemic.  More specifically, the Project is expected to provide direct support to the 
implementation of the National Comprehensive AHI Plan to produce the following 
outcomes: (a) contain the spread of the disease, thus reducing losses in the livelihoods of 
commercial and backyard poultry growers and damages to the poultry industry and 
diminishing the viral load in the environment; (b) prevent or limit human morbidity and 
mortality by stemming opportunities for human infection, and strengthening curative care 
capacity; and (c) prevent or curtail macroeconomic disruption and losses by reducing the 
probability of a human pandemic and improving emergency preparedness and response.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project would finance activities under four components: (i) Component A-control 
measures minimizing the risk of HPAI in the animal population; (ii) Component B-health 
systems preparedness and response to possible human infections; (iii) Component C-
behavior change, health education, and communications; and (iv) Component D-
strengthening project coordination and management systems, including institutional and 
legal frameworks, as well as monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  
 
1.  Component A - Animal Health.  This component will support national strategies to 
prevent, control, and eradicate HPAI among the animal population by enhancing 
surveillance and diagnostic capacity, upgrade bio-security, controlling poultry 
movements, building capacity for disease control and containment of possible outbreaks, 
conduct village level communications and farmers awareness campaigns, and providing 
help in the medium- to long-term restructuring of the poultry sector.  
 
2.  Component B - Human Health.  The component will build the capacity of the health 
sector to respond in the short- and longer-term to epidemics. This will occur through 
enhancing public health program planning and coordination to respond; early warning 
systems to better monitor and prevent epidemics at an early stage; and enhancing health 
system response capacity to cope with increased demand for services efficiently and 
improve infrastructure and management of the AHI referral hospitals.  
 
3.  Component C - Behavior Change, Health Education, and Communications.  The 
component is designed to safeguard the health of the general population, in particular 
extension staff, animal health workers, poultry producers and their families.  This will be 
accomplished through improving public awareness and information.  
 
4.  Component D - Strengthening Project Coordination and Management Systems, 
including Institutional and Legal Frameworks, as well as Monitoring and Evaluation 
(M&E). This component will support strengthening of public structures for coordination 
and management of the Project, including central and decentralized arrangements for 
coordination of activities, financial management and procurement.  M&E is also 
supported to better inform immediate decision making and future strategy formulation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in coverage.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal (EASEN) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not expected to have any large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts 
as it is focused largely on public sector capacity building and strengthening readiness for 
dealing with outbreaks of avian influenza (AI) in domestic poultry as well as preventing 
or reducing possible human infections by strengthening emergency preparedness and 
response.  In addition, the project design incorporates other beneficial measures such as 
improved biosecurity in farms and live markets, and control of poultry movement within 
and across countries.  The project's preventive activities (funding of facilities, equipment, 
laboratories, procedures, and training programs), aimed at improving the effectiveness 
and safety over the existing the AI practices, will have positive human health and 
environmental impacts. As such, the project is assigned an Environmental category B.  
 
Among the Bank's safeguards policies, only the policy on Environmental Assessment is 
triggered.  The Bank's policy on Pest Management is not triggered as the project will not 
procure any pesticides nor will increase use of pesticides will result from the project 
(however, the chemicals to be used for the disinfection of farm facilities/personal 
protection equipment will be evaluated on a case by case basis for conformity with the 
OP 4.09 for Pest Management).  The Bank's policy on Involuntary Resettlement is not 
triggered as no involuntary land acquisition or displacement of people is expected under 
the project (however, compensation of farmers for the loss of poultry has been 
incorporated into the project design).  The Bank's policy on Indigenous Peoples is not 
triggered as the project does not have any adverse physical, cultural or economic impacts 
on indigenous peoples communities, or the project is not expected to cause any restricted 
access to natural resources by the indigenous peoples (however, the project design will 
incorporate means to effectively reach the indigenous peoples).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Adverse human health and environmental impacts might occur, mainly through the 
inadvertent spread of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza virus (HPAI), if appropriate 
Page  4
mitigation measures are not in place or not properly followed.  Such impacts may result 
from inadvertent human exposure and spread of the virus during:  (i) culling of poultry, 
(ii) transportation of live or culled poultry infected by HPAI virus, (iii) disposal of animal 
carcasses, (iv) decontamination of infected areas, (v) disposal of farm waste (e.g.  
manure, AI waste cleaning wastewaters from the isolation/quarantined zones), and (vi) 
disposal of wastes from HPAI diagnostic/research laboratories and referral hospitals 
treating HPAI-infected people.  Groundwater contamination may result if animal 
carcasses and other HPAI-infected farm wastes are buried at sites where groundwater 
water table is high and/or soil is permeable.  In addition, dioxins/furans may be emitted if 
chlorine-bearing wastes (animal carcasses or farm wastes pre-treated with chlorine-
bearing disinfectants or PVC bags) are incinerated.  In addition, at diagnostic/research 
laboratories and referral hospitals, lack of use of appropriate personal protection 
equipment or poor management of healthcare wastes would possibly cause risks to 
human health and/or environment.  All these unintended impacts will be avoided by 
taking appropriate mitigation measures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives will be considered for methods for culling poultry, disposal of animal 
carcasses and farm wastes, treatment and disposal of infectious wastes from referral 
hospitals and diagnostic/research laboratories, and chemicals  used for disinfection.  
 
(1)  Based on OIE/FAO guidelines, alternative methods will be considered for safe, 
humane and efficient culling of poultry in the AI affected zones to prescribe an 
acceptable method in the Procedures Manual.  These methods will include: (i) neck 
breaking (manual), (ii) neck cutting (using mechanical devices such as Burdizzo), (iii) 
gassing with inhalation agents (e.g. carbon dioxide), and (iv) electrocution. (The culling 
procedure, which has been used in Cambodia involves neck breaking). The selected 
method(s) will be specified in the project's Procedures Manual.  
 
(2)  Alternative disposal methods for animal carcasses and farm wastes generated during 
AI outbreaks will be considered.  These methods will include: (i) burial in a pit, (ii) open 
air burning (cremation), (iii) composting, (iv) incineration at a fixed location, and (v) 
mobile incineration.  The selected method(s) will be specified in the project's Procedures 
Manual.  
 
(3)  Alternative options will be considered for the treatment/disposal of infectious 
wastes from referral hospitals and diagnostic/research laboratories.  These methods will 
include:  (i) incineration, (ii) autoclaving, (iii) microwaving, and (iv) safe burial.  The 
selected method will be specified in the healthcare waste management plan for 
diagnostic/research laboratories and each referral hospital.  
 
(4)   Alternative chemicals will be evaluated for disinfection.  The selection will be 
based on such criteria as impacts of chemicals on human health and the environment, 
availability and cost of chemicals in Cambodia.  The selected chemical will conform to 
the Bank's Pest Management Policy.   
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project design will integrate the following measures to be used for activities under 
each component, as follows:  
 
Component A.  The following actions will be taken:  (i) safe, humane, and efficient 
culling of infected and at-risk poultry, (ii) safe transportation (e.g. transportation in 
closed containers) of AI-infected animals (live or carcasses); (iii) safe disposal of animal 
carcasses and farm wastes, (iv) training for veterinary service workers through 
procedures for safe handling of AI materials, (v) consideration for personal hygiene and 
waste management during refurbishment/construction of reference/regional diagnostic 
laboratories, and (vi) promotion of safe manure management practices during poultry 
sector restructuring program (for backyard as well as commercial poultry production).  
Personal protection equipment will be used in locations or activities which pose the risk 
of AI virus infection.  The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry of Fisheries (MAFF) is 
experienced in coping with AI outbreaks, based on the major outbreaks during January-
March 2004, and subsequent fewer outbreaks in 2004, 2005 and 2006, with the resulting 
death and culling of many birds, and the loss of six human lives (in 2005 and 2006).  
Through this experience, MAFF with the support from FAO has prepared a manual 
regarding surveillance and control of AI at the village level.  If burial is to be selected as 
the preferred option for disposal of animal carcasses and farm wastes, then the burial site 
will be selected based on screening using a predetermined site selection criteria.  If 
incineration is to be selected for disposal of these wastes, then no chlorine-bearing 
material will be introduced to incineration (e.g. no use of chlorine-bearing disinfectants, 
no use of PVC bags). During project implementation, institutional capacity will be 
strengthened through preparation of an updated Procedures Manual and training of the 
Ministry's personnel on these procedures.  
 
Component B.  The following activities will be taken:  (i) improvement/rehabilitation of 
isolation centers for AI patients at selected referral hospitals, (ii) preparation healthcare 
waste management manuals, and (iii) training of staff to implement the plan.  In the event 
of human infections of AI, during project implementation, the Ministry of Health (MoH) 
will develop an Emergency Plan for rapid intervention for AI outbreak.  As part of this 
Emergency Plan, for each identified referral hospital, a specific healthcare waste 
management plan will be developed. Training of referral hospital staff and selected MoH 
staff will be provided on healthcare waste management procedures.  
 
Component C.  There are no environmental issues.  However, this component will 
include the design and delivery of effective communications tools for good hygiene, safe 
culling and disposal of animal carcasses and AI-infected farm wastes.  
 
Component D.  There are no environmental issues.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project stakeholders include:  (i) poultry farmers in Cambodia, (ii) consumers of 
poultry meat and eggs, (iii) public institutions such as Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries (MAFF), the Ministry of Health (MOH), Ministry of Finance, and National 
Committee for Disaster Management (NCDM), and (iv) provincial and local officials.  
Mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguards policies will be addressed 
during the appraisal mission.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/31/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Given the processing of this project under ERL procedures, the Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared by a consultant to be engaged by the 
Government during the early stages of project implementation. The EMP will include:  (i) 
a
description of the project, (ii) an overview of the applicable national/local laws and 
international requirements, (iii) potential environmental impacts, (iv) a description of 
mitigation measures (design, equipment, operating procedures, proposed measures for 
public consultation), (iv) monitoring and supervision program, (v) implementation 
arrangements, (vi) consultation and disclosure, and (vii) reporting.  The Consultant will 
use the information from the EMP to prepare a Procedures Manual that will include:  (i) 
detailed procedures for Component A, and (ii) waste management plans for Component 
B
(one plan for each of the five referral hospital).  
 
Full disclosure of these documents will be done after final approval by the Bank.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
Page  7
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Guzman P. Garcia-Rivero 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
 
Comments:   
