Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2461 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/07/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P101156 
Project Name: KH Demand For Good Governance Project 
Task Team Leader: Bhuvan Bhatnagar 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Other accountability/anti-corruption (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective of the Project is to build the capacities of institutions, and 
to support programs and coalitions which promote, mediate or address demand for good 
governance in the context of the government?s reforms. This will result in more effective design, 
implementation and monitoring of key reforms, and more transparency, accountability and 
responsiveness of the state to citizens.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project would finance four components:  
 
Component I: Institution Building  
 
The effectiveness of many Cambodian institutions working on DFGG is often constrained by 
short-term, piecemeal (and project-focused) donor funding. This inhibits their steady growth as 
dynamic and durable institutions. The Project will provide long-term ?core? institutional support 
to a limited number of existing DFGG institutions. Working with CSOs, government, donors and 
other stakeholders, the Project will employ institutional mapping techniques to identify and 
assess the capacity and performance of potential candidates. Priority will be given to those 
institutions that have an established track record of improving governance.  
Page  2
Core budget and program support will be provided to the selected institutions over a three to 
five year period, or longer. This will enable them to train leaders and staff, enhance strategic 
planning, develop effective programs, strengthen fiduciary and other safeguards, mobilize 
resources, prepare and implement sustainability plans, and undertake performance and impact 
assessments.  
 
Component II: Programmatic and Networking Support  
 
Despite the growth of CSOs and other efforts to promote DFGG, there are discernible gaps in 
terms of geographic and thematic coverage. Effective networks and linkages among key reform 
actors are also missing. The Project will identify such gaps and support a limited number of 
?programs? (no more than two or three) that have the potential to make, mediate or address 
demand for better governance. These programs may be proposed by both government units and 
non-government groups. Priority would be given to activities that promote joint and coordinated 
interaction, horizontally (among non-state actors) and vertically (between citizens/CSOs and the 
state).  
 
In collaboration with other partners, the Project will map existing DFGG activities and gaps in 
particular locations and/or themes, design terms of reference for the ?Request for Proposals? that 
would invite applications, provide assistance to facilitate high-quality proposals, approve 
proposals around a common program rationale, and establish a monitoring and evaluation system 
to assess the impact of interventions on the targeted reform areas. Successful programs and 
institutions would receive ?scaling up? support (likely through Component 1).  
 
To maximize effectiveness of, and complementarities between, Components I and II, the reform 
areas addressed by the institutions selected may be the ones on which funded programs will 
focus. Going further, the institutions and programs supported through Components I and II 
respectively could be integrated around a common rationale, objective(s) and related activities.  
 
Component III: Project Implementation  
 
Two separate funding channels will be created to support state and non-state institutions and 
programs. Funding of state institutions and programs will be managed by a state entity, while 
non-state institutions and programs will be managed by a non-state entity. A multi-stakeholder 
committee will provide oversight and linkages across the two funding channels. This component 
will finance the incremental operating costs of the Project for the management and oversight 
entities, including office infrastructure and recurrent costs, training, consultancies, establishment 
of monitoring and evaluation systems, studies and other technical services.  
 
Component IV: Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
Since DFGG is becoming a major theme within the Bank, there will be much to learn from the 
Project, both for Cambodia and similar high-risk countries elsewhere. The Project will 
incorporate an active and fully-funded learning-by-doing approach where lessons of what works, 
and what does not, are captured systematically, with an eye to replication and scaling up.  
 
Impacts and results are typically difficult to assess in Bank-financed projects. Also, there is 
limited experience in impact assessments of demand side approaches. Nevertheless, the Project 
will make best efforts to install a robust and creative M&E framework. The Project will select 
Page  3
and pursue a limited number of activities where early results can be demonstrated, in order to 
build stakeholder confidence in the Project?s capacity to deliver results.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will have a national coverage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An assessment of the institutional capacity of the borrower for Safeguard Policies will be done as 
part of the preparation process, if appropriate.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Some of the initiatives may involve indigenous communities and their quest for getting their 
rights recognized.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/13/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
..   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bhuvan Bhatnagar 
07/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cyprian F. Fisiy 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
