Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2007 
Report No.: 39671 
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P105715 
Project Name:  Rural Investment and Local Governance 
–
Additional Financing  
Task Team Leader:  Louise F. Scura 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 19-24, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Additional Financing 
Grant 
Sector:   
Theme:   
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
74.73 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
36.25 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Project to Support Democratic Development  
through Decentralization and Deconcentration  
(UNDP, DFID, SIDA) (US$m)                                                           17.22 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Additional Financing 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [] 
No [X ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of RILGP are to assist rural development and poverty 
reduction efforts through supporting provision of priority public goods and infrastructure 
at the commune level, as well as promoting good local governance through support of 
decentralized and deconcentrated participatory local governance systems at the commune 
and provincial levels. 
 
3. Project Description 
 
The Additional Financing would scale-up and enhance the development impact of the 
original two components: (a) Local Planning and Investment and (b) Policy Support and 
Project Management. 
 
a. 
Local Planning and Investment
 :
i. 
Provision of support to the decentralized planning process at the commune 
level, through development of five year Commune/Sangkat Development Plans, 
Page  2
three year rolling Commune/Sangkat Investment Programs and annual commune 
budgets for implementing said plans. 
 
ii. 
Provision of Sub-project Grants for small-scale rural infrastructure 
investment projects at the commune level in twenty-three (23) Project Provinces 
identified and prioritized through the participatory local planning process. 
 
b. 
Policy Support and Project Management:
 
i. 
Strengthening of the Borrower’s institutions at all levels to enable them to 
implement, supervise, monitor and evaluate the Project and achieve its objectives, 
through provision of capacity building, technical assistance, logistical and 
operational support. 
 
ii. 
Carrying out a Program for support of (a) policy reform, including: (i) 
undertaking strategic studies on decentralization and deconcentration; and (b) 
project management, including: (i) undertaking process, technical and other 
assessments of aspects of C/S-related planning, budgeting, implementation and 
conflict resolution, (ii) conducting surveys for monitoring and evaluating the 
socio-economic impacts of the Sub-projects, (iii) monitoring procurement and 
technical support to respective Commune Councils in the Project Provinces, (iv) 
conducting the mid-term and final Project evaluations, (v) conducting annual 
external audits of the Project accounts, (vi) conducting national-level workshops 
on periodic reviews of Project activities; (vii) constructing an office building for 
the NCDD Secretariat Program Support Team, (viii) rehabilitating and 
constructing NCDDS and respective PRDC Executive Committee’s office 
buildings in  selected Project Provinces; and (ix) equipping the NCDD Secretariat 
Program Support Team, PRDC Executive Committees and Provincial Treasuries 
in the Project Provinces with office equipment, furniture and transportation 
vehicles.
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
 
The original project area covered 15 provinces, and the Additional Financing will support 
expansion of the project area to 23 provinces in the second year of the Additional 
Financing (Calendar Year 2008).  The original 15 RILGP provinces are: Battambang, 
Banteay Meanchey, Kompong Cham, Kompong Chhnang, Kompong Speu , Kratie, Otdar 
Meanchey, Pailin, Pursat, Prey Veng, Prey Vihear, Ratanakiri, Siem Reap, Svay Rieng, 
Takeo.  The eight additional provinces include: Kampong Thom, Kampot, Kandall, Kok 
Kong, Kep, Mondulkiri,  Sihanoukville, and Stung Treng. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mrs. Susan Shen (EASRE), Mr. Leng Bunlong (EASRE) 
Mr. Daniel Gibson (EASSD), Mr. Lars Lund (Consultant) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The original RILGP Credit was rated as a Category B project.  The rating was based on 
the small-scale of sub-project interventions which focus on provision of small-scale rural 
infrastructure, and that the potential adverse impacts of these sub-projects would occur 
only during the construction period and would be limited in geographic scope.  The 
potential impacts will be manageable through site selection criteria and simple 
construction management techniques.  The proposed Additional Financing will not raise 
the environmental safeguards category, nor will it trigger new safeguards policies. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
None. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
Sub-project screening under the existing safeguards frameworks includes analysis of sub-
project alternatives, such as re-location of a road path to avoid or mitigate possible 
impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project design and/or implementation will integrate the following actions to avoid or 
minimize key potential impacts: 
 
The social and environmental safeguards measures under the project include the 
following three frameworks: 
Environmental Analysis and Commune Sub-Project Review 
Procedures, 
the 
Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures for Commune Sub-
Page  4
Projects, 
and the 
Highland Peoples Development Plan.
 
The safeguard frameworks were 
agreed during preparation of the original RILGP Credit, incorporated in the 
Commune/Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual, and apply to the entire C/S 
Fund, not just IDA-financed portion and not just in the provinces in the original RILGP 
project area.  Thus these safeguard frameworks would equally apply to the RILGP 
Additional Financing Grant. 
 
During implementation of the RILGP Credit, the compliance with environmental and 
social safeguards provisions has been satisfactory.  Nonetheless, the appraisal noted that 
the capacity for effective implementation of environmental and social safeguards of the 
C/S Councils and Provincial Rural Development Committees (PRDCs) in the proposed 
new provinces may not be as high as in those supported through the RILGP Credit. A 
review has been commissioned under the RILGP Credit to: (a) evaluate implementation 
of the social and environmental safeguard guidelines, and in doing so to acquire baseline 
information for systematic monitoring in the following years; (b) develop 
recommendations for improvements to the guidelines; and (c) develop and deliver a 
course of training to enhance the environmental impact awareness of concerned officials.  
In addition, to ensure continued good implementation, the national consultant engaged 
under the RILGP Credit to advise NCDD on implementation of the agreed safeguards 
measures will continue to be supported out of the Additional Financing grant. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project stakeholders include: (i) Commune/Sangkat Councils in Cambodia, (ii) 
Commune/Sangkat residents, (iii) public institutions such as National Committee for 
Mangement of Decentralization and Deconcentration Reforms, Ministry of Interior, 
Ministry of Economy and Finance, and (iv) Provincial Rural Development Committees 
and support units under the ExCom, as well as provincial and district officials.  
Mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguards policies have been in place 
since preparation of the original RILGP Credit.  These documents are available in 
English at the STFS Library in Phnom Penh and in corresponding PRDC offices in each 
of the provinces participating in project implementation under the Credit. Additionally, 
the documents were disclosured at the World Bank Office Public Information Center in 
Phnom Penh, and through the Bank Infoshop in Washington.  Khmer language versions 
of the draft documents are also available in the same places in-country.  Before the 
documents were finalized, advertisements were placed in both English and Khmer 
language newspapers in Phnom Penh indicating the locations where the documents are 
available, and the public was invited to comment on the draft documents.  No comments 
were received.  The final frameworks were included as Annexes 13, 14, 15 in the Project 
Appraisal Document and disclosed through the World Bank Office Public Information 
Center in Phnom Penh, and through the Bank Infoshop in Washington. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Drafts Final 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
1/10/2003 
3/11/2003 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
1/10/2003 
3/05/2003 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
1/10/2003 
3/27/2003 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
NA NA 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is Additional Financing to support scaling-up of the project, expanding from 15 to 
23 provinces, and that safeguard frameworks are already in place and have already been 
disclosed previously under the ongoing Credit.  The safeguards frameworks will be 
disclosed again in the new project provinces before the inclusion of the new provinces at 
the beginning of 2008. 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mrs. Louise F. Scura 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mrs. Susan S. Shen 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel Gibson 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr. Leng Bunlong 
Mr. Lars Lund 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr. Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
