Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2901 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P105397 
Project Name: Cambodia Environment and Protected Areas Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Peter Jipp 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 8, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 4, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (70%);General public administration sector 
(30%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Pollution 
management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to strengthen and expand RGCs ability to manage 
emerging environmental issues through an integrated program that 1) strengthens planning and 
management in selected protected areas; and 2) improves environmental governance and 
strengthens capacity to assess environmental impacts associated with large-scale development 
activities   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project builds upon the experience and lessons of the on-going Bank/GEF 
supported BPAMP, and will take advantage of previous work on environmental management 
sponsored  by other development partners (such as DANIDA and USAID). The project will be 
designed to improve the policy and regulatory environment and strengthen institutional capacity 
for systematic and participatory management in protected areas (benefiting the globally-
important flora and fauna and local communities living in and around these areas). The project 
will also support the broader environmental management agenda through strengthening of the 
Page  2
EIA process, refinement and enforcement of environmental regulations, environmental 
monitoring and promoting good practices for pollution control.  
 
The focus would be on activities under the direct responsibility the Ministry of Environment, 
specifically through the departments of Nature Conservation and Protection, EIA, Pollution 
Control, and Natural Resource Assessment and Environmental Data Management. Opportunities 
for improved coordination with other ministries and stakeholders will also be explored and 
supported as they are identified.  
 
The project is organized around two inter-related components.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Policy and Institutions for Improved Environmental Governance  
 
This component seeks to strengthen the policy and institutional arrangements to improve the 
governance of environmental issues in Cambodia.  Specifically, this will include support for:  
 
?
Strengthening environmental laws, regulations, and policies:  including support for a 
critical analysis of the legal, policy, and regulatory frameworks; development of related 
strategies and action plans to close gaps between the framework and actual practice, and the use 
of Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA)  
 
?
Improving effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs):  including 
support, especially in high priority sectors, for review of constraints in EIA development and 
appraisal including improved business processes for EIA such as information management, 
public participation, timely review, and monitoring of mitigation plans.  
 
?
Strengthening Environmental Institutions:  including support for targeted training and 
studies, institutional assessment; building partnerships among environmental institutions and 
universities; and modernizing capacity to monitor and enforce environmental compliance.  
 
?
Strengthening Environmental Monitoring:  including monitoring ambient and effluent 
levels of targeted pollutants from industrial, municipal, and agricultural sources.  
 
?
Extend Environmental Awareness:  including support for establishing an Environmental 
Information Center; developing strategic communication capacity within MoE and local 
government to foster information exchanges with industry and civil society; strengthening public 
awareness through various mechanisms including State of Environment reports, discussion 
forums, websites, newsletters, and other media.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Development for National Parks Planning and Management  
 
This component will support MoE to expand their efforts to improve planning and management 
of National Parks and Protected Areas; institutionalize the experiences gained and capacities 
developed under BPAMP; and extend site specific participatory conservation activities to a 
number of additional protected areas.  To mainstream project approaches, the DNCP will take on 
full implementation responsibility for this component (dropping the consultant-led Project 
Implementation Unit that operated under BPAMP).  Lessons from BPAMP and other 
international donor experiences will inform detailed project design to be elaborated in the Project 
Appraisal Document.  This component will support:  
 
?
Targeted National Park Support:  expanding the core protected area management 
activities initiated in Virachey National Park (VPN) under BPAMP to four additional protected 
Page  3
areas, and modernizing operations including increased use of appropriate information 
technologies.  
 
?
Improve Landscape-level Biodiversity Planning and Management:  extending 
frameworks for sustainable NRM to areas beyond the boundaries of the targeted PAs, in order to 
maintain critical habitat linkages in the face of rapid land and infrastructure development and 
climate change.  
 
?
Strengthen Community Partnerships for Biodiversity Protection: expanding the 
implementation of community development activities piloted under BPAMP in VNP and 
building partnerships between local communities, protected area management teams, local 
governments and other development partners to enhance awareness and foster livelihood and 
tenure security.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 1 will have a nationwide coverage. For Component 2, support would be for scaling-
up the core site-level protected area management activities initiated for Virachey National Park 
(VNP) under BPAMP to up to 4 other protected areas.  Those areas are likely to fall within the 
northern and eastern provinces of Preah Vihar, Stung Treng, Ratanakiri and Mondulkiri, but the 
final list and profiles of the selected area are to be developed   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
One of the aims of this project is to improve environmental governance and strengthen capacity 
to assess environmental impacts associated with large-scale development activities.  
 
While the RGC requires Environmental Impact Assessments to be conducted on all publicly 
and privately financed projects, the EIA capacity and implementation of environmental planning, 
however, is limited. The key challenges facing the environmental planning process include: (1) 
inadequate coverage of and access to information useful for environmental assessments; (2) poor 
quality of public consultations; (3) Insufficient skill-base, streamlined procedures, and 
professional input for effectively reviewing EIAs and associated management plans in a timely 
fashion; (4) lack of systematic use of upstream planning techniques (e.g. Strategic Environmental 
Assessments) as envisaged in Article 59 of the Country's Constitution.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Asger Christensen (EAPCO) 
Mr Svend Jensby (OPCQC) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
During the PCN Screening, the Safeguard team recommended that during project preparation 
the Task Team that an EA report needs to be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal even for a 
category B project. The scope of such report is yet to be defined as more information is 
available.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
During the PCN Screening, the Safeguard team recommended that during pro
ject preparation 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the Task Team takes into consideration the issue that financing will be provided for the 
development of management plans of National Parks and Protected Areas and extending 
frameworks for sustainable NRM to areas beyond the boundaries of the targeted protected areas, 
and that these management plans should outline mechanisms to avoid, mitigate and/or monitor 
possible environmental and social impacts.  If the project’s design only includes policy-oriented 
management plans, such mechanisms would form the basis of compliance with OP 4.01.  If, on 
the other hand, the scope of the management plans expands to include specific recommendations 
for infrastructure and other investments in protected areas, additional information may be 
required in the EA, such as environmental procedures for managing small-scale works. The 
project can benefit from many existing guidelines and manuals for the construction of ecological 
paths, access roads, administration buildings, etc. in protected areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The Forests policy is triggered whenever any Bank-financed investment project: (i) has the 
potential to have impacts on the health and quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests; or (ii) aims to bring about changes 
in the management, protection or utilization of natural forests or plantations.  The issues 
associated with this policy should be evaluated as project design advances, and confirmed at the 
QER   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Assess cultural property issues, and include, as necessary, regulations and procedures for the 
appropriate protection and preservation of historical or archeological sites in compliance with 
this policy. If the protected areas system includes areas of cultural importance, the policy should 
probably be triggered   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
In Cambodia, the Bank has determined that OP 4.10 applies to minority “highland peoples” 
estimated to total around 120,000, and which do not include Vietnamese and Chinese 
descendants, Muslim Chams and ethnic Lao.  
 
The proposed project will undertake “targeted national park support” in up to four projected 
areas, which are expected to include indigenous minority groups to which OP 4.10 applies.  Four 
provinces have been identified, but the final selection of protected areas within these is still to be 
undertaken.  The instruments required under OP 4.10 will depend on whether the identification 
of protected areas is done before appraisal.  If the areas are identified, site specific Indigenous 
Peoples Plans (IPP) are required. If the areas are not finally identified, an Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework needs to be in place by appraisal to guide the development of site specific 
IPPs.  
 
A
Social Assessment is planned to be undertaken during project preparation.  The ISDS 
states that the experience from the preceding Biodiversity & Protected Areas Management 
Project has been poor quality of public consultations. A central element of the Social Assessment 
should be to inform, develop, and conduct an improved approach that ensures free, prior, and 
informed consultation with affected indigenous minority groups on such issues as restrictions in 
access to natural resources, alternative livelihood options, and legal recognition of ownership, 
occupation or usage of remaining lands (cf. para 17 in OP 4.10)   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The policy may be triggered both by (a) the need for acce
ss to land for infrastructure such as 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
park headquarters, and (b) introduction of restrictions on natural resource use by communities 
living inside or in the surroundings of protected areas.  If the final selection of protected areas 
and determination of restrictions in access to resource utilization have been undertaken by 
appraisal, specific Resettlement Plans would be required.  If the areas have not been selected and 
restrictions in resource utilization by local indigenous groups have not been determined by 
appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework is required . This framework should include 
description of a process in which alternative livelihood options would be developed in agreement 
with the affected population.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/31/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The PCN safeguards review should take place following the preparation mission and prior to 
the QER.  The timing of the review meeting will be agreed upon by the TTL and EAP 
Safeguards Secretariat.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter Jipp 
05/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/07/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
05/30/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
