Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/02/2006 
Report No.:  AC2307
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P087945 
Project Name:  Cambodia Public Financial Management and Accountability 
Task Team Leader:  Robert R. Taliercio 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASPR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Tax policy and 
administration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
14.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50 
 
AUSTRALIA: AUSTRALIAN AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 2.25 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)8.40 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
3.90 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  3.00
19.05 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
In order to set the stage for improved service delivery and reduced corruption (the higher 
level objectives), the development objective of the project is to strengthen public 
financial management by strengthening: (1) the mobilization of public resources (as 
measured by increases in tax and non-tax revenues as a percentage of GDP and 
accountable stewardship of oil revenue), (2) the management of public resources (as 
measured by more predictable and reliable budget implementation and reduced fiduciary 
risk), (3) the management of human resources (as measured by the number of ministries 
with civil servants motivated by effective incentive levels and managed by meritocratic 
procedures), and (4) external audit (as measured by the extent of audit coverage in line 
with international audit standards and number of audit reports submitted to the National 
Assembly). Progress against the principal objective will be measured by the PFMRP’s 
Performance Management Framework.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Revenue Management: This component will support: modernization of the Tax 
Department, including strengthening of core tax administration functions and 
improvements in accountability arrangements; improvements in non-tax revenue policy 
and administration; and oil revenue management, which would develop policy and 
strengthen institutional arrangements for transparent oil and gas revenue management. 
Budget Formulation: This component will strengthen the Recipient’s capacity to 
formulate and integrate its budget. Budget Execution: This component would support 
establishment of a Financial Management Information System and would also strengthen 
procurement as well as Treasury systems and procedures. Capacity Development: This 
component will support the internal audit function, the organizational management of the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), and training. Merit Based Pay Initiative 
(MBPI): This component will support institutionalization of an accelerated pay 
enhancement program in MEF. Building the Oversight Capacity of Cambodia’s National 
Audit Authority: This component will focus on enabling theNAA to conduct effective 
audits and to deliver relevant and timely audit reports that are published and made 
available to the public.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and several provincial capitals.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
N/A 
Page  4
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert R. Taliercio 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Barbara Nunberg 
 
Comments:   
