Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3073 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/18/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P102284 
Project Name: Cambodia Second Health Sector Support Program 
Task Team Leader: Toomas Palu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.41 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
39.59
39.59 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project aims to support the Government in the implementation of its Health Sector Strategic 
Plan (2008-2015) in the sector wide context. The development objective is to ensure access to 
equitable, quality health care for all people of Cambodia through targeting resources, especially 
to the poor and to areas in greatest need. The development objective will be refined during 
Project preparation as the Plan is still being developed.  
 
Given the Project's proposed sector-wide nature, progress towards development objectives will 
be monitored through indicators in the joint monitoring framework of the Government's Health 
Strategic Plan (2008-2015). The monitoring indicators will focus on intermediate health 
outcomes in priority health areas, including immunization coverage, improved access and 
utilization of antenatal care, deliveries, physical access to health centers and hospitals, financial 
access to health services and incidence of out-of-pocket catastrophic health expenditures. 
Monitoring is expected to go beyond aggregate national level indicators and monitor reduction of 
Page  2
inequality in these indicators between provinces, urban/rural and socioeconomic groups. At the 
higher aggregate outcome level, key MDG outcome indicators will be monitored (e.g. maternal 
mortality, child mortality).  
 
Meeting the development objective is expected to help the higher level objective to improve 
aggregate health outcomes of the Cambodian population in priority public health areas, to reduce 
inequality in these outcomes and thus inequality of opportunity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The design of the project will have a health system strengthening focus. The main components of 
the proposed program would update the main components of the current Health Sector Support 
Project that will close December 31, 2008. The Project will seek to establish streamlined and 
programmatic modalities to more effectively channel development aid through pooled funding 
and better integration of non-pooling DPs to support unfinished business and the harmonization 
and alignment and scaling-up agenda.  
 
The following components are being considered:  
 
A. Improved access to essential quality health services (MPA and CPA level). This component 
would consider developing and scaling up the following streamlined modalities for donor 
support to sub-national level health services: (i) performance linked provincial level block grants 
to improve front line service delivery; (ii) financial support to scale up EFs; and (iii) an 
investment program. A formula-based provincial block grant funding modality would be 
considered to support the activities of PHC facilitites, finance eligible activities to support 
management and supervision functions at the Operational District and Provincial Health 
Department level, as well as provincial and sub-provincial level activities of the national 
programs. Such funding modality would be linked to performance. The grants are expected to be 
managed by the line structures in provincial and operational district administrations. This 
component would also include mechanisms to make health services more responsive to the 
public, especially the poor and near poor and for women and children seeking preventive 
services. This component warrants significant institutional strengthening for health 
administrations at provincial, Operational District and health facility levels that would be either 
integrated into the grant formula or addressed under component C (see below).  
 
Equity Fund Grants. Equity Funds (EFs) pay user fees on behalf of the identified poor 
population to health providers and also subsidize treatment related travel and subsistence costs. 
The proposed Project will seek to support the expected scaling-up and institutionalizing EFs 
through a consolidated funding mechanism that would pool donor funds supporting EF 
implementation to the extent possible and aligning with the Government?s own similar funding 
mechanism. Links with community based health insurance funds will be sought where possible 
to purchase care for the EF beneficiaries.  
 
Support for infrastructure development under the National Health Services Coverage Plan. This 
facility would be aligned with the health sector project implementation plan (PIP) and utilize the 
national Standard Operating Procedures. During preparation, the needs for the years 2009-2014 
Page  3
will be estimated. Support for the investment program will be linked to health system 
strengthening measures to ensure effective operation of facilities and population?s access.  
 
B. Improved capacity of national programs to respond to existing and emerging public health 
challenges. This component would consider programmatic support to the priority programs 
and/or sub-programs in the health sector Annual Operational Plans and Health Sector Strategy. 
This component would focus on core functions of national programs at the central level for 
policy development and monitoring, technical guidelines and supervision and public health 
campaigns. Support to activities that are implemented at service delivery level would be 
channeled through Component A.  
 
C. Advancing organizational and management reform in the MOH to respond effectively to 
change and development challenges. This component will seek to establish an Institutional 
Capacity Development and Technical Cooperation Facility to provide coordinated support by 
DPs for the implementation of the national Institutional Development Plan (IDP) that has been 
drafted, and will be finalized during preparation. The IDP is expected to provide a framework for 
strengthening the MOH and the key agencies to perform policy development, regulatory and 
enforcement, monitoring and oversight, technical leadership and quality assurance, and other key 
Government roles in the health sector. The Facility will also provide support to ensure 
institutional strengthening is provided to implement the activities under the Components A and 
B, in particular in the decentralization and deconcentration context. The emphasis will be on 
building local capacity, not on substitution capacity. Inclusion of support to pre-service training 
and scholarships for international degree level training will be considered. The component will 
seek to pool funds to the extent possible and establish a coordination mechanism including the 
Government, pooling and non-pooling partners. The component would also support scaling up 
the MBPI launched in the Ministry of Economy and Finance and piloted in the central MOH, to 
national programs, provincial and operational district level administrations.  
 
A
financial management assessment of the health sector will be an integral part of preparation, 
in order to determine feasible options for channeling funds and identify the needs for 
strengthening financial accountability and transparency mechanisms for alignment with country 
systems, including budget support.  
 
While still under discussion, the current proposed WB financing instrument is the Sector 
Investment and Maintenance Grant (SIM). Program Management Arrangements are expected to 
take another step towards integration in the core functions of the MOH from the current WB 
health project management arrangements.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project would be national in coverage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Many of the activities to be supported under this Project are continuation and/or expansion of 
support currently being provided by the Health Sector Support Project.  Relevant assessments 
had been prepared and are being implemented.  There is no reason to assume that the capacity for 
Page  4
implementation under this support would be different than that experienced from the on-going 
support.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gillian M. Brown (EASSO) 
Mr Bunlong Leng (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This Project is classified as a Category B activity, since support may include rehabilitation of 
health facilities.  The existing Environmental Management Plan, being used under the on-going 
support to the health sector, will be updated on the basis of an analysis currently being 
undertaken in-country to review implementation of the Plan, and compliance with the policy.  
 
The World Health Organization is the technical lead in assisting Government prepare its 
Health Care Waste Management Plan, which will guide any support related to this aspect of the 
environment.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The Project will target the poor and those with poor health outcomes.  In many instances this 
cohor includes minorities.  The current support uses equity funds to finance health care for the 
poor, and supports the training of health workers from remote and ethnic minorities who return 
to their communities to provide health care.  The existing Ethnic Minority Development Plan 
will be reviewed to ensure compliance with the current policy, and updated if necessary.  The 
document will then be disclosed in-country and in the Info-Shop   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although the trend has been to renovate facilities on existing sites, it is not possible to state 
categorically that no facilities will be constructed on new sites in this Project.  Consequently, the 
existing Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures, which defines terms and 
provides guidance for involuntary acquisition of land or other assets, disclosed in October of 
2002, will be reviewed and updated as necessary prior to re-disclosure in-country.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/01/2008 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Updating safeguard-related studies and assessments done for the current Health Sector 
Support Project was recommended by the safeguards meeting.  These updates will take place 
during the projet preparation process.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Toomas Palu 
10/18/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
10/18/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
