Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3142 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P106603 
Project Name: Road Asset Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Maria Margarita Nunez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
17.50 
 Asian 
Development 
Bank 
6.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 4.80
28.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to increase the effective use of the national and provincial road network in 
Cambodia to support its social and economic development.  The objective would be achieved 
through enhancements to the capacity of the country's institutions in managing road assets, 
priority interventions to improve the condition of the national and provincial roads, and 
expanding and strengthening routine maintenance and road safety activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation (US$59.6 million) consists of two main components outlined below 
along with their estimated cost:  
 
(A) Institutional and Road Management Capacity Development Component (US$5.6 million).  
Includes technical assistance to: (i) mainstream management and maintenance of national and 
provincial roads within the MPWT; (ii) assist in starting the process of spinning- off the force 
account maintenance works units to the private sector;  (iii) carry out a program to strengthen the 
Page  2
MPWT institutional capacity through human resource development; (iv) support the 
implementation of community awareness dissemination programs and the monitoring and 
evaluation including in: road safety, HIV/AIDs, gender, human trafficking; and (v) provide 
implementation support for the supervision of the civil works, including monitoring of 
safeguards and the project outcomes, and the undertaking of safeguards and the financial and 
technical audits.  
 
(B) Road maintenance component (US$54.0 million).  Includes the implementation of: (i) 
routine maintenance of the national and provincial road network throughout the country, using 
the current Government budget (about 2,340 km of roads); (ii) periodic maintenance of selected 
national and provincial roads, including asphalt resurfacing, resealing, re-gravelling and minor 
improvements on drainage, road safety and bridge repairs (about 1,000 km of roads); and (iii) 
rehabilitation of a small portion (about 200 km of roads) of the national and provincial road 
networks.  
 
The technical issues under discussion with the Government and the donor partners are:  
 
-
The scope of the network to be included in the project; IDA suggests to include the entire 
primary, secondary and provincial road networks;  
 
-
Whether to incorporate the Road Management Decision Support System (RMDS) into 
the road asset management priority analysis.  ADB and JICA are suggesting to follow an ad-hoc 
approach without the analytical and road data base tools;  
 
-
The preparation of the medium term rolling work plan and the annual work programs by 
the MPWT, based on the results of the RMDS;  
 
-
Including routine maintenance as an integral part of the transport sector financial 
analysis.  This analysis reviews the overall government funding of the road sector including 
details of the revenues and expenditures, with emphasis on details of the road sector as follows: 
new construction, improvement, rehabilitation, periodic maintenance, routine maintenance and 
emergency;  
 
-
Establishing guidelines for the selection of road sections for periodic maintenance and 
rehabilitation based (length and size of the road sections) based on the results of the RMDS; and  
 
-
Creating a Road Asset Management Unit after an in-depth analysis of the recent 
experiences of capacity building in the sector, and after careful evaluation of ownership by the 
MPWT.  
 
The implementation issues already discussed and agreed with the Government and the partners 
are:  
 
-
Additional funding (over and above to what the Government would otherwise be 
spending for maintenance of the national and provincial roads), would be provided by the 
project.  This would help bridge the gap between road maintenance requirements and available 
resources;  
 
-
The Inter-Ministerial Committee for Road Repair and Maintenance will oversee and 
guide the project;  
 
-
A
project implementation unit will not be created, the project would operate within the 
existing structures for road maintenance in Cambodia; and  
 
-
Government and the Development Partners guidelines and procedures for procurement, 
safeguards and financial management will be utilized, to the extent possible.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will cover roads throughout the whole country. The preliminary impacts have been 
identified. The project focus is on preservation of existing assets, the project would not involve 
new rights of way or any related issues thereof.  A complete assessment will be undertaken prior 
to Appraisal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
MPWT is the implementing agency for this project and has experience with the ongoing 
Provincial and Rural Roads (P071307) and the Road Rehabilitation (P004030) projects financed 
by IDA.  Safeguard screening, consultation procedures, and monitoring have been practiced, 
however, improvement on reporting and training of new staff will be necessary.  As part of 
MPWT reorganization, the social and environmental unit has been upgraded with a clear 
mandate to oversee the planning and monitor the implementation of social and environmental 
safeguards. Capacity of this unit as well as other key staff will be increased through safeguard 
training to be provided under PRIP technical assistance (a PHRD grant).  The project will 
provide funding for road safety component as well as to facilitate effective implementation of the 
Resettlement sub-decree being prepared by MEF-IRC.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Specific safeguard requirements for contractors, a safeguard screening, and monitoring 
requirements for road maintenance and limited rehabilitation have been established with MPWT. 
The requirements of the safeguard policies will be applied to all the roads included in the 
project for year one and subsequent years, irrespective of who finances the different sections.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The project is not expected to affect Indigenous Peoples.  If  Indigenous Peoples are affected 
by the project, the provisions of the existing Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), 
developed for the ongoing Provincial and Rural Infrastructure Project (P071207), will be 
followed.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The roads identified for development in Year 1 of the project are free of any occupancy. For 
project Years 2-5, the status of the rights of way will be investigated during implementation, and 
the Resettlement Policy Framework developed for the ongoing Provincial and Rural 
Infrastructure Project (P071307) will be used if the rights of way are occupied.  
 
Efforts by the MPWT to maintain the rights of
way of the national and provincial road 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
network free of encroachments will be supported.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/29/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/19/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:  
 
Existing ESSF and policy framework under (OP/BP 4.10) and (OP/BP 4.12) will be 
reviewed and updated during pre-appraisal in October 2007. A quick safeguard review is 
being conducted by ADB and the findings will also be considered.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Margarita Nunez 
10/31/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/13/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
