                                                                                                                                                                                                      43552


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 11/15/2007                                    Report No.: AC2312
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Cambodia                              Project ID: P100084
                                                                                                            Project Name: Avian and Human Influenza Control and Preparedness Emergency
                                                                                                            Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Alan L. Piazza
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: September 11,        Estimated Board Date: January 22, 2008
                          Authorized                                                                        2007
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: EASRE                           Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                                                                                                                                           Loan

                                    Disclosure                                                              Sector: Health (50%);Animal production (50%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Other communicable diseases (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Natural

                                              Public                                                        disaster management (P)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):             6.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                    Authorized                                                      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
                                                                                                                    Avian and Human Influenza Facility                                2.00
                                                                                                                    JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants                          3.00
                                                                                                                                                                                      5.00
                                                              Disclosure                                    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
                                                                        Public                              Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                                                                                                                                Yes [X]       No [ ]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            Consistent with the Global Program for Avian Influenza and Human Pandemic
                                                                                                            Preparedness and Response (GPAI), the Project's overall development objective is to
                                                                                                            support the implementation of the Cambodia Comprehensive Avian and Human
                                                                              Authorized                    Influenza (AHI) National Plan contributing to minimize the threat posed to humans and
                                                                                                            the poultry sector by AHI infection in Cambodia, and to prepare for, control, and respond
                                                                                                            if necessary to a human influenza pandemic. The Project is expected to produce the
                                                                                                            following outcomes: (a) contain the spread of the disease, thus reducing losses in the
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            livelihoods of commercial and backyard poultry growers and damages to the poultry
                                                                                                            industry and diminishing the viral load in the environment; (b) prevent or limit human
                                                                                                  Public    morbidity and mortality by stemming opportunities for human infection, and
                                                                                                            strengthening curative care capacity; and (c) prevent or curtail macroeconomic disruption
                                                                                                            and losses by reducing the probability of a human pandemic and improving emergency
                                                                                                            preparedness and response.

3. Project Description
The project would finance activities under three components: (i) Component A - Animal
Health Systems, including control measures minimizing the risk of HPAI in the animal
population; (ii) Component B -Human Health Systems preparedness and response to
possible human infections; and (iii) Component C - Interministerial Cooperation for
Pandemic Preparedness and Project Coordination.

 1. Component A - Animal Health. This component will support national strategies to
prevent, control, and eradicate HPAI among the animal population by enhancing
surveillance and diagnostic capacity, upgrade bio-security, controlling poultry
movements, building capacity for disease control and containment of possible outbreaks,
conduct village level communications and farmers awareness campaigns, and providing
help in the medium- to long-term restructuring of the poultry sector.

 2. Component B - Human Health. This component will build the capacity of the health
sector to respond in the short- and longer-term to epidemics. This will occur through
enhancing public health program planning and coordination to respond; early warning
systems to better monitor and prevent epidemics at an early stage; and enhancing health
system response capacity to cope with increased demand for services efficiently and
improve infrastructure and management of the AHI referral hospitals.

 3. Component C ­ Interministerial Coordination for Pandemic Preparedness. This
component will support strengthening interministerial coordination for increase capacity
to quickly and effectively mobilize a multisectoral response to a possible pandemic. This
would include the institutional strengthening of the National Committee for Disaster
Management (NCDM), the preparation and testing of a Pandemic Preparedness Program,
and the establishment of an integrated MIS and M&E system.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is national in coverage.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Bekir A. Onursal (EASRE)
   Ms Nina Bhatt (EASSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 The project is not expected to have any large-scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts as it is focused largely on public sector capacity building and strengthening
readiness for dealing with outbreaks of avian influenza in domestic poultry as well as
preventing or reducing possible human infections by strengthening emergency
preparedness and response. In addition, the project design incorporates other beneficial
measures such as improved biosecurity in farms and live markets, and control of poultry
movement within and across countries. The project's preventive activities (funding of
facilities, equipment, laboratories, procedures, and training programs), aimed at
improving the effectiveness and safety over the existing the AHI practices, will have
positive human health and environmental impacts. As such, the project is assigned an
Environmental Category B.

 Among the Bank's safeguards policies, only the policies on Environmental Assessment
and Indigenous People are triggered. The Bank's policy on Pest Management is not
triggered since the project (a) will not procure any pesticides, nor (b) will the use of
pesticides increase as a result of the project. However, the chemicals to be used for the
disinfection of farm facilities/personal protection equipment will be evaluated on a case
by case basis for conformity with OP 4.09 for Pest Management. The Bank's policy on
Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered as involuntary land acquisition or displacement
of people is not expected under the project (however, compensation of farmers for the
loss of poultry has been incorporated into the project design). While QACU's Interim
Guidelines forManaging Potential Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Assisted Avian Influenza Control Projects states that in most cases, no safeguard policies
other than OP4.01 and OP 4.12 are likely to apply, this project, based on Safeguard
Review meeting recommendations, will develop an Ethnic Minorities Planning
Framework (EMPF) which would briefly outline a communication strategy to reach
ethnic minority groups as a key element of project design.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Adverse human health and environmental impacts might occur, mainly through the
inadvertent spread of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza virus (HPAI), if appropriate
mitigation measures are not in place or not properly followed. Such impacts may result
from inadvertent human exposure and spread of the virus during: (i) culling of poultry,
(ii) transportation of live or culled poultry infected by HPAI virus, (iii) disposal of animal
carcasses, (iv) decontamination of infected areas, (v) disposal of farm waste (e.g. manure,
AI waste cleaning wastewaters from the isolation/quarantined zones), and (vi) disposal of
wastes from HPAI diagnostic/research laboratories and referral hospitals treating HPAI-
infected people. Groundwater contamination may result if animal carcasses and other
HPAI-infected farm wastes are buried at sites where the groundwater table is high and/or
the soil is permeable. In addition, dioxins/furans may be emitted if chlorine-bearing
wastes (animal carcasses or farm wastes pre-treated with chlorine-bearing disinfectants or
PVC bags) are incinerated. In addition, at diagnostic/research laboratories and referral
hospitals, lack of use of appropriate personal protection equipment or poor management
of healthcare wastes would possibly cause risks to human health and/or environment. All
these unintended impacts will be avoided by taking appropriate mitigation measures.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Alternatives will be considered for methods for culling poultry, disposal of animal
carcasses and farm wastes, treatment and disposal of infectious wastes from referral
hospitals and diagnostic/research laboratories, and chemicals used for disinfection.

 (1) Based on OIE/FAO guidelines, alternative methods will be considered for safe,
humane and efficient culling of poultry in the AI affected zones to prescribe an
acceptable method in the Procedures Manual. These methods will include: (i) neck
breaking (manual), (ii) neck cutting (using mechanical devices such as Burdizzo), (iii)
gassing with inhalation agents (e.g. carbon dioxide), and (iv) electrocution. (The culling
procedure which has previously been used in Cambodia involves neck breaking). The
selected method(s) will be specified in the project's Procedures Manual.

 (2) Alternative disposal methods for animal carcasses and farm wastes generated during
AI outbreaks will be considered. These methods will include: (i) burial in a pit, (ii) open
air burning (cremation), (iii) composting, (iv) incineration at a fixed location, and (v)
mobile incineration. The selected method(s) will be specified in the project's Procedures
Manual.

 (3) Alternative options will be considered for the treatment/disposal of infectious
wastes from referral hospitals and diagnostic/research laboratories. These methods will
include: (i) incineration, (ii) autoclaving, (iii) microwaving, and (iv) safe burial. The
selected method will be specified in the healthcare waste management plan for
diagnostic/research laboratories and each referral hospital.

 (4) Alternative chemicals will be evaluated for disinfection. The selection will be
based on such criteria as impacts of chemicals on human health and the environment,
availability and cost of chemicals in Cambodia. The selected chemical will conform to
the Bank's Pest Management Policy.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project design will integrate the following measures to be used for activities under
each component, as follows:

 Component A. The following actions will be taken: (i) safe, humane, and efficient
culling of infected and at-risk poultry, (ii) safe transportation (e.g. transportation in
closed containers) of AI-infected animals (live or carcasses); (iii) safe disposal of animal
carcasses and farm wastes, (iv) training for veterinary service workers through
procedures for safe handling of AI materials, (v) consideration for personal hygiene and
waste management during refurbishment/construction of reference/regional diagnostic
laboratories, and (vi) promotion of safe manure management practices during poultry
sector restructuring program (for backyard as well as commercial poultry production).
Personal protection equipment will be used in locations or activities which pose the risk
of AI virus infection. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry of Fisheries (MAFF) is
experienced in coping with AI outbreaks, based on the major outbreaks during January-
March 2004, and subsequent fewer outbreaks in 2004, 2005 and 2006, with the resulting
death and culling of many birds, and the loss of six human lives (in 2005 and 2006).
Through this experience, MAFF, with support from FAO, has prepared a manual
regarding surveillance and control of AI at the village level. If burial is to be selected as
the preferred option for disposal of animal carcasses and farm wastes, then the burial site
will be chosen based on screening using a predetermined site selection criteria. If
incineration is to be selected for disposal of these wastes, then no chlorine-bearing
material will be introduced to incineration (e.g. no use of chlorine-bearing disinfectants,
no use of PVC bags). During project implementation, institutional capacity will be
strengthened through preparation of an updated Procedures Manual and training of the
Ministry's personnel on these procedures. The project design will include means to
effectively reach indigenous peoples.

 Component B. The following activities will be taken: (i) improvement/rehabilitation of
isolation centers for AI patients at selected referral hospitals, (ii) preparation of
healthcare waste management manuals, and (iii) training of staff to implement the plan.
In the event of human infections of AI, during project implementation, the Ministry of
Health (MoH) will develop an Emergency Plan for rapid intervention for AI outbreak.
As part of this Emergency Plan, for each identified referral hospital, a specific healthcare
waste management plan will be developed and investments will be undertaken for heath
care waste management equipment and consumables. Grounds clean-up and restoration
at some referral hospitals will improve current hygienic conditions. Referral hospital staff
and selected MoH staff will be trained on healthcare waste management procedures.

 Component C. There are no environmental issues. However, this component will
include the design and delivery of effective communications tools (including a strategy
specifically tailored for ethnic minorities) for good hygiene, safe culling and disposal of
animal carcasses and AI-infected farm wastes, especially design to effectively reach
indigenous peoples.

 Component D. Institutional strengthening of NCDM; there are no environmental issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project stakeholders include: (i) poultry farmers (including ethnic minorities) in
Cambodia, (ii) consumers of poultry meat and eggs, (iii) public institutions such as
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), the Ministry of Health (MOH),
Ministry of Finance, National Committee for Disaster Management (NCDM), and
Ministry of Environment, and (iv) provincial and local officials. During the appraisal
mission, draft EMP and EMPF have been prepared; however, these will be completed
(with consultation) and disclosed during implementation (see Section B, below). As part
of this process, appropriate methods for consultation and disclosure will be identified.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04/15/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  06/10/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06/28/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04/15/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  06/10/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06/28/2008
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Given the processing of this project under ERL procedures, the Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) and the Ethnic Minorities Planning Framework (EMPF) will be
prepared by qualified groups of consultants to be engaged by the Government's
implementation agencies during the early stages of project implementation. This EMP
will include: (i) a description of the project, (ii) an overview of the applicable
national/local laws and international requirements, (iii) potential environmental impacts,
(iv) a description of mitigation measures (design, equipment, operating procedures,
proposed measures for public consultation), (iv) monitoring and supervision program, (v)
implementation arrangements, (vi) consultation and disclosure, and (vii) reporting. The
EMPF will entail a communication strategy to reach indigenous people which draws on
an assessment of the relevant dimensions of ethnic minority cultures. This would entail
going beyond the mere translation of communication messages for the majority
population since ethnic minorities may have distinct cultural perceptions regarding
animal/human disease requiring specifically tailored communication messages. In
addition to taking the cultural specificities into account, the EMPF will consider: (i)
ensuring that information is conveyed to ethnic minorities in a timely and comprehensive
manner; (ii) providing information in languages and in a form ethnic minorities
understand; and (iii) possibly developing additional information and training packages
that would allow for these communities to deal with animal or human outbreaks if need
be.

 These consultants will use the information from the EMP/EMPF to include draft a
section in the Project Implementation Plan (Operational Manual) that will include the
main detailed procedures to be followed during implementation (mainly for Components
A and B).

 Full disclosure of both of these documents will be done after these documents have been
found acceptable to the Bank. A waiver from the EAP RVP has been obtained to delay
the completion/disclosure of the EMP and EMPF until implementation, based on the
exception granted under OP4.01 paragraph 12, and OP4.10 paragraph 15. A specific
dated covenant is included in the Financing Agreement. Final Safeguard Clearance has
been delegated to the Sector Manager.



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples

  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                 No
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector       N/A
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed  N/A
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      N/A
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      N/A
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                               Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Alan L. Piazza                           06/18/2007
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Bekir A. Onursal                         05/15/2007
Social Development Specialist       Ms Nina Bhatt                               05/15/2007
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan          06/06/2007
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Rahul Raturi                             06/25/2007
 Comments:

