Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2460 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/07/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P097082 
Project Name: KH Empowerment for the Poor in Siem Reap 
Task Team Leader: Bhuvan Bhatnagar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 29, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural non-farm income generation 
(S);Other social development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The ultimate objective of the Project is to empower the poor to increase their social, economic 
and political capital.  
 
More directly, the Project aims to achieve this objective by: (1) strengthening primary groups of 
the poor and their federations; (2) enhancing livelihoods of the poor and addressing their social 
needs with special attention to the inclusion of the poorest and most vulnerable; and (3) 
promoting collective action to induce increased responsiveness by the state and market.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Implementation of the Project shall follow four key principles: (a) a ?saturation approach? that 
reaches out to all of the poor within a single province ? Siem Reap Province; (b) building upon 
existing initiatives, capacities and resources of the poor and the organizations that support them; 
(c) a customized approach that considers contextual differences; and (d) phased or sequenced 
implementation of the core strategy. The saturation approach is unique as this may be the first 
time in Cambodia that a development project has targeted an entire province. A concentrated 
Page  2
effort on a single province allows build-up of a critical mass of organizations of the poor to 
create synergy and achieve maximum impact.  
 
The Project has four principal components: (i) institution building, (ii) investment fund, (iii) 
support to link and scale-up pro-poor initiatives, and (iv) implementation support.  
 
Institution Building Component.  
 
This component will focus on: (a) developing and strengthening institutions of the poor; and (b) 
strengthening support organizations to provide the services needed by primary groups and 
federations of the poor.  
 
Given the large number of community initiatives in Siem Reap, the Project will adopt a 
responsive, rather than a pro-active, approach, working with NGOs and CBOs and building upon 
existing organizations in the districts where these are concentrated. In the under-served, interior 
districts, however, a more pro-active approach may be required to establish, support and federate 
groups of the poor.  
 
The initial focus of the Project will be to strengthen primary groups among the poor in the 
village, and federate them at higher levels (i.e., district, commune and province) to lower 
transaction costs and gain access to a larger pool of resources and greater economic 
opportunities. Federation will also increase the likelihood of sustainability beyond the life of the 
Project.  
 
Since members of savings and credit groups do not always share a common interest in an 
economic activity or the required skills set, they will require technical assistance in market 
analysis, business development, livelihoods support, etc. In fact, as the poor become more 
integrated into the market, their need for technical assistance may actually increase.  
 
The Project will promote service providers, which provide technical assistance, through a two-
pronged approach: (i) providing resources to primary groups and federations to enable them to 
contract service providers, and (ii) investing in the latter to build their capacity and improve 
service quality. To identify fresh models for service delivery and up-scaling, the Project will 
organize Development Marketplaces and encourage competition among service providers.  
 
Investment Fund Component.  
 
The Investment Fund will have three sub-components:  
 
1) 
Livelihoods ? to finance livelihood needs, skills-building, business development, savings 
and credit facilities, investments in commodity and value chains, market access, links to 
agriculture research and extension agencies, and private sector partnerships. Apart from grants, 
financing will also be provided through other instruments - loans, guarantees, equity 
investments, etc. ? where these are more appropriate.  
 
2)
Social Action ? to enable the poor to access critical social services (such as adult literacy, 
health, advisory and legal services) and safety nets (e.g., micro-insurance and help-lines). 
Page  3
Advocacy and information dissemination, including citizen action to resolve land disputes, will 
also be supported.  
 
3) 
Pro-Poor Inclusion ? to increase inclusion of the poorest and most vulnerable households. 
Experience suggests that the poorest of the poor may not participate in SHGs and special 
mechanisms will be required to reach them. The Project will identify the poorest households, 
facilitate their organization into SHGs, and provide SHGs with seed capital grants for lending to 
members and consumption-related expenditures. These SHGs will ultimately link to MFIs and 
other credit sources, once they develop a credit rating and meet graduation criteria.  
 
Linkages and Scaling-up Component.  
 
This will have three sub-components:  
 
1) 
Linking the poor to local engines of growth ? to identify and promote market 
opportunities for small producers and the poor. As the experience in Siem Reap province shows, 
the poor do not gain from an economic driver (the tourist boom) without specific pro-poor 
approaches. A market intelligence survey will pinpoint economic activities having good potential 
and identify ways that the poor can take advantage of them. In interior districts, where there will 
be relatively less access to the tourism market, the Project may focus on land-based livelihoods 
and agricultural production.  
 
2) 
Linking the poor to mainstream resource and financial institutions ? to assist primary 
groups and federations to network with banks or microfinance institutions for investments to 
scale-up viable activities. Dialogue with MFIs in Siem Reap will be started as primary groups are 
strengthened and federations formed, and will emphasize access for the middle poor and the 
poorest.  
 
3) 
Linking the poor to the local state? a two-pronged approach will be employed: (i) an 
information and education campaign targeted at local government officials to inform them about 
the Project and solicit support, and (ii) facilitating citizen access to the local state to articulate 
concerns about community needs or resolve disputes and conflicts. Mechanisms for such 
collective action and aggregation of demand (e.g., the village network approach of GTZ) will be 
encouraged and supported.  
 
Implementation Support.  
 
This will finance the incremental operating costs of the Project, including office infrastructure 
and recurrent costs, training, consultancies, establishment of monitoring and evaluation systems, 
studies and other technical services.  
 
Provincial Livelihood Fund:  An autonomous Provincial Livelihood Fund (PLF) will be 
established and housed in the office of the Provincial Governor of Siem Reap. The PLF shall 
have operational management autonomy in terms of staffing, funding, decision making and 
operating procedures. A Multi-Stakeholder Provincial Committee - chaired by the Provincial 
Governor and composed of representatives of provincial government departments, NGOs, civil 
Page  4
society, and the private sector - shall perform oversight on the PLF. An independent grievance 
and oversight unit, reporting directly to the Committee, shall be established to receive, process 
and resolve issues and complaints about the Project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will focus on Siem Reap province. The choice of Siem Reap is based on 
considerations of need (i.e., the poverty of the province), capacity (i.e., the presence of 
community groups, NGOs and MFIs), as well as potential (i.e., the links to the growth engine of 
the Angkor Wat tourist industry).  
 
Siem Reap is one of the three poorest provinces of Cambodia, with almost half (45%) of its 
776,000 residents considered poor. Siem Reap lags behind the rest of the country in a number of 
important social and economic indicators. It has the second highest illiteracy rate (24%) in the 
country after Ratanakkiri province. Almost one-fourth of Siem Reap children do not go to 
school, double the percentage in the rest of the country. Siem Reap is a predominantly 
agricultural province. Yet, a smaller percentage of families in the province own buffalo and 
cattle, highly-important agricultural work animals, compared to the rest of the country. Finally, 
the average farm gate price of rice at harvest in Siem Reap is 15% lower than the rest of the 
country due to local farmers? poor access to markets. This poverty situation highlights the urgent 
need for focused support to the province.  
 
There is already a measure of community organization in Siem Reap, with more than 3,000 
community-based organizations (CBOs) in the 900 villages of the province. There also 37 
international and 50 Cambodian NGOs working in Siem Reap. In addition, there are six highly 
professional micro finance institutions (MFIs) in the province. The Project will build on and 
scale up community, NGO and MFI approaches in Siem Reap.  
 
Another major reason for selecting Siem Reap is the growth engine of the Angkor Wat tourist 
industry and its potential of livelihoods for the poor. Tourism has grown steadily, with one 
million tourist arrivals in 2005 and an annual 20% increase expected in 2006 and the next five 
years. Thus far, however, the major benefit of the tourist industry to Siem Reap residents has 
been employment in construction work, restaurant and hotel employment.  The poor condition of 
agriculture in the province inhibits local farmers from taking advantage of the tourism boom. 
Instead, vegetables and other food supplies for the tourist market are mostly imported from 
Vietnam and Thailand. The same is true for the handicrafts and souvenirs sold in Siem Reap, 
which come mostly from China, Laos, Vietnam and Thailand. The Project aims to expand the 
access of the poor to economic opportunities offered by the tourism growth in the province.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Weak. However, at the level of Commune Councils, Siem Reap has been part of the RILGP, 
where there are well developed procedures for environmental and social safeguard screening of 
small scale rural infrastructure. These are gradually being internalized and implementation is 
improving by people and councilors.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
Page  5
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
A
sectoral screening EA will be undertaken during the early preparation, where 
environmental risks and management of such risks will be identified and documented. 
Environmental screening procedures will be developed as part of the subproject selection 
process.  The project envisions only small-scale infrastructure in support of livelihoods of the 
poor.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Screening will be included in the above EA procedures. Agricultural production will be one 
of the activities supported by the Project. There may be some pesticide use, particularly in 
vegetable production projects geared towards the local (residents) market.  However, the tourist 
market prefers organic and pesticide free vegetables, so pest management is likely to be a minor 
issue, if an issue at all.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Siem Reap Province is home to Angkor Wat and numerous other Cultural Heritage sites. The 
Project is expected to support only small-scale infrastructure activities; hence it is not likely to 
have any adverse impacts on the temple sites. However, screening procedures for subprojects 
will be developed. The Apsara - the government authority for the management and conservation 
of the Angkor cultural heritage and tourism - has indicated that the continued use of water from 
underground sources within Siem Reap is likely to have adverse impacts on the foundations of 
the Angkor Wat temples.  Therefore the project will avoid use of water resources that could have 
such an impact on the Angkor Wat temples.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
There are few indigenous peoples in Siem Reap Province. The project will address assistance 
to possible indigenous peoples involved in the Project through (i) participatory Project design (as 
prescribed in OP 4.10) and (ii) screening procedures that will trigger activities for indigenous 
peoples subprojects (to be outlined in a brief IPPF).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
While no land acquisition is envisioned under the Project, subprojects may need small pieces 
of land (e.g. small grain storage, cattle sheds, etc.). If land is needed, it is envisioned that it will 
be acquired through voluntary land donations. In such cases the procedures of the national 
procedures for Commune Councils will be adopted.  The Bank will satisfy itself that such land 
donations are made by informed consent and power of choice (see World Bank Involuntary 
Resettlement Sourcebook, pages 21-24, on voluntary land donations for community projects and 
the procedures to be followed in this type of project).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  6
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/20/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
..   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bhuvan Bhatnagar 
07/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cyprian F. Fisiy 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
