                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/07/2013                                   Report No.: AC6875
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Cameroon                            Project ID: P143940
Project Name: Cameroon Flood Emergency Project
Task Team Leader: Shelley Mcmillan
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2013 Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2013
Managing Unit: AFTN1                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Flood protection (40%);Irrigation and drainage (40%);Public administration-
Water, sanitation and flood protection (20%)
Theme: Water resource management (40%);Natural disaster management (30%);Rural
services and infrastructure (20%);Climate change (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            108
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to rehabilitate key hydraulic infrastructure
and improve disaster-preparedness in targeted areas in the Far North Region of
Cameroon.

3. Project Description
The proposed credit would help finance the costs associated with rehabilitation of key
hydraulic infrastructure for flood protection and rice production in the Far North Region
of Cameroon. The proposed project will support the Government in rehabilitating flood
affected, damaged and deteriorated hydraulic infrastructure, notably 70km Logone River
embankment, Maga dam and related irrigation infrastructure at both locations. The
project will furthermore assure that emergency and disaster preparedness measures are
put in place and that the population is well informed about disaster preparedness and
emergency management procedures. Specifically, the project will have three major
components as follows:

  Component A: Rehabilitation of key hydraulic infrastructure for flood protection and
rice production (US$99.2 million): This component will finance the rehabilitation of
flood affected infrastructure, notably the rehabilitation of Maga dam, 70km of the Logone
dyke and related infrastructure for flood protection, as well as the rehabilitation of the
irrigation infrastructure for SEMRY rice schemes (7,500ha). Thereby its full functionality
for water conveyance will be reinstalled. Accordingly, this component will consist of
three sub-components (i) Rehabilitation of Logone embankment, (ii) Rehabilitation of
Maga dam and related infrastructure, and (iii) Rehabilitation of irrigation areas.

 Component B: Disaster risk and emergency management (US$2.6 million): The
component will support acquisition of equipment including installation of hydro-
meteorological equipment at Lake Maga to better monitor the water levels at the Lake
will also be financed. The component will consist of two sub-components (i)
strengthening hydro-meteorological data management to support design and installation
of a hydro-meteorological monitoring system in the three main tributaries to Lake Maga,
and rehabilitation existing weather stations in the project area to better plan, operate the
hydraulic infrastructure and be prepared for potential emergencies; and (ii) strengthening
emergency management to support SEMRY and local authorities to develop an
operational contingency plan and ensure its full implementation and dissemination to
population.

 Component C: Institutional Support (US$2.9 million): This component would provide
institutional support for strengthening the capacity of SEMRY to sustainably manage,
maintain and operate the hydraulic infrastructure. The component will finance an external
dam safety panel, which will review the feasibility studies, safety measures and
construction. This component will also finance project management and coordination.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project activities will be located in the Far North region of Cameroon, District of
Maga, Department of Mayo-Danay for Lake Maga dam and Department of Logone and
Chari for the embankment of the Logone river.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
   Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
   Mr Wolfhart Pohl (AFTSG)
   Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Activities to be financed under the proposed project are expected to include the
rehabilitation of key hydraulic infrastructure, notably Maga dam and Logone
embankment, as well as rehabilitation of irrigated production areas. The following
safeguards policies are therefore triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01),
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Cultural Heritage
(OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Dam Safety (OP/BP 4.37) and
International Waters (OP/BP 7.50). The relevant instruments, including an Environmental
and Social Assessment (ESIA), Pest and Pesticides Management Plan (PPMP),
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared and disclosed during the project
implementation. Civil works will not start prior to the completion and disclosure of
relevant safeguards instruments.

  The potential environmental impacts related to the rehabilitation and improvement
works of the Maga dam and Logone embankment are expected to be substantial, though
limited in scale and magnitude, as long as the rehabilitation scope is not extended
significantly beyond the embankments. There is a high social risk related to this extended
area as it can potentially affect several thousands of people. Therefore the project has
been classified as Category A.

  The Government has defined a buffer area of 300 m from the Logone embankment and
Maga dam, as a security zone. The exact dimensions of this zone will be set in the
detailed design studies. In the past decades, these areas were progressively inhabited by
local communities. During the 2012 floods 1,222 families were affected in Maga district
and 9,025 families in Logone and Chari districts respectively. During the September 2012
floods, most of families living in this buffer area were affected by the floods and
consequently temporarily relocated by the Government. For the 2013 rainy season the
Government may resettle approximately 1000 project-affected persons in high flood risk
areas by moving them to a temporary safe site. The Government will send an official note
the World Bank informing about the exact number of persons affected in these high flood
risk areas. The Government will comply with OP 4.12 as they undertake these interim
arrangements, which will be defined in an official note sent by the Government before
negotiations of the proposed project. The note will inform on: (i) identification of suitable
temporary relocation areas, including an assessment of resettlement areas currently being
prepared and housing arrangements; (ii) identification of the exact number of people and
their assets who need to be temporarily relocated; (iii) consultations with families
temporarily being resettled to inform them about the interim resettlement arrangements;
(iv) moving allowance as well as other entitlements for assistance, and; (v) timetable for
resettlement with preference for this population to be the first group to be resettled in
permanent resettlement locations.

 This group of households will be included in the project Resettlement Action Plan(s)
that will be prepared for the project during implementation. The RAP(s) may be done in
phases, based on the appropriate technical approach for repairs/rehabilitation required for
the Maga dam, Majo Vrick spillway channel, Logone dyke, and irrigation infrastructure,
as well as the numbers of project-affected people (PAPs), which could be several
thousand households. The exact number of PAPs will be determined in the detailed
design studies. Such phasing will take account of the most urgent security and safety
aspects.

 The proposed project does not require any exceptions to Bank environmental and social
safeguards policies.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The rehabilitation of the infrastructure would improve poor agricultural practices
upstream and downstream. The rehabilitation could also have negative impacts on public
health, such as: (i) an increase in the incidences of malaria and bilharzias due to an
increase in the water surface (irrigation areas rehabilitated); (ii) pesticide poisoning due
to the unsafe application and management of pesticides and herbicides by untrained
personnel; and (iii) loss of livelihoods due to land acquisition limitation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Due to the current degraded and damaged state of the hydraulic infrastructure and the
people affected during the 2012 floods, no other alternative exists than the urgent
rehabilitation of the infrastructure. No other alternative exists except the "no project"
alternative.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Government prepared in 2006, an Environmental and Social Audit of the Maga Dam,
which contains basic and still relevant information on the site. In 2012, the Government
in the context of the Agricultural Competitiveness Project (P112635), has also prepared
an Environmental and Social Audit of SEMRY and related infrastructure with very
limited cover of the Maga dam and Logone embankment. This report provides a good
basis for the assessments to be carried out, but still remains weak on the dam safety
issues and also on the social risk in the buffer areas.

 As this operation is subject to OP/BP 8.00, Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies,
an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been
prepared. The ESSAF is consistent with Bank operational policies and procedures,
investment operations subject to OP/BP 8.00, and the guidance note for crises and
emergency operations for application of Bank safeguard and disclosure policies. This
ESSAF provides general policies, guidelines, codes of practice and procedures to be
integrated into the implementation of the proposed project. The ESSAF describes the
approach and principles to be followed to ensure due diligence in managing the potential
adverse environmental and social impacts and risks associated with the project.

  The ESSAF is developed specifically for this proposed project, to ensure due diligence
to avoid causing harm or exacerbating social tension and to ensure consistent treatment of
social and environmental issues by the Government and service providers. The purpose
of the ESSAF is also to assist the PCU and all concerned public agencies in screening
project-supported activities for their likely social and environmental impacts, identifying
documentation and preparation requirements and piloting the investments. The detailed
descriptions of project-supported activities and their exact locations will be made
available to facilitate the monitoring and evaluation of project implementation. In
addition, the ESSAF is providing a framework for the establishment of guidelines for
land acquisition and eventual compensation, codes of practice for the prevention and
mitigation of potential environmental and social impacts, and safeguards procedures for
inclusion in the technical specifications of contracts.

 The relevant safeguards instruments (ESIA/ESMP, PPMP, and RAP) will be prepared
during the first year of the project implementation.

 Consistent with the World Bank operational policy OP/BP 7.50, a riparian notification
was sent to The Republic of Chad and the Lake Chad Basin Commission (CBLT),
representing all riparian of the Lake Chad Basin. The notification was sent and clearly
indicated that the detailed studies for the rehabilitation of the Logone dyke, Maga dam
and Majo Vrick spillway channel will be sent to The Republic of Chad and CBLT once
available.

 The Maga dam is around 5 m in height, but 27 km in crest length and 620 million m3 in
reservoir capacity. The dam has shown major defects in the embankment structure and
shortage in spillway capacity: the current spillway capacity is only 100 m3/s after
rehabilitation of the gates and downstream channels, whilst the incoming flow is more
than 2,000 m3/s for 100 years return period floods. The potential overtopping and
downstream flooding risk should be considered high. Thus, the rehabilitation design,
particularly the immediate rehabilitation areas and measures need to be carefully
reviewed and prioritized within the budget of this emergency project. Because of these
reasons, despite the low height of the dam, the World Bank OP 4.37 – Safety of Dams -
has been triggered to ensure sound technical design and rehabilitation works.
  The Government will ensure that appropriate quality and safety measures are adopted
for the design and rehabilitation works. A Panel of Experts comprising national and
international dam safety experts shall review design, construction and emergency
measures for the Maga dam. The borrower will also prepare the dam safety plans,
including (i) plan for construction supervision and quality assurance, (ii) instrumentation
plan, (iii) Operation and Maintenance Plan, and (iv) Emergency Preparedness Plan
(EPP)/ Contingency Plan , which will be reviewed by IDA. In the meantime, a
preliminary Operation and Maintenance Plan and an interim contingency plan (the broad
framework plan of the EPP) covering the period of rehabilitation works will be prepared
and implemented. During rehabilitation works, a detailed EPP will be developed and
shared with responsible offices. Suitable warning and communication measures will be
established. Also, the affected population will be trained in disaster preparedness and
emergency management as per the emergency procedures.


  SEMRY, the project implementation entity, has so far only weak capacity to deal with
environmental and social safeguards aspects in accordance to The World Banks standards
and procedures. It was therefore agreed that the environmental and safeguards issues will
be managed in a two-step approach: Until the PCU is place at SEMRY; the
environmental and social aspects will be managed by the relevant expert of the PCU of
PACA. Once the PCU is established at SEMRY a health, safety and environmental
specialist will be responsible environmental and social safeguard issues. Relevant
training in social and environmental safeguards will be provided to this specialist. The
World Bank safeguards team will work closely with PCU to ensure that appropriate
measures are taken in compliance with World Bank safeguards policies.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project affected persons will be consulted at least twice during the preparation of the
ESIA. The first consultation will be organized before the TOR is finalized and the second
once the draft ESIA report is prepared. In addition, before the RAP is prepared, the
Government has agreed to conduct also an inclusive consultation with the project-
affected people. The ESSAF was shared with the main authorities at local and national
levels and will be disclosed on the MINEPAT website and the World Bank Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                   N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
This project is prepared under OP8.0 so safeguards instruments will be prepared during
early stages of project implementation and not during preparation. The legal agreement
will condition starting the relevant works with the preparation/approval, disclosure and
implementation of the corresponding safeguards instruments.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      N/A
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            N/A
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          N/A
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              N/A
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           N/A
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                 Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Shelley Mcmillan                04/06/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna   04/05/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor            04/05/2013
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Hocine Chalal                   04/08/2013
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Cary Anne Cadman                05/01/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Magdolna Lovei                  05/03/2013
  Comments:
