Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  43598 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P084160 
Project Name: Transparency and Accountability Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader: Armand E. Atomate 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 6, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.20
0.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance transparency, efficiency, and 
accountability in public resources utilization. This would contribute to achieve better service 
delivery and to address governance problems, including corruption (INS, pillar #1), which are 
key PRSP development challenges for Cameroon to reach the millennium development goals 
(MDGs). This, in turn, would assist the authorities to lay solid foundations for a transition to 
increased budgetary assistance, including from the Bank, under PRSCs.  
 
2. 
By end-project, it is expected that minimum conditions are in place to yield the following 
outcomes: (i) deconcentrated budget preparation and execution systems; (ii) enhanced efficiency 
in public procurement processes and procedures; (iii) deconcentrated state personnel and payroll 
information management systems and operations; and (iv) increased ex-post oversight. These 
outcomes would be measured by indicators, such as: the Government has fully adopted a global 
MTEF and all ministries are preparing budgets based on MTEFs; project evaluation teams are 
functioning in xx ministries and an xx percent of projects are subject to systematic economic and 
financial appraisal; government is producing annual financial accounts of its operations; the time 
to process procurement operations has been reduced from an average of xx  to yy weeks; the 
payroll management information system is in place and the decentralized personnel and payroll 
Page  2
management is working effectively; and the number of publications on financial and 
performance information by the relevant Commissions of the National Assembly.  
 
3. 
A
monitoring and evaluation plan will be prepared to track achievement of project’s 
objectives and targets on a regular basis. Improvements in public financial management 
performance will be measured using the PEFA approach, enabling international benchmarking of 
progress. Additional indicators for tracking progress in other project focus areas will be 
developed in coordination with professionals at the macro and sector levels.  
 
4. 
Project primary target beneficiaries will be cross-cutting government agencies involved 
in financial and human resources management. Ultimate recipients of project outcomes will be 
the users of the Cameroon public service who would benefit from greater transparency, 
efficiency, and accountability in the management of core public resources.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
5. 
Experience has demonstrated that transparency, efficiency, and accountability in public 
resources utilization are difficult to achieve without effective control mechanisms that ensure 
adequate monitoring of outputs and evaluation of end-results; and that provide necessary checks 
and balances. Therefore, the proposed operation – which is a TA project with no civil works 
involved and no environment impacts - would have the following components:  
 
Component 1 - Improving Budget Management  
 
6. 
The broader long-term reform of Cameroon’s public finances is supported by various 
donors, in the context of the Public Financial Management (PFM) Platform. While the IMF, the 
European Union, and the French Cooperation are taking the lead on (i) how to determine a 
desirable aggregate spending growth path consistent with the capacity to mobilize resources and 
(ii) how to ensure that budgetary allocations are consistent with PRSP sector priorities, project 
support will complement those efforts by focusing on the quality of public expenditures and on 
budget effectiveness.  
 
7. 
The objective of this component would therefore be to support the deconcentration of 
budget preparation and execution systems, in particular the transfer of some budget management 
responsibilities from the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MINEFI) to spending ministries. In 
recent years, the Government of Cameroon (GoC) has made progress in strengthening some 
aspects of public financial management. In addition, it has established a PFM Platform Steering 
Committee, which will develop and oversee the implementation of a PFM action plan. A key 
part of this is the development of a new Organic Law for the management of public finances that 
is currently being finalized.  
 
8. 
The project focus would be on strengthening budget planning and programming, budget 
execution, budget monitoring and evaluation, and financial accounting in the context of this new 
Organic Law (expected in 2007), which will provide the organizing framework for actions to be 
supported by the project. While the specific elements of this component will depend on the 
content of government’s PFM action plan which is currently under development, it is expected 
that the project focus would be on the following areas: strengthening budget formulation through 
Page  3
further developing the MTEF and extending it to other ministries; strengthening sector ministry 
capacity for investment budgeting; and improving the presentation and comprehensiveness of 
budget documentation; deconcentrating and simplifying the expenditure chain; and provision of 
support for capacity building for the line ministries in respect of their increased responsibilities; 
improving the quality of budget execution recording and reporting through the strengthening of 
information systems; and increasing the reliability of treasury accounting through rationalization 
and capacity building of the public accountant cadre in the Treasury.  
 
Component 2 - Improving Public Procurement  
 
9. 
The objective of this component would be to support the implementation of the ongoing 
procurement reforms. Recent Bank missions noted that progress has been made in the 
implementation of the agreed action plan which resulted from the 2005 Country Procurement 
Assessment Review (CPAR). However, a full application of all agreed provisions of the 2004 
Procurement Code is required.  
 
10. 
The project focus would be on improving the performance of the procurement system. 
This would be achieved merely through capacity building, in critical procurement aspects of 
planning, preparation of preliminary studies, preparation of accurate cost estimates, selection of 
adequate method, and preparation of flawless bidding documents with objective and clear 
evaluation criteria. In a first step, project support would target all the “Maitres d’ouvrage” and 
private operators. This would include the dissemination of the 2004 Procurement Code and the 
standard bidding documents (SBDs, as well as specific training in procurement planning (which 
is considered to be one of the major operational obstacles to good procurement). In a second 
phase, building capacity would target the “Maitres d’ouvrage” in the sectors of agriculture, 
education, health and infrastructures as they represent the largest share of public expenditures.  
 
Component 3 - Improving Personnel and Payroll Management  
 
11. 
The objective of this component would be to accelerate the implementation of the 
ongoing human resources management reform, in particular the deconcentration of personnel and 
payroll management database, which is a key component of this reform. To achieve this, the 
GoC is implementing two separate information management systems: one for personnel database 
(SIGIPES), the other for payroll database (ANTILOPE). SIGIPES was tested in four pilot 
ministries. The results were deemed encouraging. SIGIPES now needs to be consolidated in the 
four pilot ministries and institutionalized system-wide. Both SIGIPES and ANTILOPE need to 
be updated and upgraded, their electronic interface needs to be reactivated, and the two systems 
need to be integrated.  
 
12. 
The project focus would be on enhancing efficiency, transparency, controls, checks and 
balances in the management of personnel and payroll database. Funding would be provided to 
build or strengthen the necessary capacity to accelerate the consolidation and expansion of 
SIGIPES; reactivate ANTILOPE; complete the clean up, harmonization, and securization of 
personnel and payroll files to match budget appropriations for staff salaries with actual number 
of civil servants; secure electronically the interface/link between SIGIPES and ANTILOPE; 
Page  4
update staff and payroll management policies (where necessary); prepare and disseminate 
procedures manuals.  
 
13. 
The project will also finance analytical work to support subsequent civil service reform 
which, given its complexity, cannot realistically be achieved within the proposed duration and 
budget for this TA. However, it is expected that the proposed operation would be moving in 
parallel with, or slightly in advance to other IDA-supported operations - such as the DPL, which 
would be used as a leverage instrument for in-depth civil service reform and in-depth policy, 
fiduciary, and institutional transformation; and the planned Programmatic Public Financial 
Management Support. It would also be moving in synergy with other development partner-
supported activities -
 such as the French Cooperation’s TER-FPC project (“Transparence-
Efficacité-Rigueur des finances publiques camerounaises”) - which support improvements in 
Cameroon’s public finances, and to which the proposed TACD project relates to allow 
complementarities.  
 
Component 4 - Strengthening External Oversight  
 
14. 
The objective of this component would be to enhance external oversight and demand for 
accountability in the use of public resources. The project focus would be on strengthening 
legislative capacity for scrutiny and oversight. This would include strengthening human and 
technical capacity of the “Commission des Finances et du Budget de l’Assemblée Nationale”, as 
well as of other relevant Commissions involved in exercising ex-post oversight in the use of 
public resources. The project would also strengthen the role of the Commissions to request and 
examine information on the use of public resources, and to obtain responses from the Executive. 
In addition, project support would be provided to strengthen the capacity of local committees 
(the “Comités locaux de suivi d’investissements publics”) in monitoring the execution of 
investment projects, thereby complementing the CHOC program, which will support building of 
capacity among civil society organizations to exercise oversight.  
 
15. 
Since, at present, the information available to internal and external stakeholders is 
limited, the project would support the development and implementation of a monitoring and 
evaluation framework involving systematic and timely production, publication and user-friendly 
communication of key information, analysis, progress reporting and performance measures in the 
use of public resources.  The framework will also provide consultative mechanisms between the 
legislature, civil society organizations, the media and other users of information. This would link 
to, and reinforce the transparency dimensions of the first three components of the project.  
 
Component 5 – Support to the Project Focal Point  
 
16. 
Institutional arrangements for project preparation and implementation will be embedded 
in the country's systems to consolidate and sustain Government's leadership in, ownership and 
commitment of the reforms envisaged. Contingent upon the government’s final decision, the 
focal point for the coordination of project preparation activities will be in the Ministry of 
Economy and Finance (MINEFI), via the inter-ministerial Steering Committee for the PFM 
platform. Qualified non governmental, civil society, and private sector organizations could be 
sub-contracted, where appropriate, as partners in the execution of some project activities.   
Page  5
D.  Project location (if known) 
17. 
The focal coordination point for project processing and development would be in the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance (MINEFI), via the Public Financial Management (PFM) 
platform. Project preparation would be led by the National Coordinator of the Steering 
Committee.  The responsibility for project execution would be vested in existing Government 
agencies to create conditions for sustained ownership, commitment, and leadership in delivering 
results. Qualified non governmental, civil society, and private sector organizations would be sub-
contracted, as needed.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
Not applicable.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Armand E. Atomate 
06/11/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/11/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guenter Heidenhof 
06/11/2007 
Comments:   
