Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2764 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P104456 
Project Name: CM-Energy Sector Development SIL (FY08) 
Task Team Leader: Kwawu Mensan Gaba 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (80%);General energy sector (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
30.00 
 
Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified) 
35.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified) 
45.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
112.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives of the proposed Energy Sector Development Project are two-
fold:  
 
2.1. Improve the reliability and security of energy supply:  The project proposes to co-finance 
the proposed Kribi gas power generation project if economic and financial analyses confirm that 
the development of a natural gas infrastructure is the least cost solution for expanding 
Cameroon’s electricity generation base.  This will be measured in terms of (i) the additional 
capacity added to the system, and (ii) the increased supply reliability as measured by reduction in 
load shedding (non-distributed energy) during the dry season.  
 
Page  2
2.2. Improve the governance of the electricity sector by strengthening capacity in sector 
planning and increasing consumer protection:  The proposed project will provide technical 
assistance to MINEE, ARSEL and AER to improve their capacity in long-term electricity sector 
planning and development.  In addition, the project will strengthen the capacity of ARSEL to 
monitor the operator AES Sonel to ensuring that the interests of end-users other than Alucam are 
adequately protected. Furthermore, the proposed project would support AER in developing a 
framework and financing mechanism for rural electrification.  Possible outcome indicators 
include (i) the adoption of a satisfactory least cost energy development plan, (ii) [the adoption of 
a
more balanced cost allocation between consumers (potential contentious point)], (iii) the 
number of consumer complaints treated and resolved by ARSEL and (iv) the increased access of 
rural households to electricity (%) as a result of streamlined procedures and additional resource 
mobilization.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will have two components:  
 
3.1. Component 1 ($40 million):  Co-financing of Kribi gas power generation project:  
 
The Bank proposes to co-finance the Kribi gas power generation project with a 150-225 MW 
capacity.  Total project costs are estimated at least at $150 million to be funded under a project 
finance SPV structure with 30% equity and 70% debt..  AES plans to raise additional debt 
financing from the private and public sector and has received expressions of interest from IFC, 
EIB and Proparco.  Investment components include the gas field (developed by a joint venture 
between Société Nationale des Hydrocarbures (SNH) and Perenco), the gas-fired power plant as 
well as a 100 km, 225 kV dual transmission line from Kribi to Edea.  The project company will 
sign a 20-year Power Purchase Agreement with AES Sonel (to be negotiated) and a Gas Supply 
Agreement with the gas field developer/operator. Contract finalization with Alucam is expected 
by end  June 2007.  
 
3.2. Component II ($10 million):  Technical assistance  
 
The project would provide technical assistance (TA) with the objective to  
 
a. 
Improve the planning capacity in the sector:  TA to MINEE and ARSEL to improve the 
capacity for least cost sector planning, including mechanisms and tools for a regular updating 
and revision of the PDSE 2030, and coordination with the Ministry of Environment on project 
environmental compliance issues.  
 
b.
Strengthen the capacity of ARSEL in executing its mandate and improve regulator 
governance:  TA to ARSEL to improve their capacity in (i) regulating the incumbent operator, 
especially in terms of price setting (retail prices), and with respect to wholesale prices negotiated 
by regulated operator with major users such Alucam, and in (ii) reviewing prices with respect to 
gas input procured by IPP (such as the Kribi) to produce power. Indeed, mastering or developing 
in-house capacity to handle or manage pricing process becomes critical for the sustainability of 
the power sector in Cameroon. Beyond pricing, ARSEL should also develop capacity to handle 
other regulatory matters such as - relationship with consumers, licensing in case the GoC intends 
to issue licenses or concession contracts with new players such Alucam for the construction and 
operation of their own hydropower facilities.  
Page  3
c. 
Streamline rural electrification implementation, financing and monitoring arrangements:  
TA to AER with a focus on (i) clarifying the mandate of AER in providing technical and 
financial assistance, (ii) establishing a project structure for the implementation of PANERP, (iii) 
defining clear rules for project analysis, implementation and supervision coordination and (iv) 
developing a funding mechanism for rural electrification, including private sector participation 
where appropriate.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kribi and Edea   
 
E.  Bo
rrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
EIAs and RAPs reports for the project will be prepared by Government Consultant.  The capacity 
of the implementing agencies to execute and monitor the implementation of these documents 
will be assessed during project preparation.  Capacity enhancement activities will be provide as 
useful to ensure appropriate execution of the environmental and social management plans   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Two EA studies were prepared. One for the gas thermal power plant and one for the gas 
factory, gas field development and the marine and terrestrial gas pipelines. The gas factory will 
be located in an ecologically sensitive forest area. Also the marine area where the gas fields and 
pipelines is located is ecologically sensitive. The World Bank recommended the preparation of a 
Regional Environmental Assessment, which would address the cumulative impacts and the 
carrying out of an archaeological survey to be disclosed prior to appraisal. More comprehensive 
biodiversity surveys are being planned to start during project preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The marine area where the gas fields and pipelines is located is ecologically sensitive.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The gas factory will be located in an ecologically sensitive forest area.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
It needs to be determined if the Pest Management Policy will be triggered   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
An archaeological survey will be carried out to be disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Bakola or Bagyeli were found to live in mixed communities with Bantou ethnic groups.  
They will be impacted by the lost of natural resources as a result of land claring for the T-Line.  
In order to comply with both Bank policy and IFC performance Standards # 7 on Indigenous 
Peoples, a Community Development Plan (CDP) will be prepared following the consultative and 
participatory procedures of IP policy, and disclosed prior to project appraisal.  It is expected that 
this comprehensive approach will foster broader community acceptance of the specific measures 
targeting IPs in particular.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy is triggered by the land acquisition needed for the gas-fired power plant in Kribi; 
and theTransmission Line from Kribi to Edea.   The RAP census of affected persons and assets 
was completed by the Borrower and a RAP is being finalized by its Consultant.  A field visit was 
conducted during a WB safeguards mission to rapidly assess the situation on the ground, and the 
scope of impacts was found to be moderate.  The RAP will include social outcomes measures to 
address broader issues such as local labor recruitment, and local benefits to communities along 
the T-Line and about the gas-power Plant.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/07/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EIA for the gas power plant prepared by the international Consultant Scott Wilson for AES 
Sonel, the private operator of the future gas-fired power plant. The sponsors for the gas 
factory, gas fields and gas pipelines SNH and PERENCO prepared an EA. The sponsors will 
prepare a Regional Environmental Assessment to address cumulative regional impacts on the 
marine and terrestrial environment. The sponsors will also carry out an archaeological 
survey. Both reports will be disclosed before appraisal. During project preparation more 
comprehensive biodiversity studies will be undertaken.  
 
(i) RAP for power Plant and T-Line: The census of affected persons and assets has been 
conducted.  The draft RAP for the Power plant and the T-Line is being prepared by an 
International Consultant for AS-Sonel.  Draft RAP is expected to be received for review by 
August  2007.  
 
(ii) CDP, including IPs measures for T-Line: The TORs for CDP including IP specific 
measures is being finalized.  Draft CDP is expected to be received for review by 15 
Septembre 2007  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
(iii) The RAP and the CDP prepared for the power component by AES-Sonel will be 
approved and disclosed both in the country and at the Infoshop at HQ prior to Appraisal.  
 
(iv) On-shore Gas-Plant:  No RAP or IP Plan is required for the on-shore gas plant.  
However, the Borrower will prepare as due diligence a CDP to address broader social 
outcomes issues and manage external and cumulative risks to or from the project (influx of 
population, inflations, law and security of people and assets, local labor recruitment, etc.)  
This CDP will be reviewed and approved by the Bank before project negotiation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kwawu Mensan Gaba 
06/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
