Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC2841
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Central African Republic 
Project ID:  P104595 
Project Name:  CAR - Emergency Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation & Maintenance 
Task Team Leader:  Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 26, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (30%);Sewerage (30%);Roads and highways (25%);Solid waste 
management (15%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Government of Central 
African Republic (GoCAR) to increase access to infrastructure and urban services in 
Bangui, the capital city. The project will support GoCAR to rapidly rehabilitate, restore, 
improve and expand sustainable access to basic infrastructure services to the population 
of the most deprived districts of Bangui. The achievement of this objective would support 
GoCAR?s efforts to demonstrate visible and tangible improvements in the lives of its 
citizens that are critical for sustaining social and political stability in the country.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Infrastructure Rehabilitation?US$15 million  
 
A.1 
Water Supply US$4.2 Million equivalent?Increasing water supply to Bangui 
residents, through support to: (i) emergency repairs/rehabilitation of identified critical 
leakage points on the SODECA network; (ii) rehabilitation of two broken water pumps 
and related electrical installations; and (iii) providing boreholes (powered by solar 
energy) in ten neighborhoods located on the outskirts of the city where the current 
SODECA network does not reach the population.  
 
Page  2
A.2 
Drainage Rehabilitation?US$4.2 Million equivalent:  Reducing the number of 
people affected by periodic flooding in the neighborhoods through support to: (i) 
rehabilitating and extension of substandard and unsound structures, and construction of 
new culverts of the central Bouagba canal; (ii) resurfacing the inner walls of the collector 
with stones and cement using mostly labor-intensive works methodology to generate 
more employment; (iii) rehabilitation of shoulders and side ditches of the secondary 
network that drains into the Main Bouagba collector.  
 
A.3 
Solid Waste Management?US$2.8 Million equivalent: Creating an operational 
solid waste management system, through support to: (i) constructing 41 transfer stations; 
(ii) rehabilitating a dumpsite; (iii) facilitating collection of solid waste; (iv) training small 
and medium size entrepreneurs, communities and municipality officials in solid waste 
management; and (v) carrying out communication and sensitization activities to increase 
communities? solid waste management awareness.  
 
A.4 
Urban Roads Rehabilitation?US$3.8 Million equivalent:  This subcomponent 
aims to rehabilitate about 66 km of primary and secondary gravel/dirt roads in Bangui, 
through support to (i) reshaping identified roads; (ii) reinforcing the base structures; (iii) 
re-gravelling the roads; and (iv) rehabilitating drainage and crossing structures and 
thereby increasing access to areas that are currently isolated.  This is expected to restore 
or significantly improve accessibility by vehicles to parts of the city where an estimated 
420,000 people currently live.  
 
Component B:  Institutional Strengthening ?-US$3 Million equivalent  
 
This component aims to strengthen the capacity of the institutions involved in the 
management of the project (the Ministry of Urbanism [MREPUL], Minist?re de 
l?Equipement, and AGETIP-CAF) and responsible for the delivery of urban services 
(Municipality of Bangui and Soci?t? de Distribution de l?Eau de Centrafrique 
(SODECA) to ensure (some level of) sustainability of the activities to be financed by the 
project. It is clear that this emergency operation will not address all the important 
sustainability issues that are associated with the delivery of the urban and infrastructure 
services that the project is supporting but will help build the foundations for sustainability 
of these services through other activities that the Government and other donors will 
implement. Activities under this component would include: (i) reinforcement of the 
Technical Department of the MREPUL by the provision of technical assistance; (ii) 
strengthening of the fiduciary functions in the Technical Secretariat; and (iii) acquisition 
of software for financial and procurement management, monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E), safeguards (environmental and social) issues, and training of technical staff of 
GoCAR agencies (MREPUL, Minist?re de l?Equipement, Minist?re de l?Hydraulique, 
SODECA, AGETIP-CAF and Municipality of Bangui) and communities involved in the 
project to better streamline implementation processes.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will mainly target the capital city of Bangui and its peri-urban areas.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The two environmental safeguards instruments associated with the proposed project are 
the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF). Activities under the project are not expected to generate any 
adverse environmental effect, as a large part of the project is geared toward sustainable 
urban development. Typical of category B project, the potential impacts are not likely to 
be large scale, significant and irreversible.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site-
specific. Thus, easily remediable. No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen 
during project implementation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The approach to safeguards will be to develop an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to cover all activities to 
be financed under the project. The local capacity for environmental and social 
management is weak. Therefore, an environmental consultant will be engaged to manage 
and oversee the environmental and social management process, while providing 
Page  4
institutional strengthening and on-the-job training services throughout the project period. 
This consultant would work closely with the implementing agency AGETIP-CAF to 
apply and strengthen the ESMF and RPF procedures that will improve subproject quality 
and sustainability through compliance with safeguards.  
 
Before the preparation of the safeguards instruments, the ASPEN safeguards specialist 
attached to the team will go to Bangui to undertake three things (i) Assess the 
institutional arrangement for environmental and social safeguards within the government 
implementing agency i.e. AGETIP-CAF, (ii) Assess the Government environmental 
disclosure requirements, EA consultation process and ascertain if there is an EIA law in 
place, and (iii) Provide ASPEN Toolkit for ESMFs for small-scale projects and run a 2-
day workshop on how to apply the guidelines to screen subprojects   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
-
AGETIP-CAF  
 
-
Ministry of Urbanism  
 
-
Ministry of Equipment  
 
-
Municipality of Bangui,  
 
-
SODECA  
 
-
Ministry of Hydrology  
 
-
Ministry of Equipment   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in conformance with OP 8.00, the 
completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments were not required 
as a condition for appraisal of the project. However, these instruments: the ESMF and 
RPF will be completed and disclosed within six months of project effectiveness.   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh 
04/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
04/19/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
04/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
04/19/2007 
Comments:   
Page  6
