Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2684 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/02/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Central African Republic 
Project ID: P104595 
Project Name: CAR - Emergency Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation & Maintenance 
Task Team Leader: Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (50%);Roads and highways (25%);Solid waste management 
(15%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed Project is to increase sustainable access to 
infrastructure services to the population of the most deprived districts of Bangui. It will help with 
poverty reduction among Bangui's urban and peri-urban populations by creating short-term 
employment opportunities associated with the works contracts and by improving living 
conditions of Bangui citizens through better access to rehabilitated infrastructure services. The 
project will increase the number of inhabitants having access to all year round passable roads, to 
improved solid waste management services, reduce the number of households flooded every year 
and increase the capacity of the municipality of Bangui to manage urban services, increase 
access to water supply services and increase number of people being temporarily employed.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have two components:(a)emergency rehabilitation and repair of critical 
infrastructure; and (b) strengthening institutional capacity which will be implemented in Bangui 
City.  
 
Component A - Emergency rehabilitation and repair of Critical Infrastructure:  
Page  2
A1-Water Supply: The water utility, SODECA , has been experiencing a critical situation. Half 
of water produced is lost, including technical and commercial losses with a high level of 
unaccountable for water (UFW). Only one out of four pumps is currently operational and that 
one has been running almost continuously and faces the risk of breakdown at any time. The 
project will support a series of activities which would support SODECA to provide more water 
to the population and support its technical ability to deliver water services. These activities will 
aim at (i) reducing water leakage/losses through emergency repairs at certain critical sections on 
the network; (ii) replacing the water pumps to safeguard the production and distribution of water 
to clients; and (iii) providing boreholes under private management in poor districts not served by 
SODECA and push for some management improvement to improve services in the short term.  
 
A2-Drainage: During rainy seasons several neighborhoods of Bangui experience recurrent 
flooding. The proposed project would deal with the comprehensive development of a whole 
catchments area from downstream to upstream in synergy with the series of THIMO projects 
funded by the AFD  and of the newly EU funded project. The catchments proposed by GoCAR 
and envisaged for inclusion is the one draining runoff into the Bouagba collector. The works on 
this canal would include (i) rehabilitation, protection and extension of the central Bouagba canal; 
(ii) rehabilitation of under-designed and unsound structures, and construction of new culverts; 
(iii) rehabilitation of shoulders and side ditches of the primary network; (iv) detailed engineering 
and supervision for these works; and (v) pilot low cost appropriate technology for lining and 
paving of canals by means of masonry, wooden piles, or sheet piling.  
 
A3-Solid waste: Throughout the city, garbage is dumped in canals and collectors resulting in 
their dysfunctioning and contributing to neighborhoods flooding. The current system for solid 
waste collection and transfer to dumping site covers only a small area of the city of Bangui. The 
proposed project would contribute to organizing garbage collection within the whole selected 
catchments area for drainage and its further transfer to the designated dumping site. It will also 
involve the two other wards in Bangui--construction of decentralized transfer stations, improving 
access to landlocked areas in project wards/districts, proceed with the removal of larger heaps of 
waste, improve access to and the technical operation of the dumping site while providing short to 
medium term employment opportunities.  
 
A4-Urban Roads: Many urban roads are impassable during most of the rainy seasons and many 
inhabitants are therefore limited in their movements. The basic roads sub-projects will be aimed 
at improving the conditions of urban roads through the use of cobble bricks in labor-intensive 
construction process which will provide employment while rehabilitating infrastructure 
destroyed or not maintained in the past decade.  
 
Component B - Strengthening Institutional Capacity:  
 
This component will provide support to develop the capacity of major infrastructure service 
providers to ensure that services are sustainable over time and that access to these services can be 
expanded in the short to medium term. This component will include information/communication 
activities to support the implementation and development of solid waste management, roads, 
Page  3
water and drainage. It would include training, short term Technical Assistance, supply of 
vehicles and equipment, and incremental operating costs of Government Agencies involved in 
the execution of the project, namely the MRUL, the Steering Committee (MPS) in charge of the 
coordination of the project's activities, the Municipality of Bangui to carry out project 
management and maintenance functions including short term support to re-establish basic 
procurement, financial, personnel and equipment management systems.  This component will 
also cover the management cost of operations of AGETIP-CAR, acting as the executing agency 
of component A.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will mainly target the urban and peri-urban areas of the capital city Bangui.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity in addressing safeguard issues will be further assessed, and 
the Government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank's safeguards specialist on the 
project team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not anticipated to cause any adverse damage to the environment, or to forcibly 
displace people from their land. However, infrastructure upgrading and civil works rehabilitation 
such as replacement of  water pumps, repairs of water networks, rehabilitation of shoulders/side 
ditches of the primary network and bouagba canal, construction of  culverts and transfer stations 
for municipal solid wastes; have the propensity to generate site-specific environmental and social 
impacts. To this end, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will have 
to be prepared by the borrower. The ESMF will be disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop prior 
to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Planned activities are not expected to lead to new land acquisition or restriction of access to 
sources of livelihood. However, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared as due 
diligence.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/02/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF will have to be prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country 
and at the Bank's InfoShop prior to appraisal. The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the 
safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh 
02/02/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/02/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
02/02/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
