Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1016 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Chad 
Project ID: P090265 
Project Name: Public Financial Management Capacity Building 
Task Team Leader: Mamadou Lamarane Deme 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (95%);Vocational training (5%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Administrative 
and civil service reform (S);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
19.00
19.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
If the project is successful, what will be its principle outcome for the primary target group?  
 
The overarching objective of the project is to help Chad improve the quality of public financial 
management system and strengthen capacity to make the best possible developmental use of its 
public resources, including oil revenues, to attain the Millennium Development Goals. The 
proposed project would also support capacity building related to institutional reforms to be 
implemented under the IDA-financed Institutional Reform Support Credit.  
 
Enhancing service delivery would be supported at the sector level through ongoing and new 
IDA-funded operations. The primary target group would be directorates in the Ministry of 
Economy and Finance (MOF), which are responsible for budget preparation, implementation and 
internal financial control and audit,  newly created DAAFMs in the priority  ministries, the 
General Directorate for Public Procurement, the oversight and financial control institutions and 
local training institutions.  
 
Page  2
By the end of the three-year project, it is expected that (i) expenditure programs in the priority 
sectors are better aligned with the PRSP and sector strategies as evidenced by PERs and annual 
PRSP reviews; (ii) the integrated financial management system and adequate procedures are in 
place to ensure that actual expenditures are in keeping with budget allocations and are cost 
efficient; (iii) reports prepared by financial control institutions are of adequate quality and their 
recommendations are taken into account; (iv) local training institutions are capable of delivering 
training modules related to public finance management; and (v) a broad Government program for 
capacity building in public administration is developed.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
What project components are being considered? Can indicative cost be identified?  
 
The project would include three components. Improving organizational structure of the MOF, 
development of procedures and norms, and human resource management and development 
would be strongly emphasized. An amount of US$0.5 million would be set aside for contingency 
purposes.  
 
(i) Strengthening public finance management (US$5.6 million). This component would support 
implementation of key activities of the action plan for PFM, during the first 2-3 years. The focus 
would be on the preparation of medium-term expenditure programs in the priority sectors, the 
formulation and implementation of improved procedures for budget execution, including public 
procurement, completion of the integrated financial management system, with further 
improvements in the public accounting system, and development of human resource 
management and development in line ministries. Training, financed by the credit, will be a key 
component of a comprehensive, results-driven capacity building strategy. The project would 
reinforce the capabilities of local training institutions with support from the World Bank 
Institute.  
 
(ii) Oversight and control (US$1.3 million). This component would provide for further 
institutional strengthening for the Collège and Chambre des Comptes, which play a critical role 
in overseeing the allocation and use of the oil revenues. It would finance operating costs, 
including salaries of the Collège’s technical staff until those are assumed by the state budget, 
training and study tours, technical assistance, and information and communication services.  
 
(iii) Economic and institutional reform monitoring (US$1.1 million). The proposed operation 
would continue providing support to implementation of the reform program supported by the 
IRSC, as well as to the preparation of a Government broader program for institutional capacity 
building. The Credit would finance studies, technical assistance, training, workshops for 
consultations with stakeholders, and operating cost of coordination, monitoring and evaluation of 
IRSC.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located at the Ministry of Economy and Finance. Project implementation 
arrangements will rely on strengthening capacity of envisaged internal institutional arrangements 
to  
 
oversee and facilitate the restructuring of the Ministry.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Given still limited administrative capacity, including the capacity to process contracts and 
maintain adequate financial records and controls, project implementation may be slower than 
desirable. To mitigate this risk, technical assistance would be provided to help in  sequencing of 
capacity building activities and to support the project team in the management and monitoring of 
project implementation, as well as  for project procurement and financial management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/14/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gradimir Radisic 
11/17/2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
11/18/2004 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gradimir Radisic 
11/17/2004 
Comments:   
