Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/05/2006 
Report No.:  AC1816
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Chad 
Project ID:  P072030 
Project Name:  Urban Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Franck Bousquet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 23, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 30, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);Sub-national 
government administration (40%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.00
12.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to increase sustainable access to municipal services 
for residents in N'Djamena, Sarh, Moundou, Abeche and Doba.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will finance priority infrastructure (water, drainage, and economic 
infrastructure) in N'Djamena, Moundou, Sarh, Abeche and Doba to address partially the 
significant infrastructure gaps these cities are facing.  By packaging public works 
appropriately and using, when possible, labor-intensive methods, the project will create 
employment opportunities for unskilled and semi-skilled labor and promote SMEs in 
construction and urban services.  Finally, the project will improve capacity at the local 
level to plan, manage and maintain infrastructure and services and will support capacity 
to foster urban development at the central level.  
 
The project will have two components (i) strengthening municipal and urban 
management capacity; and (ii) provision of urban infrastructures and services.  
 
Page  2
Component A: Strengthening municipal and urban management capacities (total 
estimated cost: US$5.28 million, entirely funded by IDA)  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of the local governments 
in N'Djamena, Sarh, Moundou, Abeche and Doba to plan and manage the development 
and the delivery of infrastructure and urban services and to increase their financial 
resources in order to maintain existing and new infrastructure. The use of new or 
improved management tools and better identification and improved collection of financial 
resources in addition to capacity building will be the main thrusts of this component. 
Activities under this component will target changes that should happened at the 
municipal level and actions that will take place at the central level regarding the 
Ministries in charge of urban affairs, decentralization, finance, and land planning.  
 
The preparatory studies identified the necessary measures to achieve the component 
objective: (i) scale up the municipalities' human resources and improve the functioning of 
their support units; (ii) strengthen the technical services of the municipalities and 
providing them with the tools to carry out urban planning; (iii) establish a more 
transparent municipal management and accountability towards tax payers; (iv) strengthen 
capacity of the central and deconcentrated administration to supervise and provide 
technical assistance to the municipalities; (v) increase the financial resources at the 
disposal of the municipalities through improved collection of taxes, better yield from 
municipal assets, and strengthen the mechanisms for transfer of resources from the State 
to the municipalities; and (vi) introduce efficient management of expenditures with a 
focus on maintenance, to improve sustainability of investments.  
 
Sub-component A.1: Strengthening urban and municipal management capacities 
(estimated cost: US$2.41 million).  The sub-component will strengthen urban and 
municipal capacities in the respective municipalities through workshops, technical 
assistance, studies, training and provision of equipment. The objective is to set up 
effective, accountable and performing local governments by impacting on the attitudes 
and behaviors of officials and staff while packaging the proper incentive systems and 
penalties and by clarifying the roles and responsibilities of all actors.  This sub-
component will finance activities aimed at:  
 
(a) 
improving the internal functioning and organization of municipalities.  Activities 
include: (i) organizational audit for local municipalities and adoption of a municipal 
management manual; (ii) strengthening municipal technical services (training and 
equipment); (iii) provision of office equipment and logistics; and (iv) information 
technology training;  
 
(b) 
improving resource mobilization and financial management. A significant portion 
of the communes' resources consists of State taxes returning totally or partially to the 
communes. In this regard, the IGL and TVLP constitute a major source of taxes 
benefiting the communes. As for municipal finances, the Project cities suffer from an 
insufficient finance framework, a lack of adapted management tools and inadequate 
system of mobilizing resources, and non-regular transfer of resources from the central 
Page  3
government.  The project will assist the government and the cities themselves in 
improving the performance and the effectiveness of cities in order to help them to provide 
better urban services. This sub-component will finance the following activities: (i) 
improving resource mobilization (IGL/TVLP) leveraging the actions previously carried 
out in N'Djamena under AFD financing; (ii) standardizing the budget nomenclature; (iii) 
improving municipalities' financing management and accounting systems; (iv) improving 
collection of and management of urban taxes and yield from properties (through 
improvement of mapping and data base, strengthening of collection of urban taxes 
administered at the central and local level, including a system of supervision, control and 
incentives for the tax collectors); and (v) information campaigns to educate residents on 
the use of urban taxes, which shall also contribute to increase the willingness to pay these 
taxes  
 
(c) 
Improving urban management and planning.  Activities include: (i) strengthening 
technical services in management and planning (training, equipment); and (ii) preparation 
of a strategic sanitation plan for N'Djamena and the four other cities;  
 
(d) 
Improving transparency and accountability of city managers to urban residents. 
With the objective of increasing local governments' accountability to urban residents, this 
sub-component will finance the reporting to the population of: (i) municipalities' financial 
performance, (ii) progress reports on the project, identifying bottlenecks and actions to be 
taken at national and local levels for delivery of urban services, (iii) publication of cities' 
project performance indicators; and (iv) surveys on satisfaction of the urban population to 
ensure that municipalities take into account specific needs expressed by urban residents; 
and  
 
(e) 
providing support to community integration and awareness on socio-
environmental aspects.  Activities include: (i) support to sanitation committees; (ii) 
support to the management of public standpipes (sanitation committees or private 
structures); (iii) IEC activities in the area of environmental protection and health; and (iv) 
training for municipalities, key ministries including deconcentrated services in 
environment and social aspects.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Strengthening the capacity of the central and deconcentrated 
administrations to support the municipalities (estimated cost: US$2.87 million).  The 
objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the capacities of the central and 
deconcentrated administration to provide technical support to the municipalities to 
manage their new responsibilities (financial and urban management, procurement, tax 
base identification and collection, reporting, etc..). This sub-component will finance 
activities for:  
 
(a) 
Ministry of Land Planning, Urban Development and Housing (MATUH) and its 
deconcentrated services. MATUH's capacity will be strengthened in order to: (a) better 
support cities, in particular for the development and use of urban plans; and (b) ensure an 
optimal use of  oil revenues in the urban sector. Key activities to be funded under this 
sub-component include: (i) assistance to MATUH in implementing annual urban policy 
Page  4
review and strengthening its budget planning and execution; (ii) project launch workshop, 
mid-term review, and IEC activities for the project; (iii) strengthening the Ministry's 
(SG/DUCC) capacities, including functioning of the PMU within the DUCC; (iv) 
preparation and update of urban development plans for Moundou, Sarh, Abeche and 
Doba, as well as for 12 additional Chadian cities.  
 
(b) 
Ministry of Finance, Economy and Planning. Taxes and fees collected by State 
agencies and transferred to the communes represent the largest share of revenues for the 
communes. Assistance to the Ministry of Finance, Economy and Planning will include: 
(i) support to the deconcentrated departments of DGI and DGT to improve tax collection 
and transfer of resources; and (ii) support to the Ministry's local entities in charge of 
financial management in the municipalities.  
 
(c) 
Ministry of Land Administration.  Assistance to MAT will include: (i) training of 
staff involved with the Project implementation; and (ii) support to DCL (entity in charge 
of supervising the municipalities) in order to improve the technical and administrative 
role that it plays in assisting local governments.  
 
(d) 
Ministry in charge of Decentralization.  Assistance will include studies for 
preparation of decrees in the framework of the on-going decentralization process, and in 
collaboration with other key Ministries.  
 
Component B:  Provision of basic urban infrastructure and services (US$17.82 million; 
IDA amount: US$9.72 million)  
 
The main objective of this component is to increase access to urban infrastructure.  By 
implementing activities that are part of the project, sanitary conditions will be improved, 
opportunities for unskilled and semi-skilled labor will be created and SMEs in 
construction will be providing services and will improved their competencies.  
 
Specific investments for the cities of Moundou, Sarh and Abeche are based on the 
priorities defined in preparatory feasibility studies financed by the PHRD.  These 
priorities were discussed during the preparation mission in each city through a 
comprehensive and participatory process with local officials, the representatives of 
Central government (services deconcentres de l'Etat), local NGOs, neighborhoods 
associations, unions and beneficiaries.  During the pre-appraisal mission, these activities 
were confirmed by the municipalities during a project workshop (gathering all key 
nationals, local representatives and NGOs) organized in N'Djamena in February 2005.  
The business communities in these cities highlighted the positive impact that the drainage 
works would have in their activities by generating economic benefits in the form of less 
damage to property, reducing industrial and commercial turnover, lowering loss in stocks 
of goods, and preventing damage to infrastructure.  These activities include (i) drainage, 
sanitation and rehabilitation of roads; (ii) rehabilitation and extension of the potable water 
distribution network; and (iii) provision of economic infrastructures such as markets and 
slaughterhouse. 
Page  5
Sub-component B.1: For the City of N'Djamena (cost: US$0.72 million).  Under this 
sub-component, the project will finance mainly drainage works for commercial areas, 
specifically in the main market (marche a mil) to allow the extension of the market in 
order to accommodate new canteens and better access by the neighboring populations.  
Drainage works relate primarily to the rehabilitation and rebuilding of the rainwater 
drains which run along the east side of the market .  
 
Sub-component B.2: For the city of Moundou (cost: US$4.56 million).  Under this sub-
component, the project will finance: (i) the rehabilitation and extension of the water 
network and the construction of public standpipes in the most densely populated 
neighborhoods (59,000 inhabitants representing 40% of the total population); (ii) the 
second phase of drainage works  - and (iii) the rehabilitation and extension of the main 
market (marche a mil) so as to create a new development pole of this market to 
accommodate 500 stands.  
 
Sub-component B.3: For the city of Sarh (cost: US$3.80 million).  Under this sub-
component, the project will finance: (i) the construction of boreholes, rehabilitation and 
extension of water network; and (ii) the second phase of drainage works .  
 
Sub-component B.4: For the city of Abeche (cost: US$4.8 million).  Under this sub-
component, the project will finance: (i) the construction of boreholes and extension of the 
water network including public standpipes; (ii) drainage works; and (iii) construction of a 
slaughterhouse with sanitation facilities and waste management.  
 
Sub-component B.5. For the city of Doba (cost: US$2.0 million).  Under this sub-
component, the project will finance the construction of earth roads and the drainage 
associated in order to help facilitate the access to isolated neighborhoods in Doba. This 
will include the construction/rehabilitation of 4 km of primary urban roads, 10 km of 
secondary roads, and 12 km of drains. The urban roads to be included in this sub-
component will be finalized during appraisal, subject to a review to ensure that the ERR 
is acceptable. 
 
Sub-component B.6: M&E, Supervision of Works and Audits (cost: US$1.94 million).  
Under this sub-component, the project will finance: (i) monitoring and evaluation 
activities; (ii) environmental and social impact studies that may be required during 
implementation of component B of the project; (iii) supervision of works; (iv) periodic 
technical audits for works and contract management procedures; and (v) financial audits 
of works.  
 
Provisions for physical contingencies (10% of works or US$1.59 million) and financial 
contingencies (10% of project costs or US$2.32 million) are included in the total project 
costs.   
 
Page  6
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project cities (N'Djamena, Moundou, Sarh, Abeche and Doba) are characterized by 
rapid population growth, significant infrastructure shortage and deterioration, and the 
lack of viable local infrastructure investment and maintenance plans.  As a result, these 
cities are confronted with emergency shortages of public services, which, in addition to 
reducing the quality of life for residents and stifling economic growth, also present 
significant public health risks. The drainage of stagnant rainwater or sewage and even the 
disposal of household waste are perpetual problems in most Chadian cities, especially in 
very low-income residential areas, where unsanitary urban conditions take a heavy toll on 
public health.  The nature of works to be carried out in those five cities have been 
identified and this would include (i) drainage, sanitation and the associated rehabilitation 
of affected roads; (ii) rehabilitation and extension of the potable water supply system; 
(iii) provision of economic infrastructure; and (iv) provision of access roads to isolated 
poor neighborhoods.  Most of these works are complement to works already carried out 
by other donors in the past six years.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No long term adverse impacts were identified in the Environmental Assessment 
instrument: Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  This project will 
not fund activities that would cause an adverse effect on the environment or any form of 
land acquisition or restriction of access to sources of livelihoods.  The potential 
environmental and social impacts of sub-projects under this component will be small-
scale and site-specific typical of Category B projects.   
 
Page  7
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term adverse impact is anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of project preparation activities, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) has been prepared.  The objective of the ESMF is to establish a 
mechanism to determine and estimate the future potential environmental and social 
impacts of the activities to be undertaken under the project, and to define the measures of 
mitigation, monitoring and the institutional measures to be undertaken during 
implementation of the project.  The ESMF was prepared to cover Moundou, N'Djamena, 
Sarh, Doba and Abeche.  It is anticipated that project activities might not lead to land 
acquisition or restriction of access to sources of livelihood.  However, in the event that 
there are resettlement concerns, a resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been 
prepared, and this will be translated to RAPs as and when the need arises during project 
implementation.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), prepared by the Government, addresses the 
issue of resettlement of the affected people.  A RPF that meets the requirements of Bank's 
safeguard policies will be/was developed and adopted for each of the cities (N'Djamena, 
Moundou, Sarh, Doba, and Abeche) prior to appraisal.  The scope of the RPF is to 
provide details on: (i) populations to be affected by the project; (ii) the most vulnerable 
population; (iii) legal regulation framework; (iv) methods used for identification and 
evaluation of the affected people; (v) methods and planning of resettlement and 
compensation packages; and (vi) external and internal monitoring.  The RAPs provide 
principles and instructions on: (i) minimizing land acquisition and subsequent 
displacement; (ii) compensation to all project affected persons including non-title holders 
etc.  The RPF provides and principles and procedures for the preparation RAPs for later 
projects investments phase.  
 
The Borrower's institutional capacity in addressing safeguards issues will be further 
assessed, and the government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank's 
Safeguards Specialists on the project team.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders and potential project affected persons were consulted during the preparation 
of the ESMF and RPF.  The Safeguards Instruments of RPF and ESMF were disclosed to 
the public within the country on June 7, 2006 and at the World Bank Info shop on June 
16, 2006.   
 
Page  8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/07/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/16/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/07/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/16/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  9
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Franck Bousquet 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
 
Comments:   
