Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC2556
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Chad 
Project ID:  P090265 
Project Name:  Public Financial Management Capacity Building 
Task Team Leader:  Mamadou Lamarane Deme 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (95%);Vocational training (5%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Administrative 
and civil service reform (S);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
19.00
19.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective of the proposed operation is to help the GoC enhance 
the quality and effectiveness of its PFM system in order to improve the efficient and 
transparent use of public resources. To this end, the proposed IDA project will contribute 
to the implementation of the Government PFM reform program in close coordination 
with other donors.  
 
More efficient use of public resources in Chad will have two aspects, budget allocation 
and budget execution. It will require an improved budget process that leads to an 
allocation of the bulk of public resources, especially of oil revenue, to poverty-related 
needs. At the execution level, it involves keeping the deviation between actual and 
originally budgeted public expenditure in a small range, notably in priority sectors, as a 
result of improved budget monitoring and cash planning processes.  
 
The more transparent use of public resources in Chad translates into two targets. It 
involves improvements in monitoring and accountability systems that allow all 
stakeholders to know how public resources (including oil revenue) are used. At the 
Page  2
operational level, transparency will imply that civil servants are better able to protect 
public resources against misappropriation and to more effectively report on the use of 
public funds.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes four components, as follows:  
 
Component 1: Public finance management and financial accountability  
 
Component 2:  Human resource development  
 
Component 3: Integrated Financial Management Information System  
 
Component 4: Coordination and M&E of the Government Program   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located at the Ministry of Economy and Finance. Project 
implementation arrangements will rely on internal institutional arrangements.  
 
There is no works that could pose any environmental issue or commend any safeguard 
analysis. There are only small works planned under component 4 (Coordination and 
M&E system), for less than US$ 4,000 to rehabilitate an existing office within the 
Technical Secretariat (TS) building to accommodate its staff.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable   
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
N/A 
Page  4
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mamadou Lamarane Deme 
04/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
04/19/2007 
Comments:   
