Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2676 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Chile 
Project ID: P103441 
Project Name: Second Public Expenditure Management 
Task Team Leader: Roberto O. Panzardi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (70%);Information technology (30%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Debt 
management and fiscal sustainability (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
23.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objective would be to enhance public expenditure management by 
improving information systems and practices. Thereby, the effectiveness of financial 
administration and assets management would be improved with gains for efficiency, 
effectiveness and transparency.   Specifically, the project would:  
 
-
Improve fiscal monitoring by updating existing data systems and developing common 
standards for recording financial information.  
 
-
Improve budget processes by developing new methods for resource management and by 
strengthening the system of monitoring and evaluation.  
 
-
Strengthen financial management at the local level and especially in the most vulnerability 
municipalities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1:  
 
Upgrading SIGFE and expanding its coverage to the entire public sector.  
 
Page  2
Technical assistance and training would be provided for the design, implementation and 
monitoring of:  
 
a:  SIGFE Upgrade.  
 
A
new and expanded version of SIGFE would be developed and introduced, including:  
 
-
The redesign of budget, accounting and treasury functions for all stages of budget preparation, 
execution and control.  
 
-
The technical upgrading of software and hardware that would enable the system to be adapted 
to a web-based platform.  
 
-
The development of system modules for specialized functions such as the management of 
fixed assets, treasury management and financial planning, and the management of financial 
information for the Ministry of Health relating to hospital and pharmacy services.  
 
-
Mainstreaming the functions of the SIGFE unit within DIPRES and other public agencies at 
the national and regional level.  
 
b: Extension of SIGFE to the entire Central Government.  
 
Although SIGFE has been adopted by 90 percent of all central government agencies, the 10 
percent that remain outside the system include some large and important entities such as the 
National Treasury, the Ministry of Public Works, the Armed Forces, the Legislature and the 
Judiciary.  They were not included in the first project because, in general, they were well served 
by their own specialized systems of financial management.  The proposed second project would 
bring them into SIGFE. That would entail: (i) an assessment and redesign of the systems now in 
use by entities currently outside the system; and (ii) the customization of SIGFE to suit the needs 
of each entity.  
 
Component 2:  
 
Improvement of Budget Procedures (including preparation, execution, monitoring and 
evaluation) and of Mechanisms for Monitoring and Evaluation.  
 
A
pilot program would be introduced with an initial focus on policy modules (areas de 
pol?ticas) in a few selected ministries or agencies. Support would be provided to develop 
innovative methods of budget formulation for the selected policy modules and for strengthening 
the capacity of DIPRES to undertake results-based monitoring and evaluation.  
 
a. Development of new methods for resource management:  
 
-
New methodologies for resource management would be introduced for key policy modules 
within one or more ministries/agencies.  
 
-
For each of the policy modules, budget systems would be improved, and the monitoring and 
evaluation of budget outcomes would emphasize measurable results.  
 
-
The incentives for client agencies to participate in SIGFE would be enhanced by 
demonstrating how performance-based management can help them improve their own 
effectiveness and efficiency.  
 
b. Strengthen monitoring and evaluation:  
 
-
The Management Control Division (Division de Control de Gesti?n) of DIPRES would be 
strengthened.  
Page  3
-
Indicators would be developed to assess the extent to which budget outcomes are consistent 
with project development objectives in terms of efficiency and effectiveness.  
 
-
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) would be improved by strengthening the capacity of public 
agencies at the central, regional and municipal level so that they may better appreciate how M&E 
can be used as an effective management tool.  
 
-
The present system of Program Evaluation (PE) would be upgraded, especially with respect to 
M&E.  
 
-
The number of program and project evaluations (both internal and external) conducted by 
public sector entities would be increased from present levels.  
 
Component 3  
 
Strengthening the Financial Management of Municipal Governments  
 
The objectives of this component  would be to improve the availability of information on 
municipal budgets and financial transfers, to improve the efficiency with which capital transfers 
are made by the central government to municipalities, and the enhance the delivery of municipal 
services. Implementation would be a collaborative effort between the Office of the Comptroller 
General (CGO) and the Sub-Secretariat for Regional Development in the Ministry of Interior 
(SUBDERE).  
 
Finance would be provided for technical assistance, goods and training to strengthen financial 
management at the municipal level. That would include:  
 
-
Studies to evaluate the current state of financial management at the municipal level.  The 
studies would employ the public expenditure and financial accounting methodology and the 
institutional analysis developed by PEFA  
 
-
A
simplified system of financial management (to be known as SIGFE-MUNI) would be 
designed and installed in all municipalities. The system would cover budget, accounting and 
treasury functions.  Installation at the municipal level would be phased.  It would include 
guidelines for users together with training in information technology and processes.  
 
-
The budget classifications and accounting framework approved by CGO and DIPRES would 
be introduced at the municipal level.  
 
-
Support would be provided for intensive training programs focusing primarily on ITC and on 
budget and accounting techniques as well as on the use of the SIGFE-MUNI for large, medium 
and small municipalities.  
 
-
Support for the implementation of SIGFE-MUNI would focus, in particular, on the poorest 
100 municipalities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Santiago, Chile   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable since the project is not expected to trigger any Bank safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga (LCSSA) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Roberto O. Panzardi 
01/12/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Fernando Rojas 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
