Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2529 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/29/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Chile 
Project ID: P102931 
Project Name: Chile Ministry of Public Works Institutional Strenghtening TAL 
Task Team Leader: Jordan Z. Schwartz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 10, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (60%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(20%);General public administration sector (20%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Managing for development results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The purpose of the Technical Assistance Loan and the related Development Policy Loan is to 
support the process of institutional strengthening taking place at the MOP.  The objectives will 
include improving planning, implementation, management and regulation of concessioned 
infrastructure projects as well as road maintenance and public works contracts.  
 
The long-term expected project outcomes will be:  
 
-
More efficient use of public resources in the area of infrastructure investment;  
 
-
Higher level of efficiency returned to consumers and society at large in infrastructure services 
that are concessioned;  
 
-
Strengthening of regulation and of oversight arrangements to increase transparency and citizen 
participation; and  
 
-
More regionally equitable commitment of resources for development as a result of the 
inclusion of regional perspective in project planning.  
 
Page  2
During the course of supervision of the project, the task team will work with MOP to establish a 
methodology for the long-term measurement of improvements in the above outcomes.  That 
impact analysis will be responsibility of the MOP and will form a basis of the new levels of 
accountability being sought by the current administration.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
After extensive discussions among the Bank team, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of 
Public Works, it has been agreed that the Bank?s assistance should come through a dual program 
of a Technical Assistance Loan and a Development Policy Loan.  While the TAL will provide 
funding and Bank supervisory for the necessary consultancy, capacity building and training, the 
major expected outputs of that technical assistance will define the DPL.  In order for the triggers 
of the DPL to provide real incentives for the delivery of the TAL, the Ministry of Finance is now 
in discussions with the MOP to identify linkages between the two loans.  The two Ministries are 
preparing intra-ministerial agreements about the linkages and are exploring the possibility of 
Hacienda withholding MOP budget in line with the value of the expected DPL.  Resources 
would in this way be transferred to MOP upon successful completion of the TAL tasks identified 
as DPL triggers.  
 
The Technical Assistance Loan will look at every stage of involvement of the Ministry of 
Public Works to improve the efficiency and efficacy of its operations and investments.  
 
Both the DPL and the TAL will be built around the following components to strengthen the 
MOP's capacities and to improve its procedures:  
 
1. 
Integrated Planning:  The objective of this pillar of work is to strengthen the MOP's 
process of planning in two dimensions: (i) Regional or geographic planning for the development 
of infrastructure platforms that raises the levels of both productive and social infrastructure 
throughout a given macro-zone; and (ii) Integrated planning along supply-chains to identify 
infrastructure bottlenecks and increase sectoral competitiveness, incorporating all infrastructure, 
service and regulatory components of a given product's logistics systems.  
 
2.
Concession and Road Contract Design:  For concessions, the objective is to adopt best 
practices for bidding processes and concession design to maximize competitiveness for the right 
to serve and efficiency of investment and operations for winning bidders.  For public works 
contracts, the objective is to implement road maintenance and rehabilitation contracts based on 
quality of service criteria.  
 
3. 
Project Management.  The objective of this component of the reform initiative is to 
design and implement a system of project management that brings together, under a single 
manager, all phases of the lifecycle of a project including pre-feasibility, feasibility, contract 
award, construction and monitoring of performance.  
 
4. 
Regulation or Oversight (Fiscalizacion).  The objective of this area of intervention is to 
design and implement an agency (Superintendencia) that will regulate quality of service 
standards as well as changes to the economic-financial equilibrium of both concessions and 
public works.  
 
Page  3
In addition to these core components, the project will include tasks under the rubric of 
Institutional Strengthening which underpin the reform initiative and cut across all of the 
Ministry's functions.  These tasks will include Change Management for defining new department 
relations and lines of reporting, and identifying specific human resource needs; Strategic 
Communications to allow the Minister to communicate internally to staff and externally to all 
other stakeholders the intent, benefits, challenges and progress of each reform initiative; and 
Information Technology to expedite and refocus the program currently underway for the 
integration of the Ministry's management and financial information systems.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Chile   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A. This is Technical Assistance Loan/Development Policy Loan that will finance 
consultancies and assessments for the institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Public 
Works. There are no specific investments financed that would have an environmental impact.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Carter J. Brandon (LCSES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/12/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/20/2007 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jordan Z. Schwartz 
11/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
11/28/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
