Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC2955
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Chile 
Project ID:  P102931 
Project Name:  Chile Ministry of Public Works Institutional Strenghtening TAL 
Task Team Leader:  Jordan Z. Schwartz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (60%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(20%);General public administration sector (20%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Managing for development results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
11.70 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to assist the Government in achieving a 
sustainable and integrated approach to the planning of infrastructure; levels of service 
standards for infrastructure as well as model contracts and procedures that promote 
competition and assign risks appropriately; an integrated project management process; a 
regulatory framework for all of MOPW?s sectors of responsibility that increases 
consumer confidence in infrastructure service provision; and the legal and organizational 
separation of the areas of planning, contracting, execution and regulation of infrastructure 
provision.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Ministry of Public Works represents, in many ways, a linchpin in the Chilean 
economy.  Its own budget of US$1.25 billion makes it one of the largest financiers of 
construction in the country.  The additional US$600 million to $1.1 billion per year in 
concession investments that it leverages makes it the primary driver of public-private 
partnerships in the country.  Its rural infrastructure programs provide direct services for 
much of the country?s poor.  Its efforts at monitoring contracts and concessions provide 
Page  2
users with their primary source of protection.  Perhaps most profoundly, the infrastructure 
network that it builds underpins the competitiveness of most major industries in Chile.  
 
With an economic mandate as broad and deep as that of the Ministry of Public Works, it 
is hard to understate the benefits of higher levels of efficiency in works; more service-
oriented contracts; a better use of integrated planning to avoid white elephants and 
maximize the value of money for investment; and of greater transparency, oversight and 
consumer voice.  Logistics costs represent a clear example of the scope of potential 
benefits from better transport planning and project implementation.  The World Bank has 
estimated Chilean logistics costs as a share of GDP at 16 percent as compared to OECD 
countries/comparators who spend on average 10 to 11 percent of GDP.  If better 
intermodal linkages through more effective planning and project implementation 
decreased the logistics burden by so much as 1 percent, that economic windfall alone 
would be approximately 20 times the cost of the proposed reform.  More importantly, 
Chilean producers would benefit from the lower costs of transport services which would 
contribute to greater competitiveness, job creation and growth.  
 
Even though MOPW?s investments generally, and concessions in particular, have 
contributed to closing Chile?s infrastructure deficit, many economic analysts as well as 
the current Government believe that the leveraging of the private sector can be further 
improved as can the use of public resources for works projects.Concerns about bias and 
inefficiency in concession design and oversight have recently risen to the surface despite 
the outside world?s positive assessment of Chile?s concession program.  In particular, the 
growing frequency and size of concession renegotiations through ?complementary 
agreements? (convenios complementarios) is attracting increasing coverage in the 
Chilean news media.  As the existing Concessions Law does not allow the Ministry or an 
oversight body to recalculate tariffs based on a regulatory accounting of costs, these 
renegotiations create uncertainty about the value for money being achieved in the 
investments.  
 
Interventions to correct these inefficiencies and concerns fall first and foremost to the 
Ministry of Public Works (MOPW) since it is the primary agency responsible for 
planning, developing and constructing public infrastructure in support of the economic 
and social development of the country.  Moreover, the MOPW is in charge of the 
maintenance, operation and administration of these public works as well as the design 
and implementation of almost all concessions.   From the administration?s perspective, 
the best way to address these concerns is to modernize the internal processes of the 
MOPW; assure that its investments are linked to regional and national plans for growth; 
reorient contracts toward outputs; strengthen the oversight capacity for all contracts and 
concessions; and increase the role of the consumer in every stage of project development 
and operation.  MOPW?s institutional strengthening program therefore focuses on 
developing processes for integrated regional and supply chain planning, redesigning 
contracts to include service standards and strengthen competitive bid procedures; 
improving project management, and expand regulatory capacity of both contracts and 
concessions.  
 
Page  3
Components  
 
Component 1 - Integrated Planning: the objective is to enhance MOPW?s medium-term 
and long-term planning process of infrastructure investments, both at the national and 
sub-national level, while integrating a supply-chain approach and a territorial approach 
that will identify infrastructure bottlenecks and underpin the productive potential of each 
territory.  
 
Component 2 - Standards, Contracts and Competition:  this component will establish a 
methodology for setting, evaluating and updating MOPW?s standards of service based on 
an international benchmarking of best practices in the use of output or performance-based 
contracts . This methodology will allow for the development of a Standards-of-Service 
Manual that assigns standards according to type of contract, sub-sector, cost or cost 
categories, and demand levels. In addition, this component will finance the development 
of a database of contracts and concessions which will be used to assess the variables of 
contract design and bidding process against their ability to generate competition and 
investment results. Based upon these analyses, model contracts will be developed for 
each primary type of contract and each sub-sector.  
 
Component 3 ? Integrated Project Management: this component will  design a new 
Project Management model building on MOPW?s existing conceptual design including 
technical aspects, procedures, human resources, and the establishment of information and 
software tools to accompany the new Project Management model. The fundamental 
aspect of the design of this model is that it will be applied through a dynamic process (a 
hands-on trial and error approach) since lack of experience and applicability of the 
proposals need validating through their trial in project execution.  
 
Component 4 - Strengthening of Regulation or Oversight (?Fiscalizaci?n?): despite the 
large portion of investments in Chile?s infrastructure that are undertaken by private 
concessionaires, there is currently no independent regulatory body overseeing road, 
bridge, airport or public building contracts. Chile?s current administration has taken the 
initiative in addressing these imbalances in the market by drafting a new law to create a 
Superintendent of Public Works and by instigating a process for redesigning new public 
works and concessions contracts according to output or performance-based criteria. This 
component will support the Superintendent in several key aspects related to its ability to 
monitor performance against services standards.  These will include: (i) development of 
implementing rules and regulations that define the Superintendent?s scope of 
responsibilities; (ii) drafting of an operations manual, to lay out the procedures that 
comprise the process of Fiscalizaci?n and renegotiation; and (iii) designing economic and 
financial models and their accompanying regulatory accounting manuals for Public-
Private Partnerships in airports and public buildings  
 
Component 5 ? Organizational Reform:  
A full implementation in the change of 
processes envisioned in the first four components would result in new working relations, 
changes in the definition and relationship of entire working units, a revised matrix 
structure for project management and reporting, and the definition of new skill 
Page  4
requirements.  The MOPW envisions contracting a reputable international firm with 
experience in organizational change and business process re-engineering to undertake the 
core institutional development work associated with MOPW?s reform.  The Bank will 
finance a consultancy to provide a high-level definition of the alternative arrangements in 
accordance with the proposed legal changes. In addition, this component intends to 
separate institutionally and legally the areas of planning, contracting, execution and 
regulation of infrastructure provision in order to allow for a system of checks and 
balances according to a rational and transparent assignment of roles and responsibilities.  
The expected output is the passage of the laws that will define the primary 
responsibilities of the MOPW?s agencies, namely the Law for the Creation of the 
Superintendent of Public Works and the Amended Law on Concessions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This is Technical Assistance Loan that will finance consultancies and assessments for the 
institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Public Works. There are no specific 
investments financed that would have an environmental impact.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
