Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3015 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P099751 
Project Name: CN-Sustainable Dev. in Poor Rural Areas 
Task Team Leader: Alan L. Piazza 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P101844 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (45%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%);Roads and 
highways (15%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring 
(S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project’s development objective is to explore and pilot more effective and 
innovative ways of providing poverty reduction assistance to the poorest communities and 
households in the forms they themselves most desire and with greater positive impact.  By 
bringing project funding down to the community level and enabling the communities and 
households to determine the use of those funds, the project would help resolve the problems of 
(a) only a limited portion of available poverty reduction funding reaching the local level, and (b) 
institutional priorities and administrative constraints predetermining what poverty reduction 
activities actually take place at the local level.  By (a) improving access to housing, vocational 
and other training, and health and other social services, and (b) increasing the absorptive capacity 
of small towns on a pilot basis, the project would help to overcome the dangerous working and 
living conditions and other difficulties confronting rural migrants living in urban areas and help 
expand the rural poor’s access to off-farm employment.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. Community Infrastructure and Public Services.  The community infrastructure and public 
services component would reach out to designated poor and remote villages and address the lack 
of basic rural infrastructure and the persistently poor enabling environment for participation in 
economic development.  This component would include investment support for village access 
roads construction and improvements, drinking water supply systems, basic housing repair, 
electrification, communications, and small-scale agriculture production infrastructure (such as 
cisterns and water storage systems, irrigation and drainage, and land terracing and other land 
improvements).  Implementation would build on a demand-driven approach to ensure that 
infrastructure investments will meet the needs that have been identified by the villagers 
themselves as most urgent preconditions for improved well-being.  
 
2. Household Income Generation and Capacity Building.  The household income generation 
and capacity building component would address the current lack of basic income sources in 
remote villages and provide small block grants to communities, through a Community 
Development Fund (CDF), to support household-level productive activities such as improved 
and diversified crop production, animal husbandry, and other income generating activities.  The 
CDF approach would draw on the experiences of a number of CDD and CDF pilots currently 
being implemented and tested in China.  It would promote the full devolvement of all 
implementation, management and supervision responsibilities to participating villages, with 
informed and self-determined choices for productive activities.  CDF implementation would be 
accompanied by carefully sequenced capacity building at the village level, including farmer 
training in technical and vocational skills, infrastructure operation and management, community 
development, skills training for women, and training in fund operation and management.  
Capacity building would also include support to the extension services of key line bureaus, 
access to market information, and awareness campaigns about off-farm labor opportunities for 
farmers.  
 
3. Rural Migrants Support.  The rural migrant support component would address the challenges 
associated with China’s on-going large scale rural-to-urban migration, a defining factor of 
China’s urbanization process, with the objective of exploring a replicable model which could be 
scaled-up nationwide.  The identified challenges include unsafe housing conditions and harsh 
living environments, lack of vocational training for better and more stable job opportunities, and 
very limited access to basic social services such as legal assistance and health care.  The 
component will support activities to improve migrant workers dormitories, mainly through 
renovation instead of constructing new buildings; providing vocational training; establishing 
migrant community service centers to provide social services such as legal aid, AIDS and STD 
prevention; and care for migrant women and migrant’s children including protection of women’s 
rights and children’s schooling.  The component will only be implemented in Wanzhou District 
and Fuling District (of Chongqing Municipality) where there are large concentrations of migrant 
workers.  
 
4.  Small Town Development.  The small town development component will explore an 
effective way of promoting small town development in poor areas as an intermediate step to 
facilitate the outflow of rural migrants from their home villages.  The component will have two 
major activities.  First, the component will conduct a small town planning pilot which will focus 
Page  3
on both detailed space planning as well as planning of public service provisioning.  Second, 
based on the results of the small town planning pilot, the component will focus on the 
construction of public infrastructure which has been identified as priority investments. Subject to 
the availability of the project funds, possible public infrastructure investments include water 
supply, wastewater treatment, solid waste collection and treatment, farm markets, and migrant 
labor dormitories.  Given the limited project resources, the component will be implemented on a 
very selective basis.  In each project province, the component will be implemented in no more 
than two counties with one small town in each county.  Criteria for selecting the small town 
include whether it is a subregional center, the potential for absorbing rural laborers, the spillover 
impact on surrounding villages, and the optimal population size for public facility provision.  It 
has already been agreed in principle that the small towns selected for the component will also be 
included in NDRC’s national program of small town reform pilot.  
 
5.  Sustainable Land Management (GEF-co-financing).  The sustainable land management 
component would address land degradation issues that are closely linked with rural poverty in 
marginal areas and caused by unsustainable agricultural and other land use practices, lack of 
alternative income sources, and the limited carrying capacities of the naturally vulnerable 
dryland and mountain ecosystems of the project area.  The component would provide support to 
mitigate land degradation and avoid long-term losses in land resource potential through a mix of: 
(a) land rehabilitation and protection investments, including silt arresting structures, flood bank 
protection, erosion control measures, and restoration of native forest, steppe and grassland 
vegetation, (b) activities to ameliorate current land management, such as improved cropping and 
grazing practices, and community land use planning and zonation to reduce use intensity, (c) 
support for institutional and community-level capacity building, and (d) scaling up proven 
approaches for sustainable and conservation land management in different socio-economic 
environments.  These practices will bring direct and tangible economic and environmental 
benefits to the communities involved in the project but also have national and global 
environmental benefits.  
 
Funding for this component would be sought from the GEF under its Focal Strategy for Land 
Degradation and Operational Program OP15 on Sustainable Land Management.   The component 
would be coordinated under the multi-donor Land Degradation Partnership Framework in China 
and demonstrate sustainable land management practices that are adapted to ecosystem-specific 
conditions that fully complement the project’s poverty reduction interventions.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project would be implemented in 24 counties and districts in Chongqing, Henan 
and Shaanxi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project will be coordinated by FCPMC (affiliated to LGPR at national level), 
which has rich experience in Bank financed projects. At the provincial level, the local FCPMCs 
(affiliated to the provincial poverty leading group offices) will take the lead in project 
management. This arrangement helps assure the proper preparation and implementation of 
safeguard policies. The Shaanxi provincial FCPMC has previously executed a similar village-
based Bank poverty reduction project, and is therefore experienced in safeguard requirements.  
Page  4
Henan province and Chongqing municipality will need guidance from FCPMC at the central 
level.  Most county level authorities are new to Bank-supported project procedures and will need 
guidance from provincial PMOs (even though they are committed to the project).  In addition, 
the Bank will provide training to provincial and county level PMOs staff on safeguards policies 
and experienced safeguards consultants will be hired in helping with preparation and 
implementation in safeguards instruments.  
 
During the Identification Mission, it was noted that no firm actions have been taken for the EA 
preparation, including baseline data collection. Currently each provincial PMO is recruiting the 
EA practitioner for the preparation of the provincial EA/EMPs, and the Identification Mission 
stressed that prior experience with the Bank’s project should be listed as one of the key criteria 
for the selection of EA consultants. A training workshop on the Bank’s Safeguard Policies will 
be provided to the PMOs/ EA consultants during June 18-22, and the Task Team will work 
closely with the PMOs/ EA consultants to provide technical guidance and to strengthen their 
capacity in document preparation as well as implementation management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will include rural infrastructure and public services (village roads and paths, 
village water supply, village power supply, small scale production infrastructure), and selected 
small towns infrastructure, which will fall into Category B classification according to OP4.01. A 
consolidated project-wide EA Report and EMP will be prepared to address relevant 
environmental issues.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Among the project’s 24 counties/districts, two counties/districts are designated minority 
autonomous areas which comprise concentrated populations of ethnic minority peoples including 
Tujia and Miao. A social assessment will therefore need to be conducted in accordance with the 
requirements of the Bank policy to assess the project’s potential impacts -- both positive and 
adverse -- on these minority communities.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is expected that limited and scattered land acquisition will be required for a variety of small 
infrastructure activities proposed in the community infrastructure and public service component. 
In addition, resettlement impacts might be involved in migrant support and small town 
development components, but the land acquisition and resettlement impact would be quite 
limited.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
According to the project preparation schedule, the final draft EA, RI and IPP reports should 
be ready by the end of March, 2008. The tentative schedule is as following:  
 
•
Institutions for preparing the RI and social assessment are selected by the end of 
September, 2007.  
 
•
Draft social assessment reports are ready to submit to the Bank for review by the end of 
December, 2007.  
 
•
First draft RI and IPP are ready to submit to the Bank for review by the end of January , 
2008, if the social assessment concludes that a separate IPP is needed.  
 
•
First draft RI and IPP are ready to submit to the Bank for review by the end of March, 
2008.  
 
For the EA preparation, the tentative schedule is as follows:  
 
&#61599; 
the EA consultants are selected before mid-July 2007;  
 
&#61599; 
the first draft provincial EAs are ready to submit to the Bank for review 
before October 2007;  
 
&#61599; 
the first draft consolidated EA is ready to submit to the Bank for review by 
the end of December 2007;  
 
&#61599; 
the final EA will be completed by the end of March 2008.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alan L. Piazza 
06/19/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
07/12/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
