Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC2342
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P077752 
Project Name:  SECOND SHANDONG ENVIRONMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Shenhua Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 26, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (76%);Water supply (13%);Solid waste management (11%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
147.20 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
134.30
134.30 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to promote the sustainable improvement of 
the environmental conditions in participating municipalities/counties of Shandong 
Province through: upgrading and development of facilities for wastewater collection and 
treatment, solid waste management, and water supply; and enhancement of financial 
performance and efficiency of key urban environmental services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project covers 9 municipalities or counties of Shandong Province in the areas of 
waste water treatment, water supply, solid waste and institutional capacity building.  
 
Though extensive screening and alternatives analysis, the project has the following four 
components: (1) wastewater collection network and treatment in Gaomi, Huantai, Qixia, 
Weifang, Weihai, Yantai and Zaozhuang, associated river improvements in Qixia, 
Weifang and Zaozhuang, and development of septic tanks management system supported 
by a GEF grant in Yantai; (2) solid waste management in Heze and Rizhao, with 
commitment from Heze to participate in CF transactions; (3) water supply in Gaomi and 
Huantai; and (4) institutional development and capacity building component.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Shandong Province is part of the North China Plain in North-Eastern China. The 
Province borders the Bohai Sea and the Yellow Sea and is crossed by the Yellow River. 
The Taishan-Yimeng mountainous terrains lay in the centre of the Province. The 
mountains are surrounded by the fluvial plains of the Yellow River to the west, of the 
Huai to the southwest, and of the Jaolai river system between the mainland and Jiaodong 
peninsula. The centre of the peninsula is hilly.  
 
Many rivers in Shandong Province are ?non-permanent?, with flows available only 
during the summer months. A great number of reservoirs have been built for water 
storage and flood protection. Rivers in urban areas are generally of poor quality, less than 
Class III standards. With poor water resources, the province relies more and more on 
water diverted from the Yellow River. Water scarcity gets even worse when many water 
sources are polluted and cannot be used for urban water supply or industrial needs.  
 
Shandong province covers an area of over 157 000 km2 with a total population of 91 
million in 2003, which ranks it as the second most populated provinces in China. It 
consists of 17 municipalities and 139 counties (including county-level municipalities and 
districts under city administration). The average annual population growth rate from 1990 
to 2000 was 0.64%, meaning an annual increase of 5.4 million people. There is also a 
growing transfer of rural population to urban areas, which makes the development of 
urban infrastructure an important challenge for the municipalities and the Province. The 
rapid demographic, urban and economic growth has led to environmental deterioration, 
with key environmental issues being air and water pollution,  and a worsening situation 
of  water scarcity.  
 
Lack of proper sanitation and waste management facilities and services turn many rivers 
into open sewers or garbage fields, especially during low or no flows. These poor  
sanitary conditions particularly affect the health and living conditions of the poor in 
urban areas.  
 
To combat further environmental deterioration, the province and municipalities have 
mapped out environmental policies and programs, which are aimed at substantially 
reducing the main pollution problems. These efforts should, on one hand permit 
economic growth, while on the other hand, improve municipal utility infrastructures and 
services to reduce industrial and urban pollution and provide ecological protection. 
Particular mention is made in these plans to regional watershed protection as well as 
environmental management. Improving and developing water supply management, 
wastewater management and solid waste management is necessary to improve 
environmental and sanitary conditions, especially for the poor, as well as to support urban 
growth and economic development.  Developing these services also requires 
strengthening institutional capacity and taking measures to ensure financial sustainability 
of these public services. To make up for the investment shortage and matching the 
necessary funds to the population growth represent huge challenges for municipalities of 
Shandong Province.  
Page  3
The project will be located in following six cities and three counties. All participating 
municipalities have retained local consultants to prepare engineering feasibility studies, 
environmental assessment and resettlement plans. The work is overseen by an 
international consultant GroupeHuit-SCE of France.  
 
Gaomi is the capital of the county, one of twelve counties within Weifang municipality. 
Gaomi covers an area of 24.7 km?, with a population of 261,000 inhabitants , which is 
expected to grow to 500,000 in 2020. The component is located in the town but its water 
supply will also provide water services to seven surrounding small townships. The town 
industries include textile, food processing and machineries. The total GDP of the county 
is 8.8 billion RMB, shared between first, second and tertiary sectors (18%, 50%, 32%). 
The surface water from Wangwu and Xiashan reservoirs will provide 85% of the water 
source, gradually increasing to 100% , as the remaining 15% from Jiaohe wellfield will 
be gradually phased outdue to increased ground water pollution. Treated effluent from 
Gaomi WWTP is discharged to the Xiao Kang River, which currently receives the 
untreated raw sewage and has a poor water quality of  Class V.  
 
Heze municipality located in the southeastern part of the provincehas a current 
population of 380,000 over an area of 37.6 km2. The population is expected to grow to 
720,000 by 2020. The GDP is 5.8 billion RMB share between the first, second and 
tertiary sectors (21%, 41%, 35%). Despite being an important chemical and food-
processing base, Heze has  one of the lowest  GDP levels among the medium towns of 
Shandong.  
 
Huantai, the capital of the county, one of eight counties within Zibo municipality, is 
located near to the Bohai Sea coast. It has a current population of 180,000, with a 
projected increase to 400,000 by 2020. Huantai  covers an area of  11.6 km?.  The 
component also affects four neighboring townships (Guihe, Tianzhuang, Tangshan and 
Guoli). Local industries include leather processing, medical chemistry, paper mill, food, 
building materials, and machineries. The total GDP of the town is 10 billion RMB shared 
between the first, second and tertiary sectors (8%, 61%, 31%), which indicates a large 
proportion of the industry in the economy. Huantai is closely linked to the development 
of the Zibo town, one of the richest and biggest areas of Shandong. Forecast indicates 
that by 2025,  Huantai will become the northern urban district of Zibo city.  Water from 
the Yellow River transferred through Xicheng reservoir will be the main water supply for 
local industries,  leaving that groundwater source exclusively for residential use. Treated 
effluent from Huantai would be discharged to the Dong Zulong River, which has a 
quality standard of Class V.  
 
Rizhao municipality located at the Shandong peninsula is the second largest port of the 
province on Yellow Sea. The city has a population of 430,000, growing to 820,000 by 
2020 over an area of 40 km2.  The economy is mianly supported by the harbor and other 
heavy industries. The total GDP is 11.5 billion RMB, shared between the first, secondary 
and tertiary sectors (21%, 51%, 28%), which indicate the importance of the agricultural 
sector and the weakness of the services sector.  
Page  4
Weihai municipality located at the Shandong peninsula is a port on Bohai Sea with 
590,000 inhabitants on an area of 62 km? expected to grow to1.25 million in 2020. The 
city industries include electronics, chemicals, plastics, food, construction materials, 
textile, and machine manufacturing. The total GDP is 22.5 billion RMB shared between 
the first, second and tertiary sectors (7%, 54%, 39%), which indicates a good balance 
between the industrial and the service sectors. The recipient of Weihai effluent is the 
Yellow Sea through sea outfall, with required environmental quality of Class II.  
 
Yantai municipality located at the Shandong peninsula is a port on Bohai Sea with 1.1 
million inhabitants on an area of 135 km?. The city industries include textile, energy 
generation, chemicals and light equipment manufacturing. The total GDP is 50.3 billion 
RMB, shared between the first, second and tertiary sectors (5%, 58%, 37%) indicating a 
large part of the industrial and very small part of agricultural sectors. The recipient is the 
Yellow Sea through sea outfall with required environmental quality of Class I.  
 
Qixia is the capital of the county, one of eleven within Yantai municipality. It has 
99,000 inhabitants. The total GDP of Qixia is 6.7 billion RMB shared between the first, 
second and tertiary sectors (24%, 43%, 33%), which indicates a large part of farming 
industry in the economy.  The component is not located in Qixia city, but in Economic 
Development Zone, 20 km northwest from the town. The Zone has currently a population 
of 35,000 planned to reach 63,000 in 2020. Industries in the Zone?s current area of 18 
km? include cement production, machine tools, electrical components, clothes making, 
fruits storage and processing. The recipient is the Baiyang River, which feeds drinking 
water reservoir for Yantai, required environmental quality Level 1B.  
 
Weifang municipality located near to the Bohai Sea coast has a population of 970,000 
on an area of 118 km? expected to grow to 1.8 million in 2020. The city industries 
include chemicals, textiles, papermaking, food processing and machine manufacturing. 
The total GDP is 28.2 billion RMB, shared between the first, second and tertiary sectors 
(5%, 60%, 35%), which indicates the importance of the industrial production and the 
quite weak agricultural part in the economy. The recipient of Weifang effluent is the 
Bailang River, with planned quality within and downstream of the city of Category V; 
about 50 km downstream of Weifang before discharging into Bohai Sea the 
environmental regulation requires the Category III.  
 
Zaozhuang municipality located in southern mainland has a population of 390,000 on an 
area of 42.3 km? expected to grow to 480,000 in 2020. The city industries include coal 
mining and processing, power generation, chemicals, food processing and light 
equipment manufacturing. The total GDP is 3.57 billion RMB shared between the first, 
second and tertiary sectors (7%, 54%, 39%). Per capita the GDP is 7,275 RMB, which is 
about half of the average of the Province. The recipients of the city effluent are the Yi 
Chengsha and the Xisha Rivers, with planned quality within and downstream of the city 
of Category IV.  
 
Page  5
At the project level, the Bank?s role is to ensure that lessons learned and experience 
gained through Shandong Environmental Project (SDEP) and other similar or related 
projects are reflected in the planning, design and management of the proposed 
investments. Attention has been and will continue to be focused on assessing options, 
alternative technologies, selecting least cost solutions in developing municipal utility 
infrastructures. The Bank will also place emphasis on the financial sustainability of these 
municipal utility services by strengthening institutional capacity and operational 
efficiency with proper arrangements of tariff policies and measures, with special 
consideration for improving the conditions of the urban poor. All of these goals are 
consistent with the objectives of the China Country Assistance Strategy related to 
environmental protection and infrastructure and urban development.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project covers the following areas:  
 
-
Improvements and expansion of  water supply systems to meet current and future 
demands;  
 
-
Collection of wastewater and municipal solid waste to improve quality of urban 
life;  
 
-
Treatment of wastewater to improve water quality in rivers and sea;  
 
-
Improvement of flood control;  
 
-
Enhancement of river landscape in urban areas; and  
 
-
Municipal solid waste processing and disposal facilities.  
 
Environment Assessment:  
 
The proposed project is classified as Category A under OP 4.01. Local consulting firms 
(Shandong Academy of Environmental Sciences and China?s Ocean University) have 
Page  6
prepared environmental Assessment (EA), with the assistance of an international 
environmental consulting firm GroupeHuit-SCE of France. The EA concludes that the 
Project will bring  significant positive impacts to the natural and socioeconomic 
environments of participating cities. The EA has not identified serious adverse or 
irreversible environmental impacts that cannot be effectively mitigated to acceptable 
levels.  
 
More specifically, the project will collect a large volume of wastewater currently being 
discharged untreated to local rivers flowing through urbanized areas, reduce pollution 
loadings and improve water quality in local rivers (from worse than Class V to designated 
Class V) and eventually seawater, and establishing much needed solid waste processing 
facilities and sanitary landfill sites.   The proposed project will also be beneficial to 
public health and quality of life through improved water supply service and improved 
solid waste collection systems.Expansion of sanitation facilities and services will 
improve the sanitation conditions of about 700,000 people.  Over 400,000 people will be 
covered by improved flood protection measures. An additional over 300,000 people will 
have access to potable water.  
 
The WWTPs planned in Huantai, Yantai and Qixia would remove annual pollution load 
of more than 13,000 t of BOD, 17,000 t of suspended solids, 2,300 t of NH3-N and 300 t 
of total phosphorus.  
 
Furthermore, the proposed SDEP II project will result  in the collection of an additional 
220,000 m?/day of wastewater in Gaomi, Weihai, Weifang and Zaozhuang. Collected 
wastewater will be treated in WWTPs built with other financing sources. It can be 
estimated that, when this wastewater is properly treated, the project will result in an 
annual pollution abatement of about 14,000 t of BOD, 19,000 t of suspended solids, 
2,500 t of NH3-N and 79 t of total phosphorus.  
 
Shandong Academy of Environmental Sciences and China?s Ocean University carried 
out the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of the proposed Second Shandong 
Environment Project according to China?s national requirements as well as Bank policies 
and procedures.  The international consultants provided guidance during EIA preparation 
and prepared the project-wide consolidated EA report based on the component EIA 
reports. The TORs and draft EAs were discussed in detail during project preparation with 
the Bank. EIAs have been completed for components in each project city, inter alia, 
baseline environmental conditions (water resources quantity and quality, air quality) and 
socio-economic conditions. They also describe alternatives considered in feasibility 
studies for each component.  The draft English-version consolidated EA report was 
submitted to the Bank in mid February 2006 and reviewed by the Bank before and during 
appraisal.  
 
Major potential adverse impacts will mostly occur during the project construction phase. 
Construction of the water distribution and sewer collection networks, water  and 
wastewater treatment plants, river landscape improvements, sediment removal (during 
dry-out seasons) and construction solid waste collection and disposal facilities will 
Page  7
involve landfill occupation, airborne dust, noise, soil erosion and odor incidents. The 
result of the sediment sampling and analysis program indicate that the sediment is not 
hazardous and can be disposed of at a local sanitary landfill.  
 
Resettlement:  
 
Among 10 subprojects, 7 of them would involve new land acquisition and 2 of them 
would involve building demolition for affected households, enterprise and small shops. 
According to the survey, the construction of 7 subprojects will acquire a total of 155 ha 
of land areas, including 88 ha of rural land areas and 67 ha of state owned land. Among 
the acquired rural lands, 24 ha or 28% are cultivated land. The acquisition of farmland 
would affect 315 households and 1,203 persons from 32 villages, 19 townships and 7 
counties or districts, averaging 0.02 ha per person. In addition, during project 
construction, a total of 208 ha of land areas would be occupied temporarily, which 
include 113 ha from rural collectives with 56% as farmland and 95 ha of state owned 
land. Most of affected state owned lands are roads and rivers. Along with land 
acquisition, a total of 142,188 square meters of buildings will be demolished, with 92% 
as residential structures. It will cause relocation of 754 households with 606 households 
in urban areas and 148 households in rural areas, and affect 11 enterprises and 42 shops, 
involving with 210 employees.  
 
Safety of Dams:  
 
The safety status of their dams was reviewed in the context of OP/BP4.37, Safety of 
Dams.  Four existing reservoirs would be involved in the project, either to provide raw 
water for water supply, or for flood regulation.  Starting from 2003, the province 
conducted dam safety inspections and assessments on all large and major medium size 
dams, resulting in the project dams being classified as Class C dams, i.e. with quality 
defects, or unable to function under the design conditions.  On the basis of that finding, 
the central Ministry of Water Resources and Shandong developed a remedial program to 
correct the identified deficiencies.  The remedial works for one reservoir was complete in 
2005; two would be completed by end of 2006; and the remedial works for Weifang 
Bailianghe Reservoir is planned to be completed in 2007.  Until the remedial program is 
completed, the dam safety would be assured by keeping the water level and the pounding 
level lower than during normal operating condition in accordance with the Operating 
Plans for Flood Season for Dams Calcified as Class C.  
 
Assurances would be sought during negotiations that (a) Gaomi and Qixia Counties and 
Weifang Municipality will complete the remedial works for all four dams by December 
31, 2007; (b) Shandong Province will establish an independent panel of dam safety 
experts, commencing no later than November 30, 2006, which will review the operation 
plans for all four dams prior to each flood season and recommend to the province to take 
all necessary actions if any to ensure the safe operation of the dams during the flood 
seasons; and (c) the panel will also report annually to the province and the Bank on 
progress in the remedial work and on the safety of the four dams.   
 
Page  8
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Construction of water supply and wastewater networks, waterworks and water treatment 
plants and pumping stations, and river embankments, may require tree removal. The 
exact nature of this impact is difficult to quantify at present, but during construction 
phase, field inspectors in charge of supervising the EMP will ensure that any tree removal 
is kept at minimum. Records of tree removal would be kept and replanting will take place 
at a rate of not less than one tree planted for each one cut.  
 
The proposed project will achieve a significant reduction of pollution loadings to local 
rivers, which will bring indirect positive impacts to downstream water bodies such as 
wetlands, lakes and seas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Analyses of alternatives were conducted as part of the feasibility studies and EA?s of 
wastewater collection and treatment, water supply and distribution and solid waste 
projects with the objective to avoid or otherwise minimize adverse environmental and 
social impacts and to minimize project benefits.  Local feasibility study consultants 
worked with EA consultants and project owners to evaluate available options and optimal 
solutions were selected based on least adverse impacts on the environment and 
communities at the least costs. Details can be found in feasibility study reports and EIA 
reports. 
 
For water and waste water components, the design institutes carried out comprehensive 
analyses, evaluating various alternatives for locations, technologies and numbers of 
wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) and water works, alignments for transmission 
mains, construction of pumping stations in comparison with gravity flows, selection of 
combined or sanitary sewer systems, and different layouts of wastewater and water 
supply networks.  In each instance, the alternative with the lowest evaluated cost and 
least environmental and resettlement issues was selected.  For example, four alternative 
locations were considered for Chengxi water plant in Gaomi and the final option was 
selected on the basis of cost effectiveness and the impact on areas with severe water 
pollution.   
 
For solid waste component, a wide range of alternatives were considered in terms of 
location, treatment scheme, composing technologies and so on?the final choice was made 
by comparing the advantages and disadvantages of each alternative.  In Heze, for 
example, the location of the treatment plant was chosen by taking into consideration 
distance from residential areas, the length of power line, the cost of land value and local 
urban Master Plan.  In Zaozhuang, remediation of the existing dump was chosen as the 
preferred approach versus transporting waste to other landfills. 
 
Table A  Alternatives for the Wastewater Component 
 
Alternatives Choice 
Advantages/constraints 
 
Huantai 
   
Page  9
Choice between 1 or 3 WWTPs 
&#61485;1. Option A: 1 WWTP with 79 km sewer 
network 
 
&#61485;2. Option B: 3 WWTPs with 65 km sewer network. 
1 
Lower cost 
 
20%
longer sewer network 
 
Treatment process 
1. CASS (Cyclic Activated Sludge Technology) 
 
2.
Oxidation Ditch 
 
3.
A/O 
3 
Higher pollution abatement 
 
Lower energy consumption 
 
Less land occupation 
 
Lower investment and operation costs 
 
Easier operation 
 
Yantai    
 
Location and capacity of WWTP 
1. New WWTP at Mouping 
 
2.
Extension Xinanhe WWTP 
2 
Less land occupation 
 
Lower cost 
 
Extension of Xinanhe WWTP 
1. North of current site 
 
2.
East of current site 
1 
Lower impact on economic (farming) activities 
 
Combined or separate sewer system 1. Combined 
 
2.
Separate 
1 in old areas, 2 in new-built areas 
Minimizes discharge of polluted 
waters to rivers in new- built area, while minimizing resettlement in old ares 
 
Minimizes civil works and costs in old area 
 
Choice of interceptor ratio 
 
1:1 
 
 
Main intercepting pipes along Beiguan road 
1. pipes at both sides of moat 
 
2.
the same, but pipe is laid only at one side in some places, and sewage from the two 
sides is conveyed to this pipe 2 
Avoids clearance of 10,000 m2 of buildings, 1785 
m
of
walls, and one transformer 
 
Lower cost 
 
Pipeline route 
2 routes (see FSR)  
 
Less land occupation 
 
Pipelines pass under Xiangzhuang Jigeng Road in the forest 
 
Lower cost 
 
Location of pumping station 1. south side of Yan-Wei highway crossing with Yuniao 
river 
 
2.
north side  1 
Ease of construction 
 
Choice of treatment process  1. A2/O 
 
2.
BIOLAK 
 
3.
Orbal oxidation channel 
1 
Better N and P removal 
 
Land occupation 5.3 instead of 6.3 ha 
 
Power consumption 0.3 instead of 0.35/0.46 kWh/m3 
 
Better operation convenience (+experience in China) 
 
Lower cost: 
 
Resp. total investment (million RMB), annual operation cost (thousand RMB), unit 
handing cost (RMB/m3) and unit operating cost (RMB/m3) 
 
1.
114; 22; 0.77; 15; 0.52 
 
2.
112; 24; 0.82; 16; 0.53 
 
3.
129; 26; 0.89; 18; 0.62 
 
Choice of dephosphorization process  
- where to add the coagulant; 
Page  10
-
choice of coagulant Polyaluminium salt added between biological basin and secondary 
sedimentation basin 
Efficiency 
 
Convenience of use 
 
Choice of sterilization process  
1. chlorination with liquid chloride 
 
2.
chlorination with chlorine dioxyd 
 
3.
sterilization with UV rays 3 
Safer operation 
 
Less land occupation 
 
Ease of operation 
 
Sludge management 1. anaerobic digestion; 
 
2.
aerobic treatment  2 
Simplicity of operation 
 
Lower investment cost 
 
Design of underwater pipe sea outlet 
1. discharge at 7 meter depth 
 
2.
discharge at 10 meter depth 
1 
Lower cost 
 
Both alternatives satisfy seawater quality criteria 
 
Options for water reuse 
1. circulating cooling water in existing power plants in 
Mashan Industrial Park or Mouping Development Zone 
 
2.
greening irrigation Binhai road 
short term: 2 
 
long term: 1 can be discussed 
1: investments for delivery are expensive and 
current consumption possibilities are small 
 
Qixia 
   
 
Location of WWTP  Site 1: close to industrial area 
 
Site 2: farther from industrial area 
1 
Less damage to existing vegetation 
 
Better convenience for water reuse 
 
Better accessibility 
 
Treatment processes 1. Oxidation ditch 
 
2.
ICEAS 
 
3.
A2/O 
1 
Higher land occupation 
 
Higher power consumption 
 
Ease of operation 
 
Average investment 
 
Wastewater network Two alternative routes (see FSR) 
2 
Higher impact on 
traffic 
 
Lower cost 
 
Zaozhuang 
   
 
Combined/separate system  1. Combined 
 
2.
Separate 
1 in old areas, 2 in new-built areas 
Minimizes discharge of polluted 
waters to rivers in new- built area, while minimizing resettlement in old ares 
 
Minimizes civil works and costs in old area 
 
Pipeline route 
1. two interceptor mains along both banks 
 
2.
one
interceptor main in the middle of the river 
2 
Ease of maintenance 
 
West bank of Dongsha River  
 
1.
Along north outer ring road till WWTP in the south 
 
2.
north outer ring road-Hongkong St.-Zaozhuang St.-RenDa Wall-along west bank of 
Xisha river-WWTP 
1  
Shorter pipe 
 
Ease of connection 
Page  11
Saving the need of lifting pump station 
 
East bank of Dongsha River  
 
1.
north outer ring road-Xinhe Rd.-Dongshahe railway bridge-Renmin Rd.-invert 
siphon-west bank interceptor main 
 
2.
Qitao Rd.-Chang?an Rd.-Renmin Rd.- invert siphon-west bank interceptor main
 
1  
Ease of connection 
 
Saving the need of lifting pump station 
 
East bank of Xisha River 
 
1.
Along east bank of Xisha River-Shiliquan Rd.-WWTP 
 
2.
Xichang Rd.- Shiliquan Rd.-WWTP 
2  
Limited resettlement 
 
Shorter pipe 
 
Ease of connection 
 
West bank of Xisha River 
 
Along west bank of Xisha River-Shiliquan Rd.-WWTP 
 
Wenhua Rd.- Jingji San Lu-Shiliquan Rd.-WWTP 1 
Ease of connection 
 
Zaozhuang 
   
 
Transverse river section pattern 
1. complex section 
 
2.
rectangular section 
1 
More land acquisition and resettlement 
 
Nicer scenery 
 
Higher cost (188 instead of 169 million RMB, including resettlement) 
 
Land appreciation by 100,000 RMB/mu (surplus revenue of 40 million RMB at least) 
 
Rubber weirs or regulating locks 
1. rubber weirs 
 
2.
regulating locks 
 
Lower cost (174 instead of 214 million RMB) 
 
Nicer scenery 
 
Weifang 
1. 
interception culvert boxes 1 :1 + artifical wetland 
 
smaller interception culvert boxes 1:2 + stormwater balance tank  1 
Interception 
box culvert + artificial wetland 
 
Rainwater adjusting storage scheme 
 
Cost lower 
 
Good pollutant removal 
 
Lower power consumption 
 
Large land occupation but out of city area 
 
No water replenishment to the river 
 
Table B  Alternatives for the Solid Waste component 
 
Alternatives Choice 
Advantages/constraints 
 
Heze 
   
 
Location of treatment plant  1. Yuwayao: North of Heze, 8 km to the center 
 
2.
Gengwayao: North-West of Heze, 15 km to the center 
1 
Longer distance to 
residential area (m) 
 
Drinking water protection area close to site 2 
 
Larger storage volume 
 
Shorter necessary power line 
 
1.
is more in accordance with Urban Master Plan 
 
Lower land value 
Page  12
Treatment scheme 
1. sanitary landfill 
 
2.
high temperature composting 
 
3.
incineration 
 
4.
synthetic treatment 
4 
Minimizes environmental impact 
 
Higher cost 
 
Composting technologies 
1. storehouse static aerobic composting 
 
2.
silo intermission dynamic composting 
 
3.
skip stacking machine turn-over aerobic composting 
 
Lower investment 
 
Ease of operation 
 
Treatment process for leachate and wastewater 
1. membrane filtration and discharge 
into surface water 
 
2.
A/O with discharge into municipal sewage system 
2 
Lower investment and 
operation costs 
 
Isolation of landfill bottom  1. curtain wall drilling (grouting) 
 
2.
lining with on-site available materials and with artificial materials; 
 
3.
both 
2 
2 greater safety than 1 
 
1
lower cost than 3 
 
To minimize the resettlement impacts, serious efforts have been made through 
optimizing the project design and implementation arrangements. For instance, in order to 
reduce demolition impacts, the river regulation scope was reduced from 80 to 40 meters 
wide in Zaozhuang and from 50 to 10 meter wide in Weifang. Various measures were 
taken to minimize the resettlement impacts among different subprojects, which are 
reflected in the subproject RAPs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Policy Framework  
 
China has adopted multi-pronged policies to manage water issues in North China. They 
include preventing and reducing water pollution, implementing rational prices for water 
(including irrigation), recovering costs for wastewater sector, reducing consumption of 
water, promoting re-use of water, and building the South-North water transfer project. 
Reflecting these national policies, Shandong has been implementing its share in: (a) the 
Bohai Blue Sea Action Program, which is being implemented in three stages from 2000 
through 2015 with the aim of reducing land-based pollution and restoring the damaged 
ecological system in the sea; and (b) the South-North project, which includes Huantai and 
Zaozhuang within its pollution reduction program, for construction of municipal sewage 
treatment works for the Shandong section of the South-North project.  
 
Shandong provincial and municipal EPBs are in charge of drafting and issuing local 
laws and regulations; organizing environmental monitoring and control; supervising the 
treatment of pollution; dealing with the major pollution incidents; and carrying out 
education and training in environmental protection. Accordingly, within its duties, SEPB 
reviewed and approved the individual EIAs.   
 
Page  13
Environmental Management  
 
Designated by the Shandong Provincial Government, Shandong Provincial Project 
Management Office (SPPMO) will be responsible for overall coordination of the project 
implementation including the EMP implementation.  SPPMO has had previous 
experience in coordinating the implementation of Bank-financed projects, including 
SDEP and the Huai River Pollution Control Project.  The project management offices 
(PMOs) of municipality/counties (including EPB staff) and PIUs will be responsible for 
the implementation of their respective components including their EMP implementation.  
The staff responsible for EMP at SPPMO and city PMOs/PIUs will be trained through the 
project TA package on environmental regulations and their application, mitigation 
measures, public consultations, environmental monitoring and producing progress 
reports.  Environmental consultants contracted by the PIUs will also assist in 
environmental supervision during project construction and monitoring listed in the table 
below:  
 
Institutional Arrangement for Environmental Management  
 
Level Project Management  Construction Supervision 
Environment Management
 Compliance 
Monitoring 
 
 
During Construction  
 
SDEP II level 
SPPMO  
 
Technical Assistance Consultants 
Shandong Provincial EPB  
 
Technical Assistance Consultants 
(Shandong EPB)  
 
Sub-project level 
Implementing Agency Project Management Unit (PIU)
 
Construction Supervision Engineer (or Institute) engaged by the Agency
 
Construction Supervision Environmental Engineers (CSEE) and Environmental 
Field Site Inspectors (EFSI) (within the Construction Supervision Engineer team)  
 
Local EPMD 1. Monitoring Programme as defined in EMP, carried out by the CSEE  
 
2.
Regulatory monitoring by local Environment Monitoring Station (EMS) under 
authority of the EPB  
 
During Operation-  
 
SDEP II level 
 
- 
Provincial EPB 
Shandong EPB  
 
Sub-project level 
Management, Operation and Maintenance Agency 
-
 
Environmental Management Unit (EMU) + Environmental Monitoring Unit
 
1. Monitoring Programme as defined in EMP, carried out by Environmental 
Monitoring Unit  
 
2.
Regulatory monitoring by local Environment Monitoring Station (EMS) under 
authority of the EPB  
 
Training Requirements.  To ensure effective implementation of the above measures and 
plans staff of implementation agencies will be trained in environmental impacts and how 
to ensure timely responses to accidents. The training program will covers issues such as 
Page  14
environmental laws and regulations, standards, project-related environmental science and 
environmental management.  The training will be held prior to the commencement of 
construction and will be attended by at least one senior management staff and one 
environmental staff from each of the contractors and supervision companies.  
 
Monitoring.  The EMP lists environmental performance indicators such as air and water 
quality, noise levels, construction sites and camps, as well as details of monitoring 
programs, such as specific locations and time of sampling and the agencies responsible 
for reviewing monitoring programs and results.  
 
Supervision and reporting.  The Bank will supervise the project?s environmental aspects 
twice a year. SPPMO will be responsible f or reporting including semi-annual progress 
reports with a section/chapter on the EMP implementation. During project 
implementation and beginning in 2007, an annual report on the EMP will be furnished to 
the Bank by March 31 of each year, along with any revisions proposed to the EMP to 
achieve its objectives.  
 
Funding Arrangements and Schedule of Implementation.  The costs of mitigating the 
effects from construction will be included in the cost of facilities. Monitoring of air and 
water quality, noise, worker health, and site safety/hygiene will be conducted by local 
environmental monitoring units or consultants, and financed from counterpart funds.  
 
Resettlement Planning, Implementation Capacity and Monitoring  
 
Resettlement Planning:  7 of 10 components involved resettlement impacts. Individual 
RAP?s in Chinese were prepared for each of 7 components describing  resettlement 
impacts. A summary RAP was prepared in both English and Chinese based on outline 
provided by the Bank. The RAP included comprehensive inventory survey, adequate 
compensation rates, realistic rehabilitation measures, and detailed cost estimate, which is 
in compliance with both Bank?s policy and Chinese laws and regulations. The RAP 
contains a detailed budget that amounts to RMB243.16 million, which is integrated into 
the total project cost.  
 
To facilitate the implementation of RAP, resettlement leading groups and resettlement 
offices have been set up in relevant counties and municipalities to be responsible for the 
resettlement implementation. The resettlement leading groups are led by deputy 
governors of relevant counties and cities and resettlement offices are staffed with 
experienced persons from key city agencies and affected townships. Trainings on Bank 
resettlement policy and resettlement practice will be provided to improve local capacity 
and facilitate resettlement implementation. The resettlement implementation among 
subprojects will be coordinated by Shandong Provincial PMO which has extensive 
Page  15
experience from implementing both Shandong Environment Project (Ln 4237-CHA) and 
the Huai River Basin Pollution Control Project (Ln 4597-CHA).  
 
During the course of implementation, an experience independent external monitoring 
agency will be selected to carry out resettlement monitoring and evaluation for these 7 
subprojects, which will be carried out once a year. The monitoring procedures, content, 
staffing, timeframe and reporting have been detailed in the RAPs. Independent 
monitoring will cover both physical progress of RAP implementation and monitor the 
restoration of income and livelihood among affected people.  In terms of internal 
resettlement monitoring, it will be carried out by both provincial PMO and subproject 
resettlement offices with assistance from external monitoring agency.  
 
Borrower?s Capacity: The Shandong Provincial Project Management Office (SPPMO), 
which has guided the preparation and successful implementation of the Shandong 
Environment Project (Ln 4237-CHA) and the Huai River Basin Pollution Control Project 
(Ln 4597-CHA), has experienced staff with capacity to manage the preparation of the 
proposed project. The experience and knowledge accumulated will continue to support 
preparation of this project. At the municipal/county level, Leading Groups, Project 
Management Offices, and Project Implementation Units for the most part have been 
established already and resettlement officials are assigned in each of the municipal 
PMOs.  
 
Monitoring: Internal and external monitoring has been designed as part of the project 
resettlement management.  The project resettlement offices will carry out internal 
monitoring of the resettlement implementation.  The monitoring procedures, content, 
staffing, responsibility, timeframe and reporting have been detailed in the RAPs.  An 
external monitor has been selected for independent monitoring of the RAP 
implementation.  Independent monitoring will cover physical progress of RAP 
implementation, including compensation payment, allocation of residential sites, 
farmland allocation, and restoration of infrastructure.  The independent monitor will also 
review the public consultation process, operation of the resettlement project offices, 
grievance redress mechanisms and restoration of livelihood of the affected farmers.  
Independent monitoring will be conducted once a year during the project implementation 
period.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In preparation of RAPs, local governments, township and village officials, affected 
households and affected shops and shops were consulted in census and asset inventorying 
processes and on finalization of the project location and schemes, compensation rates, 
relocation arrangements and livelihood restoration measures. Consultation with affected 
persons will be continued throughout the resettlement implementation process. The RAP 
contains procedures for grievance redress for the affected people. A resettlement 
information booklet (RIB) including the key contents of the RAP will be developed and 
distributed to the affected persons once the final RAP is approved by the Bank. The draft 
RAPs have already been disclosed in the project areas, which is listed in the following:  
Page  16
During the EA preparation, at least two rounds of public consultations were conducted 
in each project city; Public announcements were made about the project and the EIA on 
local radio and television, as well as in newspapers and on the Internet. These notices 
informed the public of the locations where the EA and the RAP could be reviewed and 
commented on, as well as contact telephone numbers. Posters summarizing the EA and 
RAP were displayed in community centers and public meetings were held. The EIA was 
disseminated in the project cities from August 2005 to January, 2006.  Public comments 
are reflected in the project design and environmental mitigation measures.  The 
documents were sent to the Bank?s Infoshop in Washington and in Beijing in February 
2006. Details of public consultations and information on each component are available in 
the project files.  
 
No. 
Component 
Time of disclosure 
Media  Location of RAP  
 
1
Yantai waste water 
01/05/2006 
Yantai Daily News Paper 
Yantai 
Drainage Company  
 
2
Qixia Waste water 
01/22/2006 
Yantai Daily News Paper 
Qixia 
Drainage Company  
 
3
Zaozhuang waste water 
12/30/2005 
Zaozhuang City weekend
 
Zaozhuang PMO  
 
4
Gaomi water supply 
01/24/2006 
Wafang Daily News Paper 
Gaomi Water 
Supply ompany  
 
5
Huangai waste water and water supply 
01/24/2006 
Huantai online Web
 
Huantai PMO  
 
5
Huangai waste water and water supply 
01/24/2006 
Huantai online Web
 
Huantai PMO  
 
6
Wafang waste water 
01/24/2006 
Wangang DRC Web  Wangfang DRC  
 
7
Heze solid waste 
01/25/2006 
Mudan Evening Daily News  Heze PMO  
 
Information Disclosure. The table below summarizes the information disclosure 
activities that have been held in each SDEP II location.  
 
No. 
Project Component 
Information Disclosed Media  Time of Disclosure  
 
1
Gaomi Water Supply and wastewater management  Draft EIA report
 
Weifang Daily ;  
 
www.sdgmzls.cn 9/19/2005 
 
 
2
Huantai Water Supply and wastewater management Draft EIA report
 
Huantai Broadcast Station 
9/9-16, 2005  
 
3
Weihai Wastewater Management 
Draft EIA report  
 
4
Yantai Wastewater management 
Draft EIA report  
 
5
Qixia Wastewater management 
Questionnaire release notice  Qixia 
Broadcast and TV Station 
8/7-17, 2005  
 
6
Weifang wastewater management 
Project brief and draft EIA report
 www.wfdpc.gov.cn 
11/7/2005 
 
 
1/6/2006  
Page  17
7
Zaozhuang Wastewater management  
 
8
Heze Solid waste management 
Draft EIA report 
Heze Daily
 12/21/2005 
 
 
9
Rizhao Solid waste management 
Draft EIA report 
www.rzjs.gov.cn
 11/11/2005 
 
 
12/23/2005  
 
RAP Disclosure  
 
No. 
Component 
Time of disclosure 
Media  Location of RAP 
Contact phone  
 
1
Yantai waste water 
01/05/2006 
Yantai Daily News Paper 
Yantai 
Drainage Company  
 
2
Qixia Waste water 
01/22/2006 
Yantai Daily News Paper 
Qixia 
Drainage Company 
0535-5215964  
 
3
Zaozhuang waste water 
12/30/2005 
Zaozhuang City weekend
 
Zaozhuang PMO 
0632-3313195  
 
4
Gaomi water supply 
01/24/2006 
Wafang Daily News Paper 
Gaomi Water 
Supply Company 
0536-2323435  
 
5
Huangai waste water and water supply 
01/24/2006 
Huantai online Web
 
Huantai PMO 0533-8189904  
 
5
Huangai waste water and water supply 
01/24/2006 
Huantai online Web
 
Huantai PMO 0533-8189904  
 
6
Wafang waste water 
01/24/2006 
Wangang DRC Web  Wangfang DRC
 0536-8789827 
 
 
7
Heze solid waste 
01/25/2006 
Mudan Evening Daily News Paper 
Heze 
PMO 
0530-5190555   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/26/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
08/01/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  18
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  19
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shenhua Wang 
06/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
06/21/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
06/21/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
 
Comments:   
