Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/06/2007 
Report No.:  AC2994
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P096556 
Project Name:  Eco-Farming Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sari K. Soderstrom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 11, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Renewable energy 
(30%);Crops (15%);Animal production (15%);Agricultural extension and research (10%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Land administration and management (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
120.00
120.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the rural environment and living 
conditions in project areas while promoting environmentally friendly and economically 
efficient farm production.  In addition, the project aims to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and increase carbon recycling through methane combustion and reduced 
burning of coal and firewood in the project areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will apply a comprehensive approach to fully integrating biogas 
development with farm production systems, including biogas technology solutions and 
biogas-related on-farm investments; institutional strengthening of biogas service and 
extension systems at each level; technician and farmer capacity building; and improved 
M&E systems at local level.  The project will be integrated with the government’s 
National Rural Biogas Program in project provinces and will be largely implemented 
building on existing institutional systems.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Integrated Eco-Farming Systems. This component, comprising two sub-
components (i) Integrated Household Systems; and (ii) Community Development, will 
assist farmer households to integrate biogas into their production systems to improve the 
environmental impact, quality, and efficiency of farm production, and improve their 
living conditions.  
 
Component 2: Local Technical Extension and Biogas Service System. This component 
will strengthen and expand the existing rural energy and agricultural extension services to 
strengthen the technical support systems for sustainable operation and maintenance of 
biogas systems; and facilitate stronger integration of the existing rural energy and 
agriculture support services. The two sub-components: (i) Service System Improvement; 
and (ii) Training will assist with (a) refurbishing local extension and training facilities; 
(b) provision of equipment and materials for biogas service systems and agricultural 
extension; (c) training of county, township, and farmer technicians, and farmers; (d) 
support to farmer biogas and related associations; and (e) applied research on improving 
biogas technology and management.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. This component will 
respond to the need for establishment of an efficient and effective project management 
structure and systems, with well trained and appropriately resourced staff to enable the 
project to achieve its objectives. Comprising three sub-components: (i) Project 
Management; (ii) Institutional Capacity Building; and (iii) Monitoring and Evaluation, it 
will finance project management costs, equipment, training, and monitoring and 
evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project would be implemented in 5 provinces (Anhui, Hunan, Hubei (Enshi 
Prefecture), Chongqing Municipality, and Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region) and 
would be centrally coordinated by the Ministry of Agriculture. It would directly benefit 
about 570,000 farmer households.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Mr Farzad Dadgari (EASRE) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.  An EIA covering all five provinces was carried out 
for the project. No major or irreversible negative environmental impacts of the project 
were identified.  The EIA has fully considered potential project impacts on the natural 
and social environments and have recommended a plan to ensure that positive 
environmental impacts are further enhanced and any negative impacts are kept to a 
minimum.  Potential impacts on human health have been assessed and specific measures 
to minimize the potential transmission of pathogens, water-borne and zoonotic diseases 
will be taken by all participating farmer households. The EIA identified the need to 
prepare an “environmental best management guidelines” rather than an EMP, thus no 
costs are allocated for an EMP implementation within the project.  
 
OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples.  The presence of ethnic minority groups in the project areas 
invokes OP4.10.  Participation in the project is voluntary and incentives for the 
participation are great (partial subsidies are provided to project participants).  The 
requirements of OP4.10 are integrated into the overall project design and an Ethnic 
Minorities Development Plan complying with OP4.10 was prepared.  The key challenge 
of the project in relation to ethnic minorities is to ensure that the households belonging to 
minority groups have equal opportunities compared to Han Chinese to access project 
benefits.  This is addressed in the project design through: (i) targeting of ethnic minority 
communities, (ii) a communication and information campaign with messages that are 
accessible to ethnic minority groups; (iii) project extension staff trained to deliver the 
communication and information campaign so that ethnic minority groups can participate 
in the project; and (iv) monitoring indicators that provide data on the targeting and use of 
project benefits by ethnic minority groups.  
 
OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. No involuntary relocation and land acquisition are 
envisaged under the project.  Rural access roads and courtyards designed under the 
project will be mainly reconstructed or improved on their existed old bases within 
villages, and there is no plan for structure construction in expanding of the existing eco-
energy extension service system. However, because most of the project activities will be 
carried out around villages, some small-scale infrastructure at village level may be 
Page  4
undertaken to facilitate project achievements.  Some of them may require of the acquiring 
of land (e.g., road widening or construction of sheds or other facilities), but would be 
sited within the village itself.  Use of land allotted to individual households on a lease 
basis by the collective might have some adverse impact on households unless obtained 
through voluntary negotiations with the leaseholder.  Mitigation measures would be taken 
to minimize any such potential impacts.  A Policy Framework for Resettlement and Land 
Acquisition has been prepared, which describes all these situations and avoiding/ 
mitigating principles to be complied with in accordance with the Bank’s safeguard policy 
OP4.12 and the relevant Chinese laws.  In such cases, consultation with farmers would be 
documented, and impacts would be monitored and reported.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None identified.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will be coordinated by Ministry of Agriculture who has long experience in 
preparing and implementing Bank financed project. In response to suggestions received 
from consultation undertaken as part of the SA process, several special features have 
been incorporated into project design to ensure the ethnic minority communities have an 
equitable opportunity to participate in, and benefit from, project activities. These include:  
 
-
Project priority given to ethnic minority communities/households in Guangxi, and 
western Hubei and Hunan.  In selection of project communities and households, ethnic 
minority nationality is set as one of the priority conditions in the project design. This has 
been factored into selection of participating counties, resulting in statistical over-
representation of minority communities among direct project beneficiaries.  
 
-
Tailoring sub-project design to fit the ethnic minorities customs.  This project assists 
farmers to achieve integrated farming systems that make more efficient use of water and 
soil resources, biomass, and other resources.  The core model includes livestock, biogas 
digester, and improved living environment (toilets, kitchen).  Current fuel resources of 
the Zhuang, Yao, Miao and Tujia communities are mostly straw and firewood that are 
collected by women. Consultation with these communities indicated that ethnic minority 
farm households welcome the biogas schemes and energy-saving stoves, especially in 
combination with their traditional wood-stoves for house heating and social gatherings.  
Meanwhile, they also use the biogas residues (organic fertilizer) as input for agricultural 
production.  
 
-
Targeting sub-project activities to the needs of ethnic minority communities. Normally 
the project design is based on the model of “biogas scheme with three-components-
improvement” (kitchen, toilet and pig -hed), called “one plus three improvements).  
Ethnic minority communities living in mountainous areas specifically need water supply 
and access roads as well, besides sanitary toilets and pig-sheds associated with the biogas 
Page  5
schemes.  In response to these requests, some sub-projects have adjusted their component 
design adding limited village infrastructure rehabilitation or orchard construction.  
 
-
Training for the e
thnic minorities’ biogas technicians/workers in particular and for 
their communities in general.  There are regular official trainings provided for rural 
biogas technicians who gain certificates for working locally.  This technical training has 
also been especially designed for ethnic minority community members in the manner and 
language acceptable to them. These trained rural biogas technicians from ethnic 
communities have a particular responsibility to train and guide their community 
members.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
More than 570,000 farm households in Guangxi, Chongqing, Hunan, Hubei and Anhui 
Provinces will directly benefit from improving their living conditions, reducing 
incidences of diseases and intensity of labor (especially for women), and increasing 
agricultural productivity and economic incomes.  
 
Based on socio-economic surveys and stakeholder analysis in project areas of all five 
project provinces, a social assessment (SA) assessed the project’s potential social impacts 
and set forth measures to maximize the project benefits and avoid/minimize its adverse 
impact.  In view of the project locations in ethnic minority areas, in Guangxi and the 
western parts of Hunan and Hubei, the SA highlighted a participatory approach to project 
management and implementation which is reflected in an Ethnic Minorities Development 
Plan. The SA guided the overall project design to incorporate free, prior and informed 
consultation and participation of ethnic minority communities, and how to mitigate 
potential social risks to marginalize any ethnic minority or other vulnerable groups 
including women and poor households.  
 
The SA confirmed that the project design includes no activity that would lead to 
resettlement or significant land acquisition.  In the event that any land acquisition should 
take place, a Policy Framework for Resettlement and Land Acquisition was prepared 
consistent with the Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.12.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/23/2007 
 
Page  6
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/25/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/25/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  7
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sari K. Soderstrom 
06/29/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Farzad Dadgari 
06/29/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
06/29/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
07/06/2007 
Comments:  SM approval provided by Ms. Idah Pswarayi-Riddihough, Acting EASRE Sector 
Manager,  July 5-6, 2007. 
