Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC1984
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P082992 
Project Name:  Demonstration of alternatives to Chlordane and Mirex in Termite Control 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Helen Chan 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other industry (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.69 
 Financing 
Gap 
14.36
28.05 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to (a) demonstrate elimination of chlordane and 
mirex use for termite control in the demonstration provinces through introduction of 
integrated pest management in termite control; and (b) prepare a national replication 
program for complete phase-out of chlordane and mirex in China by 2014.  
 
Consistent with this objective, the key project outputs will include (a) elimination of 
chlordane and mirex consumption in the demonstration area’s building construction 
sector; (b) comprehensive policy, regulatory and institutional reforms at the national and 
provincial level to replace termiticide-based termite management with integrated termite 
management; (c) closure and clean-up of the Liyiang Guanghua Chemical Company, and 
corresponding permanent reduction in the national chlordane and mirex production; and 
(d ) development of a national replication program and production quota system for 
phaseout of chlordane and mirex in the rest of China.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project is
 the first step in meeting China’s commitment to total elimination in the 
production and use of chlordane and mirex for termite control in the country.  It is a stand 
alone full size GEF project which follows the standard Bank and GEF project processing 
procedures.  
 
The project has six components: (i)Institutional Capacity Strengthening; (ii)Policy 
Framework for Elimination of Chlordane and Mirex; (iii)IPM Implementation; 
(iv)Closure of Chlordane and Mirex Manufacturer; (v)Monitoring and Evaluation; and 
vi)National Replication Program for Elimination of Chlordane and Mirex in China.  
 
Component 1: Institutional Capacity Strengthening (US$1,822,000). The objective of 
this component is to mobilize institutional capacity for project management, technical 
and advisory capacity for project implementation, and capacity of the key stakeholders to 
support the shift from pesticide-based termite control to IPM-based termite prevention 
and control. The component will achieve this objective through activities focused on 
mobilizing the lead termite institutions and individuals at national and provincial levels, 
training of the Convention Implementation Office (CIO) in the State Environmental 
Protection Administration (SEPA) and two provincial level Project Implementation Units 
(PIUs) in project management and evaluation, and providing programmatic support to 
key organizations involved in project implementation.  It has three subcomponents:  
 
a. 
Project Management and Technical Capacity. This sub-component will support 
the institutional capacity for project management through establishing a Termite Project 
Team in CIO and two provincial level PIUs in the demonstration area; training the project 
staff; and establishing two Provincial Steering Groups in Zhejiang and Jiangsu to provide 
political guidance and support to the project.  
 
b.  
Technical and Advisory Capacity for Project Implementation. This sub-
component will support recruitment of an international Chief Technical Advisor (CTA) 
and a national technical advisor (NTA) to provide guidance on technical matters; and 
hiring of individual technical experts to assist in project implementation and evaluation.  
 
c. 
Inception Activities and Mobilization of Key Stakeholders. This sub-component 
will support a broadly attended National Inception Workshop as well as two provincial 
Launch Workshops in the demonstration area to mobilize stakeholders at the outset of 
project implementation.  The workshops will provide general information on POP 
elimination; risks associated with the use of chlordane and mirex for termite control; and 
approach to their elimination. They will also present detailed implementation 
arrangements and provide introduction to integrated termite management.  
 
Component 2: Policy Framework for Elimination of Chlordane and Mirex 
(US$840,000). The objective of this component is to improve the policies, regulations 
and standards so they facilitate elimination of chlordane and mirex and promote IPM for 
termite control. Since the reliance of Chinese termite control industry on pesticides is 
Page  3
embedded in the existing policies and regulations, the support of this component in 
adopting improved policies is critical in ensuring substantial and permanent shift from 
chlordane and mirex to IPM in termite control.  
 
The component will support revision of key national and provincial policies and 
regulations that govern termite control. The revisions and issue of these policies will 
follow the implementation progress of IPM technology in the demonstration provinces so 
the experiences and lessons generated by the demonstration project can be reflected in the 
revised policies. The component will have two sub-components.  
 
a. 
National Policy and Regulatory Study.  The sub-component will support review 
and revisions of the following national level policies and regulations:  
 
i.   
National Model Construction Code,  
 
ii.  
Technical Standards for Termite Prevention in Housing Construction in China,  
 
iii. 
Regulation on Termite Prevention and Control in Urban Construction,  
 
v.
Registration of the IPM compatible termite control products, and  
 
vi. 
Production quota system and supporting policies (a new policy to be issued).  
 
b. 
Provincial Policy and Regulatory Reform.  This sub-component will support 
review and revisions of the following provincial level policies and regulations.  
 
i. 
Provincial Construction Codes modeled after the revised National Construction 
Code,  
 
ii. 
Circular on Prohibition of Use of Chlordane and Mirex in Termite Prevention and 
Control and Promotion of IPM,  
 
iii.  ZCB No 265 and JCB No 279. Technical Standards for Termite Prevention in New 
Buildings,  
 
iv. 
ZPB No. 422 and JFB No. 156 Circulars on Pricing in the Construction Sector,  
 
v.
Manual on Budgeting Standards in the Construction Sector,  
 
vi. 
ZCB No. 37. Quality Control Manual for Termite Prevention and Control in the 
Construction Sector, and  
 
vii. 
Zhejiang Order No. 86. Regulation on Termite Prevention and Control for Urban 
Housing and corresponding regulation in Jiangsu.   
 
Among these policies, the production quota system will be crucial to maintain a 
permanent reduction of the production of chlordane and mirex equivalent to the 
consumption of 150 MT of chlordane and mirex to be phased out in the demonstration 
area.  
 
Component 3: IPM Implementation (US$19,252,000).  The objective of this component 
is to replace the existing chlordane and mirex-based termite control in the building 
construction sector of the demonstration area with an IPM-based bait system and 
complementary IPM measures. The component represents the principal ground-level 
intervention funded by the project. It will take place in the two demonstration provinces. 
It will target the building construction sector which accounts for the highest concentration 
of termite damage and chlordane and mirex use. It will have the following five sub-
components.  
Page  4
a. 
IPM Operating and Training Manual. This sub-component will fund preparation 
and dissemination of a detailed operating and training manual for bait system and 
complementary IPM measures for termite control.  
 
b. 
IPM Training Program.   This sub-component will support design and delivery of 
training programs specific to different groups of people in termite control, including 
termite station managers, researchers, and operators. In all cases it will include general 
introduction to risks associated with the use of chlordane and mirex, concept of IPM and 
applied training in skills necessary for introduction of the bait system.  Notably, the sub-
component will adopt a training of trainers approach to ensure sustainability of the IPM 
training.  
 
c. 
Public Awareness and Information Dissemination.  This sub-component will fund 
public awareness activities on the risks associated with chlordane and mirex and benefits 
of IPM. It will also fund development of an information website to serve the information 
needs of general public as well as those with research or professional interest in termite 
control.  
 
d. 
IPM Implementation.  This sub-component will fund application of commercial 
bait systems and complementary measures in the building construction sector of the 
demonstration provinces. The bait system technology for termite prevention 
–
in-ground 
termite stations – relies on (i) inserting bait stations with harmlesswood or cellulose bait 
in the ground at regular intervals of about 10 feet at the perimeter of the building, (ii) 
monitoring the stations for signs of termite activity every one month (or 3 months for 
some brands), and (iii) if an activity is detected, replacing the harmless bait with a slow-
acting termiticide which spreads from foraging worker termites to other members of the 
colony through the normal feeding and grooming behavior, and eventually destroys or 
suppresses the colony through disturbing termite growth or metabolism.  
 
For active termite infestations, above-ground bait stations are placed directly at the site 
of infestation. Several different systems using this technology are broadly used under 
various brand names in countries like USA, Australia, Japan, Hong-Kong (China), 
Malaysia, and Thailand. Compared to chlordane and mirex or other liquid chemical 
treatments, the bait system technology requires only minute amounts of chemicals, uses 
chemicals which are less harmful to human health and to the environment, and targets 
entire termite colonies rather than individual termites. The sub-component will fund 
procurement, installation and monitoring of about 433,000 in-ground bait stations and 
about 617,000 above-ground bait stations. The use of bait stations will reduce the 
national consumption of chlordane and mirex by 150 metric tons annually. The chlordane 
and mirex production will be controlled through a production quota system accordingly.  
 
e. 
Research and Development.  This sub-component will fund applied research 
aiming at improving the effectiveness of bait systems, complementary use of 
biopesticides, physical barriers, anti-termite building designs, and other IPM measures.  
 
Page  5
Component 4:  Closure of Chlordane and Mirex Manufacturer (US$ 2,641,000). The 
objective of this component is to demonstrate (a) permanent physical closure and 
dismantling of the Liyang Guanghua Chemical Company which manufactures chlordane 
and mirex; and (b) clean up the
 facility’s chlordane and mirex contaminated site and 
disposal of chlordane and mirex wastes. The plant closure is a critical activity for 
phaseout of chlordane and mirex, and an important complement of IPM implementation.  
The IPM technology – bait systems – offers the termite industrya viable alternative to 
chlordane and mirex in termite control while the chlordane and mirex plant closure 
delivers both a tangible phase out measure and a strong signal to chlordane and mirex 
producers and termite industry that the government is firmly determined to phase out 
chlordane and mirex.  
 
The component will have two sub-components as follows:  
 
a.  
Closure and dismantling of Liyang Guanghua Chemical Company.   This sub-
component will fund complete dismantling and removal of all equipment and facilities at 
Liyang Guanghua Chemical Company, as well as compensation for lost profits directly 
associated with the closure and workers compensation.  
 
b.  
Clean-up and disposal of chlordane and mirex wastes.  This sub-component will 
fund clean up of the contaminated site, excavation of contaminated soils and disposal of 
contaminated soil and demolition materials at a hazardous waste landfill.  
 
Component 5: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$137,000).  The objective of this 
component is to evaluate the overall performance of the project, facilitate IPM learning, 
and capture the knowledge necessary for the preparation of the national replication 
program. The component will fund monitoring and evaluation workshops, annual review 
meetings, and computerized management information system necessary to track and 
evaluate project implementation progress.  
 
Component 6:   National Replication Program for Elimination of Chlordane and Mirex 
in China (US$801,000).  The objective of this component is to develop a national 
program for elimination of chlordane and mirex in termite control based on the 
experiences gleaned from this demonstration project The component is essential in 
ensuring that the learning supported by the demonstration project and the momentum in 
eliminating chlordane and mirex will be utilized throughout China.  The component will 
fund workshops and consulting services for preparation and dissemination of the 
replication program, drafting of the national replication program document, stakeholder 
consultations and supporting activities. It will also fund preparation of baseline 
information feeding into preparation of environmental impact assessments (EIAs) for 
closure of the remaining eight chlordane and mirex manufacturers.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces. The two provinces were 
included in the project to increase its demonstration value and representativeness of the 
overall demonstration area in the following aspects:  
Page  6
i. 
Climate and ecology. The two provinces represent different climatic and 
ecological conditions. Jiangsu is more temperate. It is representative of the northern 
portion of the Chinese termite belt. Zhejiang is subtropical monsoon climate. It is 
representative of the southern portion of the termite belt with warmer temperatures and 
higher precipitation.  
 
ii. 
Institutional arrangements. The two provinces have different institutional 
arrangements for leading provincial termite control management. In Jiangsu, termite 
management is organized by the provincial termite association, which is a non-profit 
industrial association of termite operators. In Zhejiang, termite management is organized 
by the provincial termite control institutes, which are government agencies.  
 
iii. 
Termiticide production. The two provinces have different presence of chlordane 
and mirex producers and consumers. In Jiangsu, there is a high concentration of 
chlordane and mirex producers, but lower consumption of these chemicals in termite 
control. In Zhejiang, there are no chlordane or mirex producers, but the consumption is 
five times greater than in Jiangsu.  
 
Both provinces are highly developed, with booming economy, high degree of land 
utilization for industry, agriculture or other productive uses, and relatively high levels of 
background pollution. There are no sensitive environmental or social features that affect 
project design or compliance with safeguards requirements.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (SASEI) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
Mr Martin Fodor (EASEN) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (ESDQC) 
Mr Yun-Hwa Ko (EASEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  7
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Safeguard issues occur at two levels 
–
the overall project level and the component level. 
At the project level, the principal safeguard issue is related to the introduction of 
integrated pest management (IPM) approach in termite control. The impact of the IPM 
introduction will be positive as it will lead to elimination of toxic POPs termiticides 
chlordane and mirex and promote environmentally sustainable methods of termite 
control, including the use of termite baiting systems. Nonetheless, proper training of 
termite control operators will be necessary to ensure that the use of the baiting systems is 
both effective and safe. Although the baiting systems use only minute amounts of 
chemicals compared to the conventional control methods, their proper handling and 
application will be essential to avoid any negative impacts on the environment or human 
health. The project core activities, as well as implementation of the PMP 
recommendations will ensure that pest management related safeguard issues are properly 
addressed.   
 
At the component level, the safeguard issues are related to the closure of Liyang 
Guanghua Chemical Company and clean up of its site from chlordane and mirex waste. 
Although the overall impact from closure and clean up of this major chlordane and mirex 
manufacturer will be positive, there are potential negative environmental impacts 
associated with the clean up and disposal of hazardous POPs waste, and social impacts 
associated with the loss of employment for the plant workers.  
 
The potential negative environmental impacts are temporary, and are related to the 
demolition of the production facilities, excavation of contaminated soil, transport of 
hazardous waste and its disposal in a hazardous waste landfill, and transport and disposal 
of non-hazardous demolition waste at a general landfill. The impacts include noise, dust, 
issues of personal safety for clean up workers and road safety for transport of the waste. 
The mitigation of these impacts during the site clean up is outlined in the EMP, and will 
be detailed in a detailed site clean up implementation and safety plan which will be 
prepared before the start of any physical works.  
 
The potential negative social impacts are related to the loss of employment for Luyang 
Guanghua Chemical Company workers, and loss of profit for the plant owners. Although 
the employment in the plant is only part-time, temporary employment due to the on-
demand character of the production (the plant produces only when an order is placed; the 
work there is not a principal source of income for the workers) the unmitigated loss of 
employment would have negative social impacts. The mitigation of these impacts through 
a
compensation and retrenchment program for the workers, as well as lost-profit 
compensation for the plant owners, is outlined in the Social Assessment. It will 
implemented as a part of the closure component.   
 
Page  8
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project itself or future activities associated with the project are not expected to have 
any negative indirect or long term impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
At the project level, several alternative approaches were considered at project design 
stage.  
 
First alternative was to reduce the project area (demonstration area) to an area 
encompassing less than the entire Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provinces. The alternative would 
result in lower overall project costs and simpler implementation arrangements. This 
alternative was rejected because it would lower the demonstration value of the project by 
reducing the representativeness of the demonstration area in the following aspects:  
 
(i) Climate and ecology. The two provinces represent different climatic and ecological 
conditions. Jiangsu is more temperate. It is representative of the northern portion of the 
Chinese termite belt. Zhejiang is subtropical monsoon climate. It is representative of the 
southern portion of the termite belt with warmer temperatures and higher precipitation.  
 
(ii) Institutional arrangements. The two provinces have different institutional 
arrangements for leading provincial termite control management. In Jiangsu, termite 
management is organized by the provincial termite association, which is a non-profit 
industrial association of termite operators. In Zhejiang, termite management is organized 
by the provincial termite control institutes, which are government agencies.  
 
(iii) Termiticide production. The two provinces have different presence of chlordane and 
mirex producers and consumers. In Jiangsu, there is a high concentration of chlordane 
and mirex producers, but lower consumption of these chemicals in termite control. In 
Zhejiang, there are no chlordane or mirex producers, but the consumption is five times 
greater than in Jiangsu.  
 
The second alternative was limiting the introduction if IPM to a small, field-trial scale. 
This alternative would result in lower project cost, lower project management cost and 
simpler implementation arrangements. The alternative was rejected because one of the 
principal challenges of introducing IPM into termite management in China is not field-
testing whether IPM technologies are effective 
–
they are –  but advancing rapidly from 
laboratory tests, field trials and experiments to full scale application across the entire 
termite control industry. This alternative would not lend itself to broad changes in termite 
control policies and management which are critical to shift from pesticide-based control 
to integrated termite management.  
 
The third alternative was a direct substitution of chlordane and mirex with liquid 
chemical barriers. This alternative would promote a direct substitution of chlordane and 
mirex with other liquid termiticides, without promoting a termite control industry shift to 
IPM. This alternative was rejected because of the potential negative environmental and 
health impacts associated with the use of large amounts of liquid termiticides. For 
example, the main chlordane and mirex alternatives – chlorpyrifos, fenvalerate and 
Page  9
permethrin 
–
have been banned in the US and other countries due to their health impact. 
Moreover, such approach would not comply with the Operational Policy 4.09 on Pest 
Management which mandates IPM.  
 
The fourth alternative was to focus only on reducing consumption of chlordane and 
mirex but not reducing their production. It would limit the project interventions to the end 
uses of chlordane and mirex but not address the issue of their supply. The alternative 
would allow the project to concentrate on IPM policies and applications, and would lower 
the overall project cost and complexity. This alternative was rejected because the 
disappointing experience from past attempts of China to eliminate chlordane and mirex 
through focusing only on the consumption-side interventions as well as highly successful 
experience from phaseout of ozone depleting substances through simultaneous 
consumption and production side interventions showed that effective phaseout of broadly 
used industrial chemicals requires coordinated regulatory intervenion against both 
production and consumption of the chemicals.  
 
The fifth alternative was introduction of a broad set of IPM technologies. The project 
considered an option of introducing a broad set of IPM technologies and measures. This 
alternative would, in theory, allow a unique combination of different IPM technologies 
for different termite prevention and control interventions. The alternative was rejected 
because international and national experts agreed that from among an array of IPM 
technologies, the bait systems complemented by other measures, (such as use of pressure 
treated wood, physical and chemical barriers, good construction practices, localized 
chemical treatment, etc.) applied with consideration of the specific environment and 
conditions, are most suitable for achieving elimination of chlordane and mirex and 
facilitating a cost-effective shift to IPM.  
 
The sixth alternative considered was inclusion of additional sectors besides building 
construction sector in the project. These additional sectors include forestry, orchards, dam 
and dyke construction, and similar sectors. This option was rejected as unnecessary 
because the building construction sector accounts for practically all of the chlordane and 
mirex use (more than 95%), and the termite control in other sectors is carried out, at least 
partially, by the termite control professionals (termite stations) from the building 
construction sector. The combined effect of addressing the use of chlordane and mirex by 
termite stations and controlling the chlordane and mirex production is considered 
sufficient to achieve their elimination in other sectors as well.  
 
At the level of the closure component (closure of the Liyang Guanghua Chemical 
Company), several remediation alternatives were considered as follows:  
 
Monitored natural attenuation. This is essentially a monitored no-action alternative, 
relying on natural processes of attenuation to reduce the site contamination. The 
alternative was rejected due to data limitations, long attenuation time, costly monitoring 
requirements and limited demonstration value and potential negative environmental and 
human health impacts before the contamination reduction can be achieved.  
 
Page  10
Biological remediation. Natural or enhanced bioremediation was considered for site 
clean up. It was rejected due to limited worldwide experience with the use of 
bioremediation for addressing chlorinated pesticides, and potential impacts from 
inappropriate or ineffective use of this technology.  
 
Incineration. Excavation of contaminated soil and off-site incineration was considered 
as one of the mainstream disposal alternatives. It remains a plausible alternative since it is 
economical, effective and available in Jiangsu. However, it was not selected as the 
preferred disposal option due to concerns about local incinerator experience with POPs 
destruction, and potential negative impacts associated with inadequate incineration 
(formation of dioxins and other air pollution).  
 
Thermal desorption. Thermal desorption for treatment of contaminated soil was 
considered due to its good effectiveness, in situ treatment and reuse of treated soil. It was 
rejected, however, due to high cost and potential environmental impacts stemming from 
limited experience with the technology in China).  
 
Other alternatives, including in-situ vitrification, pyrolisis, and chemical treatment were 
considered but rejected on the grounds of high cost and limited experience. For detailed 
review of these and other disposal alternatives, please see the EIA/EMP document.   
 
Landfilling of the hazardous material in a secure hazardous material landfill was 
selected as the preferred alternative based on the cost, local availability and experience of 
Chinese hazardous waste management companies. The potential negative environmental 
and safety impacts associated with this alternative can be well handled using the existing 
local practices and measures prescribed by the EMP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Pest management issues. The key safeguard policy requirement 
–
minimum use of 
pesticides and maximum utilization of IPM – is integrated as a fundamental feature of 
project design. In addition, detailed measures and recommendations are spelled out in the 
PMP.  
 
In this area, the borrower capacity is adequate. Although the general experience with 
IPM is limited, there is a number of research institutes and pest management 
professionals engaged in project implementation who have the capacity to understand and 
effectively implement the pest management policy requirements. Where the detailed 
implementation capacity is lacking the project will implement a robust training program 
under its capacity building and IPM components (please see PAD for details).  
 
Environmental issues. The potential negative environmental impacts associate with 
Liyang Guanghua Chemical Company closure and clean up will be addressed through 
implementing the environmental management, monitoring and personal safety measures 
recommended by the EMP. These measures include proper removal and disposal at a 
secure landfill of contaminated soil and construction materials, treatment of waste water 
Page  11
and sludge from the facility in a licensed industrial wastewater treatment plant, transport 
safety measures, dust and noise reduction control measures, and personal safety and 
protection regime for the clean up workers. The diligent implementation of these 
measures will be supervised on-site by an independent site clean up supervision engineer 
engaged by the project (in addition by the normal supervision by the PIU and the Bank 
missions.) Prior to implementation, a detailed site clean up implementation plan will be 
prepared detailing the procedures, timing, safety measures and other implementation 
details to prepare for smooth and effective implementation.  
 
The capacity to implement these measures is moderately developed. There is 
considerable institutional and regulatory framework for environmental management in 
place, however, the typical due environmental due diligence process is less substantial 
than necessary for a project of this kind. In particular, the experience with environmental 
due diligence for site clean up is very limited in China. To enhance this capacity, a 
complementary training program, financed by the Japanese Government, will be put in 
place prior to project effectiveness.  
 
Social issues. The mitigation measures to ameliorate the potential social impacts from 
the loss of employment are outlined in the Social Assessment. The principal measures are 
cash compensation and retrenchment (retraining program) for workers and lost profit 
compensation to plant owners.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The people potentially most affected by the project are the workers and owners of the 
Liyang Guanghua Chemical Company (68 people). Also potentially affected are the 
residents of villages in the vicinity of Liyang Guanghua Chemical Company. Altogether, 
there is 249 people living in three settlements the nearest of which is 150 meters from the 
plant site. These people may be affected during the site clean up and also if unmitigated 
contamination is allowed to spread from the site.  
 
As a part of the formal two-round consultation process, the input from the affected 
people and general population was sought through disclosure of project information on 
the official website of SEPA and Jiangsu Environmental Protection Bureau. During April 
–
May 2005, SEPA and provincial PIU personnel made field visits to the potentially 
affected people and surveyed about 240 people a standardized questionnaire. Importantly, 
target groups were formed from plant employees, nearby residents and owners of the 
nearby fishponds as well as the personnel of the relevant government agencies to solicit 
the input into project design.  
 
The second round of the public consultation will take place in the form of a town-hall 
meeting in early December after the safeguard documents reached a near-final stage of 
preparation.   
 
Page  12
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/19/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/30/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/19/2005  
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/19/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/20/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  13
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Helen Chan 
12/06/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yun-Hwa Ko 
12/06/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
12/06/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Peishen Wang 
12/06/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
12/06/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Magdolna Lovei 
12/06/2005 
Comments:   
