Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/10/2006 
Report No.:  AC2373
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P075613 
Project Name:  Shaanxi Ankang Road Development 
Task Team Leader:  Aurelio Menendez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 19, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (90%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Other public sector governance (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
435.00
435.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to assist the Borrower in improving passenger and freight 
traffic flows in an efficient and safe manner along the corridor from Ankang to Maoba in 
Shaanxi Province by: (i) enhancing road infrastructure capacity and network integration 
along the corridor Ankang-Maoba; (ii) increasing accessibility to markets and social 
services for the lower-income families in rural areas of Ankang; and (iii) strengthening 
Shaanxi Provincial Transportation Department's capacity in managing the increasing 
number of kilometers of roads under its responsibility in the Shaanxi province and, in 
particular, within the Ankang region.  
 
These objectives respond to a territorial perspective of the interventions that attempt to 
address the transport needs of the Ankang region in the context of the construction of the 
Xian-Ankang-Sichuan Boundary expressway.  This expressway will lead to one of 
China's most industrial and populated cities, Chongqing.  Shaanxi is a strategic land 
transport hub--surrounded by seven other provinces--where North-South corridors 
intersect East-West corridors that link coastal areas with the Western provinces.  The 
project would meet both the provincial government objective to improve the transport 
network to support the social and economic development of the province (especially in 
Page  2
the lagging counties, such as Ankang), and the central government objective to facilitate 
trade between the Western Region and the coastal areas.  
 
The assessment of the achievement of the project development objective will be carried 
out through the measurement of outcome indicators, including: reduction in average 
freight rates, travel times, and accident rates along the corridor to be constructed, as well 
as increases in transport flows and reduction in passenger and freight services along the 
rehabilitated local roads, and higher percentage of the national/provincial road network 
with updated information on its condition, and enhanced knowledge and application of 
updated road management approaches.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A. Ankang-Maoba Expressway (AME). [estimated cost US$681.5 million - 
92.1% of the total project cost - of which US$256.6 million will be financed by the Bank 
Loan]  
 
The AME component includes the construction of an expressway of about 87 km 
connecting Ankang and the village of Maoba, close to the border with the Sichuan 
Province. The expressway would consist of four lanes designed for a speed of 80 km/hr, 
taking into account the mountainous terrain of the corridor.  This component includes the 
construction of the relevant ancillary buildings and the acquisition of the relevant 
electrical and mechanical (E&M) facilities.  It will also require the acquisition of land 
and the resettlement of people.  The design of the expressway has paid adequate 
consideration road safety features and has minimized the social and environmental 
impacts, based on the analysis undertaken at the feasibility stage and further adjustments 
required upon completion of the preliminary engineering designs.  A joint local-foreign 
consulting firm will supervise the construction of the AME, in a manner similar to the 
one implemented under the expressway component of the Second Shaanxi Provincial 
Highway Project.  
 
Component B. Local Roads Improvement Program (LRIP). [estimated cost US$55 
million - 7.4% of the total project cost - of which US$40.6 million will be financed by the 
Bank Loan]  
 
The LRIP aims at improving of interconnection between provincial, county and village 
roads in the rural areas surrounding the corridor Ankang - Maoba Expressway.  The 
interventions will consist of rehabilitation of existing roadways, with adjustments to its 
width when necessary or upgrading existing non-motorized tracks to motorized 
substandard roadways when warranted by the number of beneficiaries and due 
consideration to environmental impacts.  This program aims at improving conditions of 
the lower class roads that interconnect rural townships and villages in the Ankang City 
along the AME corridor to the higher-class road network and to the AME.  A set of 28 
roads have been identified for the first year of the program.  The total number of 
kilometers estimated to be financed under this component is 1,480.  The supervision of 
these works will be carried out by a local consulting firm that will be contracted by the 
Page  3
Ankang Traffic Bureau, and will work under the monitoring and direction of the Shaanxi 
Provincial Highway Bureau (SPHB).  
 
Component C. Institutional Strengthening Program (ISP). [estimated cost US$2.7 
million - 0.4% of the total project cost - of which US$2.1 million will be financed by the 
Bank Loan]  
 
The institutional strengthening program includes the following sub-components:  
 
-
Impact evaluation and monitoring studies will measure the impacts of the road 
rehabilitation under the LRIP on the socio-economic and transport conditions in the 
relevant areas of the Ankang City, establishing a complementary knowledge base for 
future interventions on those types of roads across the Shaanxi Province. The study will 
include the definition of the impact evaluation methodology and sample and up to three 
surveys over the project implementation period towards providing a comprehensive 
assessment of the impacts of the road improvement program in the livelihood of the 
population in the areas of influence of the rehabilitated local interconnecting roads.  
 
-
Acquisition of auscultation equipment for strengthening the information base of SPTD 
that is necessary to make informed decisions about the allocation of maintenance 
resources and the correct prevention of the deterioration of the provincial and national 
roads under its responsibility.  
 
-
Technical assistance for the use of the road auscultation equipment and the 
incorporation of the information into the pavement management system (PMS) currently 
installed at SPTD  
 
-
The training for staff of the agencies and institutions involved in the management of 
the project (including staff from the Ankang Traffic Bureau). The training activities build 
on training carried out under previous Bank-financed projects, and will focus primarily 
on: highway research, planning, transportation management, construction, operation and 
maintenance of highways.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented within the boundaries of the Ankang City/Prefecture.  
Ankang lies within the Qinba mountainous area, on the Southermost border between the 
Shaanxi and Sichuan Provinces.  It is a relatively isolated area, with poor road access.  
Waterways used to be an important communication channel, but have dropped in 
significance, and it now mainly serves internal transport in the local areas.  Though 
villages with road access have reached about 90%, the access roads are very poor and 
urgently need rehabilitation.  These have constrained local development in terms of 
traveling time, safety, and the opportunities to develop its resources (planting of paddy, 
corn and wheat, garden vegetable, tea, and tobacco, and pig and sheep livestock, and 
tourism). There exist a growing number of non-farm jobs.  (As part of the social 
assessment, it has been found that non-farm jobs contribute to over 50% of family 
income).  
 
Ankang is one of the key poverty pockets in the country.  Of its 10 counties and 
districts, seven have state level poverty status. Over 230,000 people, about 10% of its 
Page  4
population, are receiving assistance for minimum subsistence.  In 2002, its average GDP 
per capita is only 38.55% of that nation-wide and 55.8% of that in Shaanxi Province.  
The average farmer income per capita is only 1417 yuan, about 57% of that in China and 
88% of that in Shaanxi.  Ankang is one of the focus areas in Shaanxi Province for poverty 
reduction.  
 
The Ankang-Maoba expressway crosses Ankang City from the North at Ankang until 
the village of Maoba, about 10 kilometers before the border with the Sichuan Province, 
traversing Hanbing District, Langao County, and Ziyang County.  The LRIP, 
complementary to the expressway component, also covers the same counties and district.  
This component has tentatively identified 108 roads, including one provincial road of 
74.5 km, 12 county roads of 463.7 km, 13 township roads of 191.4 km and 82 village 
roads of 751.8 km.  Most of the project works will be of a rehabilitation nature, including 
possible widening and straightening in certain sections. Impacts of the LRIP are expected 
to be minor.  
 
The Maoba-Bashan Expressway  
 
During project preparation a 12-km section at the Southern-most section of the AME 
was dropped from the initial project scope because of continuous disagreements with the 
neighboring Sichuan Province on the best alignment for the section that crosses the two 
provinces.  In June 2006, an agreement was reached regarding the point of connection of 
expressways joining Shaanxi and Sichuan province, upon completion of an alternative 
analysis study commissioned by MOC to its First Design Institute.  The point of 
connection is near the Bashan Township in Shaanxi province.  For ease of reference the 
portion of the expressway connecting Maoba with the Sichuan Expressway near the 
Bashan Township in Shaanxi province will be called the Maoba-Bashan Expressway.  
The construction of the Maoba-Bashan Expressway will allow completion of the corridor 
from Ankang to the border with Sichuan province. That expressway will be treated as a 
separate project, though a directly related project, to be funded entirely with local funds 
and constructed concurrently with or prior to the completion of that AME.  
 
As explained in more detail in other sections of the ISDS, in the construction of the 
Maoba-Bashan Expressway, SPTD will apply a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and an 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), that complies with the World Bank related 
safeguard policies.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
Mr Hiroshi Ono (EASEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The construction and operation of AME would cause such potential large scale impacts 
on the environment as:  
 
-
Two sections (9.8 km and 5.2 km) of AME run through the edge of an Experimental 
Zone of provincial level Ying Lake Wetland Nature Reserve (YLWNR) which is by 
definition deemed as ?critical natural habitats? under OP.4.04.  However, Natural 
Habitats Policy was not triggered because it was concluded that the project would not 
involve significant conversion or degradation of YLWNR mainly due to the change of 
alignment based on an extensive alternative analysis.  
 
-
Nine cultural relics sites including one building, two tomb stones and six underground 
tombs/relics were identified.  Therefore, Cultural Property Policy was triggered and 
further study was conducted to examine if the project would significantly damage non-
replicable cultural properties.  
 
-
Soil erosion and subsequent water pollution during construction phase will be a major 
environmental issue.  Water pollution may also be caused by the discharge of untreated 
wastewater from service areas and toll stations as well as spilled oil and hazardous 
materials.  
 
-
Among the 39 noise sensitive sites (31 villages and 8 schools), noise levels were 
predicted to exceed the standards at 1 location during day time and at 11 locations during 
night time in 2011.  Construction works including heavy machinery operation and earth 
works may also cause noise and air (dust) problems.  
 
Although to a reduced extent, the implementation of LRIP could cause potential adverse 
impacts on the environment including soil erosion and subsequent water pollution, 
damage on vegetation and wild animals, and noise and dust problems mainly during 
construction.  
 
Social  
 
Page  6
The Social Assessment (SA) Report provided rich socioeconomic information about the 
project areas and local development, in-depth analysis of the project impacts, particularly 
its impacts on poverty reduction. It also facilitated the consultation process and brought 
out feedback from the local population.  The SA identified Hui ethnic minority 
population in the project areas, researched their history and current social, economic and 
cultural characteristics, and analyzed possible project impacts on them.  The SA 
concludes that the Hui population in the project areas (mostly merchants living as urban 
residents in Chenguan town, which is not located within the expressway corridor), does 
not fall under the World Bank?s definition of Indigenous People.  
 
The AME component would require the acquisition of land, relocation of houses, some 
small business and factories as well as some local public facilities.  The component 
would require 5,880 mu of land, including 2,655 mu of cultivated lands, 404 mu of 
wasteland and 1,688 mu of forest land.  The total affected population is 28,340 people 
from 6,950 families, including 27,950 of 6,865 families affected by land loss, 1,326 
people of 284 families losing houses and 936 people of 199 families affected by both 
land and house losses. Due to the linear nature of the project, the land loss impact is 
relatively small.  Of the 38 villages losing land, no one loses more than 20% of their total 
land and 30 of them are losing less than 10%.   The project would also require houses of a 
total 93,050 m2.  The first year program of LRIP would require a total of 1,020 mu of 
land, including over 900 mu of wasteland and 120 mu dry farmland. There is no impact 
on houses or infrastructure.   The total affected population is about 460.  The total 
resettlement cost is estimated at RMB294,000.  Data related to the Maoba-Bashan 
Expressway--the Southern connection of the project AME to the border with the Sichuan 
Province, with a distance of about 25 km--would be known once the related  RAP is 
furnished to the Bank by March 31, 2007.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In 2004, YLWNR and Ying Lake Provincial Scenic Spot received about 80 thousand 
tourists and this number is expected to increase upon completion of the project due to 
improved accessibility.  To prevent potential indirect and/or long-term impacts on local 
human life and the environment due to increased tourists to YLWNR and Ying Lake 
Provincial Scenic Spot, strengthening of the management capacity has been addressed in 
the Plan of YLWNR.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During the preparation of the project, the final alignment for the AME was carefully 
selected through the comprehensive analysis of five major alternatives schemes including 
without-project case.  Major considerations included in the design are: (1) to minimize 
impacts on environmental sensitive sites such as YLWNR, scenic spots, water source 
reservation areas and cultural relics sites; (2) to minimize resettlement and land 
occupation; (3) to minimize impacts on community activities and infrastructure; and (4) 
engineering and financial aspects.  
 
Page  7
Significant efforts were given to minimize the environmental impacts on YLWNR and 
associated sensitive sites.  During the alignment research phase, three corridor schemes 
were identified, of which two went from Ankang to Sichuan while the remaining one 
from Ankang to Chongqing, and an Ankang-Sichuan scheme was taken up for further 
study.  However, at the feasibility study phase, the Bank noticed that the proposed 
alignment (Hanjiang Scheme) passed through the core reservoir part of YLWNR as well 
as Ying Lake Provincial Scenic Spot and Provincial First Grade Water Source 
Reservation Area.  Though those sensitive areas had been re-categorized from 
Core/Buffer Zones to Experimental Zone as a result of the functional planning adjustment 
of YLWNR in 2005 under the approval of Shaanxi Provincial Government (Shaanxi 
Provincial Environmental Protection Bureau) reflecting the current ecological conditions 
and functions, further extensive discussion was made to avoid/minimize the possible 
impacts on those sensitive areas among project designers, engineers and environmental 
protection personnel.  As the result, the Hanjiang Scheme was rejected at the final stage 
of preliminary design phase, and an alternative scheme (Haoping Scheme) with the need 
of a longer tunnel.  The Haoping Scheme could mostly avoid the impacts on Ying Lake 
Provincial Scenic Spot and Provincial First Grade Water Source Reservation Area, and 
significantly reduce the impacts on YLWNR by turning away the alignment from its core 
reservoir part although part of the road section still runs through the edge of the 
Experimental Zone. Besides Hangjiang/Haoping schemes, additional 3 sections were also 
carefully studied with in-depth comprehensive comparison among environmental, social, 
technical and financial factors.  
 
Shaanxi Archeological Institute was contracted to conduct a cultural relics survey in 
September 2005.  The survey identified nine cultural relics sites, including one 
provincial-level and eight county-level sites.  They were one building, two tomb stones 
and six underground tombs/relics.  The alignment has been fine tuned to avoid three sites 
(above ground) out of the identified nine sites.  For remaining six sites which may be 
affected by the project, SPTD has developed mitigation measures and their 
implementation arrangements, including cost estimates and timetable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Safeguards  
 
An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) for AME, and an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for LRIP have 
been developed by Chang an University.  Based on EMF, an Environmental Assessment 
(EA) for local roads is to be executed on an annual basis prior to construction.  The drafts 
of EIA, EMP and EMF including the first year EA were prepared in compliance with the 
Bank Policy OP 4.01 (Category A) and found satisfactory to the Bank after its extensive 
reviews.  
 
In addition, for the connected Maoba-Bashan Expressway an EIA, acceptable to the 
Bank, will be prepared and furnish to the Bank by March 31, 2007 and thereafter its 
mitigation measures will be implemented in the construction of that expressway.  
Page  8
AME Component  
 
Two sections (9.8 km and 5.2 km) of AME go through an Experimental Zone of 
provincial level Ying Lake Wetland Nature Reserve (YLWNR).  Although the 
Experimental Zone is by definition deemed as "critical natural habitat" under OP.4.04, it 
is understood that the Wetland Nature Reserve was established mainly for drinking water 
resources protection, it does not qualify the criteria for a wetland (i.e. shallow water, 
hydrated soil and adaptive plant).  Based on findings of ecological and biodiversity 
survey, its wetland/natural habitat value was much lower than originally claimed and 
does not fall into definition of critical natural habitat. It was concluded that the project 
would not involve its significant conversion or degradation because: (a) the area subject 
to conversion was relatively small (0.42 % of the total area) and the best possible effort 
had been made to minimize the conversion through an alternative analysis; (b) the area 
subject to conversion had already been well developed and had less significant ecological 
value according to the detailed scientific survey and consultation with public/experts; (c) 
the letter issued by the Provincial Environmental Protection Bureau confirmed that the 
project was fully in compliance with the management framework of YLWNR; and (d) 
extensive prevention/mitigation measures were to be provided.  
 
Seven cultural relic sites including one building, two tomb stones and six underground 
tombs/relics were identified.  The alignment has been fine tuned to avoid three of the nine 
sites.  The remaining six sites will be further excavated by a qualified archeology institute 
prior to the commencement of construction work, and the excavated relics having a 
significant cultural value will be subject to off-site preservation. Similarly, if cultural 
relics would be identified during the construction of the Maoba-Bashan Expressway they 
would be protected in accordance with the prevailing domestic legislation which 
complies with World Bank related safeguard policy.  
 
A
stand-alone Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed, and the 
proposed measures are to be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts.  The 
EMP defines environmental management and supervision mechanisms and procedures 
with the assignment of dedicated staffs.  The FFFPO established under SPTD is 
responsible for the implementation of EMP.  Environmental monitoring will be carried 
out by the monitoring station of Ankang City.  
 
During the construction and operation phases, environmental monitoring will be carried 
out at selected sensitive sites.  The major variables to be monitored include construction 
and traffic noise, COD, Oil and SS for river water, TSP and NO2 for ambient air.  To 
enhance environmental protection knowledge and skills, key staff engaged in 
environmental protection will receive intensive training.  The training program includes 
lectures by experts, site visits to similar projects, and periodic domestic or international 
training.  
 
LRIP Component  
 
Page  9
The EMF has been developed including: baseline environmental data; institutional 
arrangements; EA procedures; supervision, training and monitoring plans; public 
consultation procedures; and environmental mitigation measures.  SPTD is responsible 
for the overall coordination and guidance, and Ankang City Traffic Bureau for the 
implementation of the EMF.  The EMF was disclosed locally in April 2006 and at 
InfoShop in May 2006.  
 
The First Year EA/EMP involves 28 roads with a total length of 450 km of Class IV 
roads, and no new alignments are included.  The EIA/EMP was prepared according to 
requirement of agreed Environmental Management Framework.  Proper mitigation 
measures have been developed in the EA/EMP to avoid, minimize and mitigate potential 
environmental impacts  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
Three safeguard documents have been developed in line with local laws, regulations and 
World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.  They are the Resettlement Action 
Plan (RAP) for the AME component, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the 
LRIP and a RAP for the first year program of the LRIP.  They describe in detail the 
following:  
 
-
The planning process, detailed resettlement impacts and village impact analysis.  
 
-
The policy framework and basic principles to be followed.  
 
-
Detailed livelihood restoration program. The rehabilitation approach was developed 
through consultations with every affected village and follows a strategy combining land-
for-land measures and cash payment option.  A preliminary village livelihood 
implementation program was developed for each village.  
 
-
Relocation program.  All the relocating households are planned to move within the 
existing villages and no group resettlement sites are considered necessary.  
 
-
Compensation and rehabilitation of infrastructure, business and enterprises.The 
facilities will be compensated at reconstruction cost and will be reconstructed by the 
owner government departments.  Nearly all affected business and enterprises are 
suffering small impacts and their operations will not be affected.  They will be 
compensated for their losses.  
 
-
Resettlement organizations.  SPTD is in charge of the implementation of the 
resettlement program.  A multi-level resettlement organization has been established for 
the implementation of the project, including resettlement offices at provincial, municipal, 
county and township levels.  Their respective responsibilities and functions are detailed 
in the RAP.  
 
-
Monitoring.  Both internal and external monitoring is planned for resettlement 
implementation.  The resettlement offices will be responsible for the internal monitoring 
while an external agency will be engaged as the independent monitor.  
 
-
Consultation and participation.  The affected villagers participated in the social 
economic survey, impact census, inventory and formulation of the compensatory and 
livelihood rehabilitation plan.  Arrangements to ensure continued participation are 
planned in the RAP.  Project information, relevant government policies and regulations 
were broadly disseminated through village meetings in the project areas.  
Page  10
-
Schedule of implementation of resettlement actions.  
 
-
Grievance redress.  Mechanisms have been designed for grievance filing and redress.  
This has been disclosed to the local population and will be further disseminated through 
the Resettlement Information Booklet.  
 
-
Resettlement cost.  The total resettlement cost for the AME is RMB 169 million, 
equivalent to US$ 21 million (1 USD=8.02 yuan), and RMB 294,000, equivalent to about 
US$38,500, for the first year program of LIRP.  This will be financed by domestic funds.  
 
The RAPs and resettlement policy framework have been prepared in line with local 
laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.10.  The task team has reviewed early drafts of 
these documents and provided comments for their appropriate finalization.  The social 
safeguard documents are in compliance with OP 4.12.  
 
In addition, for the Maoba-Bashan Expressway a RAP, acceptable to the Bank, will be 
prepared and furnish to the Bank by March 31, 2007 and thereafter implemented in the 
construction of that expressway.  
 
Borrower Capacity  
 
SPTD has maintained a good implementation track record for the previous Bank 
highway projects.  The ICR of the Second Shaanxi Provincial Highway Project (February 
10, 2003) rated this project satisfactory including safeguard compliance.  
Notwithstanding, in order to develop capacities at all levels, a total of more than 30 key 
staff from SPTD and its construction office, design institute, monitoring institute, Ankang 
City and county/district including environmental administrative personnel, environmental 
supervisors and staff engaged in environmental protection will receive intensive training, 
including lectures by experts, site visits to similar projects, and periodic domestic or 
international training.  
 
The Shaanxi Provincial Transportation Department (SPTD) is in charge of the 
implementation of the resettlement program.  A multi-level resettlement organization has 
been established within SPTD for the implementation of the project, including 
resettlement offices at provincial, municipal, county and township levels.  Their 
respective responsibilities and functions are detailed in the RAP.  This is the third World 
Bank lending operation in the transport sector in Shaanxi.  STPD has accumulated a lot of 
experiences and built up capacity through these operations in implementing resettlement.  
However, the local roads improvement component would take place in Ankang City 
where knowledge of World Bank policies is not as strong, and the staff in that city will 
require capacity strengthening.  An institutional development effort, similar to the one 
described for the environmental safeguards in the previous paragraph, will be undertaken 
for the staff in charge of the implementation of the resettlement action plans.  
 
Summary Provisions for the Maoba-Bashan Expressway  
 
In the construction of the Maoba-Bashan Expressway, SPTD will apply a Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) and the mitigating measures under an Environmental Investment 
Page  11
Assessment (EIA), both acceptable to the Bank.  For these purposes, SPTD will furnish 
to the Bank for its review by not later than March 31, 2007, the proposed RAP and EIA 
for the Maoba-Bashan Expressway.  Other planning, design, and implementation 
arrangement, including procurement, financial management and audits under the Maoba-
Bashan Expressway would follow Chinese legislation, as this expressway will be 
financed entirely with local funds.  The EIA and the RAP would be prepared by Chang 
an University (the same consultants that prepared similar documents for the AME 
expressway).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental Safeguards  
 
Two rounds of public consultation were carried out according to the World Bank's 
guideline in December 2004 (first round), and July 2005 (second round, Ziyang-Maoba 
section) and March 2006 (second round, Ankang-Ziyang section).  The first round 
consultation was conducted by a questionnaire survey in which 50 valid answers were 
collected out of 58 questionnaires sent.  The second round consultation for Ziyang-
Maoba section included meetings with local people at project-affected towns (2 places, 
more than 50 people) and surveys through questionnaires (199 valid answers collected 
out of 210 questionnaires sent).  During this process, project-affected individuals, 
organizations of concerned villagers, and village committees were intensively consulted.  
Apart from the resettlement-related issues, the public showed concerns about social 
disruption by the expressway and environmental protection during construction, 
requested adequate mitigation measures.  Their feedback was reflected in the engineering 
designs and EMP.  The draft EIA/EMP was disclosed at the communication bureaus of 
Ankang City, Hanbing District and Ziyang County in April 2006, as well as at InfoShop 
in May 2006.  
 
For LRIP, the EMF provides the basics and procedures for public consultation and 
information disclosure, which are to be followed in the preparation of EAs to meet the 
Bank?s requirement.  The EMF was disclosed in April 2006 at the communication 
bureaus of Ankang City, Hanbing District, Langao County and Ziyang County as well as 
at InfoShop in May 2006.  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
The resettlement planning for the AME followed a participatory process.  Affected 
villagers and various government agencies participated in the social economic survey, 
impact census, inventory and formulation of the compensatory and livelihood 
rehabilitation plan.  The affected people will continue to participate in the formulation 
and implementation of detailed village livelihood development plans.  Arrangements to 
ensure continued participation are planned in the RAP.  Project information, relevant 
government policies and regulations were broadly disseminated through village meetings 
in the project areas.  A project information handbook will be developed and distributed to 
every affected farmer household.  Project RAPs have also been disclosed.  
Page  12
For the first-year LRIP, initial livelihood rehabilitation plan has been developed for each 
road, in consultation with local governments and villages.  The resettlement planning 
team studied and assessed various livelihood options in each area.These are summarized 
in the form of initial plans for each individual road.  These options have been shared with 
the villages during the planning process to advise them in the optimal use of their land 
compensation fund.  Final decision on the use of their compensation funds and choice of 
different livelihood options will be made by the villages themselves.  The project 
resettlement offices will continue to advice and monitor this decision-making process and 
implementation of their selected livelihood programs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/24/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/25/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/05/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/24/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  13
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
09/27/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Peishen Wang 
09/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
09/27/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Hiroshi Ono 
09/27/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/10/2006 
Comments:  Juan D. Quintero, Acting RSC 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
10/05/2006 
Comments:   
