Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/31/2006 
Report No.:  37210
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P083322 
Project Name:  Sichuan Urban Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Hiroaki Suzuki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: September 7, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);Sewerage (10%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (8%);Sub-national government administration (2%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Land administration 
and management (S);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
219.87
219.87 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve core urban functions in an 
equitable and resource efficient manner by removing identified infrastructure bottlenecks 
hampering land development, transport, and environmental conditions in four second-tier 
cities in Sichuan Province.   
 
3. Project Description 
Urban Infrastructure Investment Component (US$365.56 million)  
 
This component will support spatial planning priorities in the four cities as shown 
under:  
 
Mianyang US$98.70 million  
 
The proposed project will fund the construction of trunk and secondary infrastructure, 
including drainage and environmental improvements, in two new major urban 
development areas adjacent to Mianyang's city:  
Page  2
(a) Pioneer Park: US$49.96 million  
 
This subcomponent will fund the construction of:  
 
23.6
km of local access roads and associated bridges, sewers, and drainage, as well as 
landscaping activities, to expand the park area (483 ha); and  
 
2.6
km
section of the Second Ring Road (2RR) within Pioneer Park (including an 
interchange with Yingbin Avenue), as part of the 2RR.    
 
(b) Southern Economic Development Zone (SEDZ): US$48.73 million  
 
The subcomponent will support construction of 24.5 km of local access roads within 
areas A & C of the SEDZ (560 ha), together with associated drainage infrastructure and 
landscaping.  
 
Suining US$64.98 million  
 
The proposed project components in Suining are secondary infrastructure, sewerage and 
roads in the newly developed Xining District Area to the west of the city, including an 
associated link road to the city railway station area.  
 
(a) Xining District Area: US$58.23 million  
 
The Xining District Area component will support secondary infrastructure construction 
to develop an area of 351 ha for mixed residential, administrative and commercial uses.  
The proposed works include 25 km of access and distributor roads, bridges, river 
embankments, sewers, and landscaping.  
 
(b) Xining Road: US$6.75 million  
 
The Xining Road is proposed as a link northwards from the Xining District Area to the 
North railway station to improve access and connectivity to the new development area.  
 
Yibin US$76.35 million  
 
The proposed project will fund two river bank roads designed to improve access within 
the city and enhance the degraded riverbank environment.  
 
(a) Route A: US$40.44 million  
 
Route A (6.7 km) is a distributor road along the north bank of the Min Jiang and Chang 
Jiang rivers connecting the old city and existing urban areas with the Tianyuan District 
and the proposed new industrial development zone.  
 
(b) Route B: US$35.91 million  
 
Route B comprises a 3.5 km extension of the existing riverbank wall and two-lane local 
road westwards from the Cultural Square in the center of Nan An District.  
 
Panzhihua US$125.53 million  
 
The proposed project will support four components designed to accommodate growth of 
the city by improving access and traffic circulation (two urban roads), and upgrading the 
city's sewerage systems, riverbanks, and landscape conditions.  
 
(a) Bing-Ren Road: US$80.22 million  
 
The proposed Bing-Ren Road is a link between the existing central business district 
(CBD) and the expanding residential district of Renhe. It would comprise a 6.7 km 
section of a four-lane road linking the recently completed Airport Access Road to Duren 
Road (West) in Renhe.  
 
(b) Bin Jiang Road: US$9.32 million  
Page  3
The proposed road improvement (2.7 km) will relieve congestion in the downtown area 
and will provide additional capacity for longer distance cross-town traffic.  
 
(c) Sewerage: US$10.41 million  
 
The sewerage component will help develop comprehensive wastewater collection 
systems (39 km of pipeline) in the Bingcaogang, Geliping, and Qingxiangping 
catchments, which will be connected to the existing Bingcaogang Wastewater Treatment 
Plant (WWTP) and new Qingxiangping WWTP, to be constructed under a build-operate-
transfer (BOT) arrangement.  
 
(d) River Embankment and Landscape Improvement: US$25.6 million  
 
The proposed project will support a series of measures along the Jinsha River: cleaning 
up debris; constructing an embankment to prevent slope and soil erosion; and improving 
landscapes at four scenic spots, including planting trees and bushes along the 15 km of 
river from Xinzhuang Bridge to Jinsha railway station.  
 
Institutional Development and Capacity Building (IDCB) Component (US$7.00 
million)  
 
This component consists of: (i) TA for Institutional Development and Capacity Building 
for the project municipalities (US$3.30 million) and (ii) TA for Project Implementation 
and Management, including EMP/RAP implementation monitoring (US$3.70 million). 
The goal of the TA is to help municipalities improve urban planning and management 
capacities related to spatial planning, land management, transport planning, and utility 
and asset management. A management information system (MIS) and geographical 
information system (GIS) will be used as major instruments for municipal institutional 
development and capacity building. TA will include trainings and workshops linking, via 
satellite, SUDP cities with other Asian cities and cities worldwide to share information 
and best practices, with possible advisory and technical support from the Tokyo 
Development Learning Center. This global linkage will also help the project cities induce 
foreign direct investment in the project areas, especially in the Economic Development 
Zones.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Mianyang  
 
The city's Master Plan envisages growth in both the north-western section (Pioneer Park 
Area including a new administration center) and southern section (Southern Economic 
Development Zone) of the city. This will be achieved by relocating the city 
administration and hi-tech and science related enterprises and institutions to the north-
western section and directing general manufacturing industries to the southern section 
from overcrowded inner areas, whilst redeveloping the inner areas for high quality 
residential, financial and commercial use.  
 
Suining  
 
The municipality intends to reduce population densities in the overcrowded core area 
and accommodate growth by developing new urban districts to the east across Fujiang 
River and to the west in Xining District which has access to the highway and a new 
Page  4
express railway, connecting the cities with two metropolitan areas, Chengdu and 
Chongqing. The project components in Suining are designed to assist with the growth of 
the city in its western part and comprise the Xining District Development Area and an 
associated link road, Xining Road, to connect the area with the city station area located 
northwards from the area.  
 
Yibin  
 
Yibin is located at the confluence of the Min Jiang and Jinsha Jiang, which together 
form the Chang Jiang (Yangtse River). The rapidly growing city is set to become the 
focus of the prime energy-producing center in Western China with the development of a 
series of major hydro-electric schemes with generation two times larger than the Three 
Gorges Dam, on the Jinsha Jiang immediately upstream of the city. The overcrowded old 
city is situated between the Min Jiang River and Jingshajiang River. The municipality 
intends to reduce the excessive density in the old city center by developing a new 
administration center and residential areas across Jinshajiang River and by shifting 
manufacturing enterprises to the new industrial zone developed in Tianyuan District 
north of the Min Jiang River.  
 
The project in Yibin contains two road components, both of which follow the banks of 
the rivers, and which are designed to improve access with the city and enhance the 
previously degraded riverbank environment. Route A (6.7km) is a distributor road along 
the north bank of the Min Jiang and Chang Jiang rivers connecting the old city and 
existing urban areas with Tianyuan District and the proposed new industrial development 
zone. The road additionally connects with the northern bridgehead of the new Chang 
Jiang Bridge (under construction),which forms part of the Ring Road, and provides a key 
link within the city. Route B comprises a 3.5 km extension of the existing river-bank wall 
and 2-lane local road westwards from the Cultural Square in the center of Nan An 
District.    
 
Panzhihua  
 
The city, surrounded by mountains, has been developed on both banks of the Jinsha 
River. The lack of suitable development land within the existing riverside areas requires 
the development of a new southern area and associated improvements to the transport 
system. The city's mineral-based heavy industrial activities have taxed the water quality 
and led to degradation of the river bank which requires mitigation.  
 
The proposed Bing-Ren Road is a link between the existing central business district 
(CBD) and the newly expanding residential district of Renhe: it comprises a 6.7 km 
section of 4-lane road linking the recently completed Airport Access Road to Duren Road 
(West) in Renhe. The proposed road improvement (2.7 km) will relieve currently 
congested streets in the downtown area and will provide additional capacity for longer 
distance cross-town traffic.  
 
The sewer component will help develop comprehensive wastewater collection systems 
in Bingcaogang, Geliping and Qingxiangping catchments which connected to the existing 
Bingcaogang WWTP and a new Qingxiangping WWTP which will be constructed on a 
Page  5
BOT basis. The project will construct a series of measures along the Jinsha river, which 
include cleaning up of debris and construction of an embankment in case of slope sliding 
and soil erosion (selected locations along 30km length on both side of the riever); 
landscape improvement at four scenic spots; plantation of trees and bushes on places 
where soil permits up and above the 50 year flood level, along the 15 km of river stretch 
from Xinzhuang Bridge to Jinsha railway station.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (QAG) 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 
Ms Youlan Zou (EASUR) 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as Category A under OP 4.01. The project mainly consists of 
relatively small-scale urban road construction and service infrastructure for the urban 
areas expansion in four secondary cities. Environment Assessment has been completed. 
EA has not revealed any serious environmental issues.  
 
The project will bring positive impacts and benefits to the environment and 
communities. The sewer in Panzhihua, Yibin, and Suining will intercept wastewater 
currently discharged to the environment without any treatment and thus reduce pollutant 
loads discharges. This will help improve the water quality of the receiving rivers and 
important fish habitats and fisheries protection area in the upper Yangtze river system.  
 
The river embankments will enforce the river banks to prevent slope sliding and soil 
erosion and enhance ability for flood control. The landscape component will improve 
environmental aesthetics in the project cities and provide more leisure and green space 
for the residents.  
 
Page  6
From the city wide perspective, the road components are expected to contribute to 
ambient air quality improvement through reduced traffic jams in city centers and 
increased average driving speeds on a city wide basis. The new and upgraded roads will 
contribute significantly to community development, attracting outside investment, quality 
of life of area residents, convenient outings in the city.  
 
The urban area development components in Mianyang and Suining will meet the urban 
demands to accommodate the rapid population growth and urban and economic 
expansions.  
 
The project will improve the basic transportation and environmental infrastructure in the 
project cities and contribute to continuously improved foundations for sustainable 
development and improvement of the standard of living for the cities' residents.  
 
Major potential adverse impacts during the construction of the sewer network, roads, 
river embankment and landscape improvement include land occupation, airborne dust, 
noise, soil erosion, discharges to rivers and fish habitats, and traffic and urban service 
disruptions.  
 
Impacts during the operational phase of these facilities include increased noise and 
motor vehicle emissions along project roads, and surface runoff to receiving rivers. The 
project roads in Yibin are adjacent to a national level rare fish protection zone. But the 
impacts of the road construction and operations to the fish habitat, primarily the surface 
runoff containing suspended solids and possibly oils from construction sites and road 
surface, are expected to be limited only to less than 1 m from the river bank according to 
a
two dimensional mathematical model about the pollutants dispersion. The fish habitats 
and fisheries resources are not likely subject to significant impacts from these discharges.  
 
The project involves involuntary resettlement.  In total, 5,369 mu of land will be 
acquired, 545,730 m2 of houses will be demolished, 3,046 households will have to move 
and 396 non-residential units will relocate.  The Resettlement Plans are prepared for 
compensation and rehabilitation of land acquisition and housing demolition. The 
Provincial PMO will coordinate key issues with the municipal PMOs who shall take the 
full responsibility in resettlement implementation.  
 
The Status Report on Minority Nationalities in Sichuan was prepared. It is showed that 
the scattering ethnic minorities in the project area of Panzhihua share a similar living 
modality and production pattern with the Han.  The definition of indigenous peoples 
stated in the Bank's  OP4.10 does not suit them.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The urban expansion components will convert existing agricultural (Xining District in 
Suining and Pioneer Park in Mianyang) and mostly unused land (Economic Development 
Zone in Mianyang) into urban or industrial land. The original lands will lose their current 
land features and functions, and the area environment will receive higher pollutant loads 
Page  7
from increased population and new industrial operations attracted to the newly developed 
urban development areas. As an indirect and induced impact, the improved road network 
in Suining will also result in increased visitors to Guangde temple, a provincial level 
cultural relic.  
 
Compensation funds for land acquisition and resettlement are requested to be timely and 
fully paid.  Rehabilitation programs are further worked out for people affected by land 
acquisition and relocation.  No long term impacts are anticipated if the resettlement 
activities are successfully completed and the resettlement objective of restoring and 
improving the livelihood of the affected people is met.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative road alignments, road configuration designs, pavements, bridge designs, 
sewer pipe plans, and river embankment designs have been identified. The EA team has 
worked with the project feasibility study teams to compare and evaluate alternatives and 
optimal alternatives were selected based on the avoidance or least adverse impacts on the 
environment and communities as well as engineering and economic considerations. All 
project cities have considered the 'without project' scenario as an alternative.  
 
In the preparation of the feasibility study, the resettlement scale is an important factor in 
comparison of various schemes. During the project design the principle of avoiding and 
minimizing resettlement was taken; and during construction, measures are considered to 
reduce the adverse impact on the surrounding people. For instance, the width of the road 
and the distance between two bus stations are not fixed in Yibin.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The governments of project cities recruited the Chengdu Hydropower Investigation 
Design and Research Institute to prepare the project EA and EMPs for Panzhhihua and 
Yibin, and Sichuan Academy of Environmental Sciences for Mianyang and Suining.  
Each city has its own EA and site specific EMP, prepared by these institute/academy, 
following diligently the national procedures and standards as well as the Bank safeguard 
policy requirements. The EA documents such as EA reports, EMPs and a project wide 
EA Summary have been prepared, incorporating Bank's comments during project 
preparation and pre-appraisal, and found to be satisfactory.  
 
The EA covers the project description, baseline environmental conditions, 
environmental benefits and project justifications, analysis of alternatives, potential 
environmental impacts and mitigation measures both at the construction and operation 
stages, environment management plans, public consultation and information disclosure. 
The EMP specifies the environmental management and supervision mechanisms, 
mitigation measures, environmental monitoring plans, training plans and estimated 
budget allocations necessary for implementing the mitigation measures, monitoring plans 
and ways to strengthen client capacity. Key environmental mitigation measures during 
construction include: dust suppression; erosion control; use of low noise construction 
Page  8
equipment/machinery, proper arrangement of construction activities to avoid sensitive 
time and locations, traffic management during construction, borrow pits and spoil 
materials disposal sites rehabilitation, and use of proper operational procedures by the 
contractors during construction. Major mitigation measures during operation include 
installation of noise isolation windows and noise barriers at sensitive receptors and 
enhancement cities' motor vehicle emission control programs.  
 
The provincial PMO and all project owners will have environmental specialists on staff 
during project construction and/or operation as may be appropriate to coordinate and 
management environmental performance. In addition, the project owners will also engage 
environmental supervisors for regular inspections and supervision of construction 
activities to ensure implementation of EMP and compliance with regulatory and project 
requirements for pollution control and environmental protection. In sensitive locations, 
such as roads in Yibin which is are near a national level fish protection area, specialists 
from protection area administration, local fisheries, forest and environmental protection 
bureaus will be invited to supervise construction activities to ensure minimum impacts to 
the protected fish habitats.  
 
Each project cities have also developed detailed environmental monitoring plans. These 
plans basically have two tiers: daily and regular monitoring by contractor and 
construction supervision companies through visual observations and simple apparatus 
such as hand hold noise meters. This would ensure timely identification of environmental 
issues during construction so that appropriate mitigation and corrective actions can be 
taken promptly. The second tier monitoring is periodical compliance monitoring by 
professional environmental monitoring stations. This monitoring will determine 
compliance status of construction and operation activities.  
 
Considering the lack of environmental knowledge and monitoring methods of 
contractors and construction supervision companies in general, a mandatory training of 
all contractors and construction supervision companies have been developed. The 
training will be held prior to the commencement of construction and will be attended by 
at least one  senior management staff and one environmental staff from each of the 
contractors and supervision companies. The training programs will include project EA 
results, introduction of EMPs, technical background about mitigation measures, detailed 
methodologies for the daily monitoring, mitigative and corrective action designs, and 
reporting requirements. The cities will also provide training to environmental staff of 
PMO and individual project owners as part of capacity building. The training programs 
will include environmental regulations, policies and standards, environmental 
management, and general pollution control and environmental management technologies.  
 
Each project city has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). In addition, 
Mianyang and Suining also prepared resettlement policy framework and a set of contracts 
to ensure the rights of the project affected people.  The RAPs define the compensation 
standard and entitlements for the people affected by the project, and outline the 
implementation plan, institutional arrangement and budget for the activities.  
 
Page  9
This is the second Bank-supported urban project in Sichuan Province.  The Provincial 
PMO and the external monitor do have some experience in resettlement implementation.  
However, the borrowers' capacity at the city level to plan and implement the measures 
described in the RAP needs to be improved through the Launch Workshop soon after the 
approval of the project; through various training of the resettlement staff in each city; and 
through a close monitoring system.  
 
Implementation of the EMP and RAP is closely monitored by the project implementing 
agencies, and they will submit the monitoring report semi-annually.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Two rounds of public consultation have been conducted in each of the project cities. The 
consultation is basically through questionnaire surveys supplemented by the focused 
interviews of key affected people and other stakeholders. In total, over 650 people mostly 
project directly affected have been consulted for their opinions and concerns about 
project. In addition, special meetings or interviews were held with Guangde temple in 
Suining, environmental, hydrology and municipal engineering specialists in Panzhihua 
and State Upper Yangtze River Rare and Special Fish Protection Areas Administration, 
local forests, fisheries, and environmental bureaus in Yibin for specific environmental 
and social issues. Concerns expressed by the public and other stakeholders have been 
incorporated in the project EA and preparation of the EMP.  
 
Project information including major anticipated adverse environmental impact and 
mitigation measures has been disclosed to the public through public notices in local 
newspapers in each of the four project cities. The draft EA reports have also been made 
available to the public at the local project offices and dedicated websites. All cities plan 
to release the final EA reports and EMPs once these documents to the public are 
finalized.  
 
Municipal and project design staff have consulted with the potentially affected 
communities when identifying resettlement impacts, formulating resettlement policies, 
and preparing resettlement plans.  Total number of people involved has reached to 3,357 
in the 4 cities (Mianyang: 1,560, Panzhihua: 660, Suining: 285, Yibin: 852).  This has 
allowed impacts to be minimized, and identification of remedial plans acceptable to the 
affected persons. Furthermore, monitoring and grievance procedures will be established 
and participation will continue during resettlement implementation.  
 
Information regarding the project and the resettlement program will be published in 
local newspapers and through TV programs.  To ensure that affected persons are 
informed about compensation standards, rehabilitation measures, and grievance 
procedures, resettlement announcements will be posted in the affected villages and 
neighborhoods.  As required by the Bank policy, the full RAP has been available at the 
City PMOs.  The announcement of the RAP disclosure was made in the four cities during 
the period from Sep.  24 to Oct. 10, 2005.   
 
Page  10
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/28/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/07/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/14/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/18/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/18/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  11
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hiroaki Suzuki 
11/10/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
11/10/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Youlan Zou 
11/10/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
11/23/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
11/23/2005 
Comments:   
