Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2999 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P098654 
Project Name: GEF China Thermal Power Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader: Jie Tang 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (80%);Power (10%);Central 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Regulation and competition policy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
19.70 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.80 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
139.00
143.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce coal consumption per unit of electricity 
production in Chin by removing regulatory, institutional and technical barriers to phasing out 
small inefficient coal-fired units, improving the efficiency of larger units and introducing new 
generation dispatch models and trading mechanisms to improve the overall efficiency of the 
power system.  
 
The global objective of the proposed GEF project is to reduce GHG emissions to mitigating 
climate change through reduction of coal consumption for power generation in China. The 
proposed project is consistent with the Strategic Objective of the GEF Interim Strategy 
(Summary of Negotiations on the Fourth Replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund, dated August 
25, 2006) - that of promoting retrofitting of power plants. It is grandfathered under that strategy.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed GEF Project will achieve the PDO through the following components:  
 
(i) 
Component 1 - Policies and Regulations to Phase out Inefficient Small Units. This 
compoonent will support development of effective policies & regulations providing a mixture of 
mandatory and incentive measures to phase out inefficient small coal-fired power generation 
units; capacity building for monitoring compliance; pilot implementation in two pilot provinces; 
and establishement of CHP operation on-line monitoring system in the two piloting provinces, 
including instruments, computer hardware and sofatware to support enforcement of relevant 
regulations for CHP units.  
 
(ii) 
Component 2 - Demonstration of Rehabilitation for Efficiency Improvement. It will 
support demonstration of new technologies/equipment and practices of CHP rehabilitation that 
will gain maximum efficiency improvement and emission reduction through sustitution of 
decentralized small boliers for heat supply; capacity building for improving plant operation and 
maintenance to achieve improved power generation efficiency.  
 
The proposed rehabilitation works for efficiency improvement will primarily focus on steam 
turbines (i.e., improving the conversion efficiency of thermal energy into electrical energy) and 
conversion of a couple of units into CHP.  The project will not be financing any major 
rehabilitation of existing boilers as such works will be carried out as part of the power plant's 
own energy efficiency improvement program/works.  
 
More specifically, the project will be financing: rehabilitation of existing steam turbines 
(replacement of parts), improvement in the combustion systems (pulverized fuel burners, 
induced air fans, variable speed motors etc.) and conversion of the power generation plants into 
CHPs, which would not require any additional land: and in case of plants which are converted 
into CHPs, project would support laying of underground (in public land) heat/steam pipe lines to 
connect the existing heat distribution networks and dismantling of existing small inefficient coal 
fired boilers  
 
(iii) 
Component 3 - Trading Mechanism and Model for Fuel-efficient Dispatch. It will support 
development of fuel-efficient generation dispatch model combined with trading mechnism to 
improve overall efficiency of power system and address associated social and financial issues; 
implementation of the new dispatch system, including software and hardware in two pilot  
procinces, one with dominated thermal units and another with a mixtiure of hydro and thermal 
capacity.  
 
The policies and regulations developed under Component 1 and the trade mechanisms 
developed under Component 3 will be implemented to complement each other for greater use of 
energy from efficient plants which would ultimately result in reduced coal consumption.   
 
(iv) 
Component 4 - Technical Assistance to Project Implementation. This component will 
support hiring international and local consultants for supervision and guidance of project 
implementation and replication of successful experience and practices; and  
 
(v) 
Component 5 - Project Management. The component will support hiring of PMUs' staff 
and necessary logistic activities.  
 
Page  3
Expected Project Impacts.  The Project would have sector-wide impact on thermal power 
generation efficiency improvement, thereby achieving significant reduction in GHG emissions.  
The expected impacts:  
 
Performance indicator: Average Gross Efficiency of 367 gce/kWh in 2006 (baseline), and 355 
gce/kWh in 2012 (target)  
 
Impacts: GHG emisison reduction by 90 million tCO2e  
 
Assumptions: coal-fired generation  
 
2006
(baseline): 2600 TWh  
 
2012
(target): 3300 TWh  
 
Note: GHG emission reduction estimated based on total coal-fired generation (TWh) increase 
by 5% p.a. from 2006 to 2012 and the targeted gross efficiency improvement for the same period 
by 12 gce/kWh.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
While the policy work under Component 1 and 3 will target the coal-fired generation throughout 
the country, the pilot programs under all the three components will be implemented in Shandong, 
Shanxi, Henan and Guangdong provinces.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
During project preparation the Task Team safeguard specialists will evaluate the institutional 
capacity of the agencies / plants for implementation of various investment activities. If this 
capacity is deficient, technical assistance will be defined under the Component 4 to strengthen 
this capacity accordingly.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Youxuan Zhu (EAPCO) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Works financed under Component 2 of this project are clearly linked with the works being 
carried concurrently at the power plants ? substitution of existing inefficient boilers for heat 
supply and rehabilitation of existing heat supply network. Therefore, the Component 2 has 
greater potential for adverse environmental impacts mainly during the construction and 
demolition of exiting inefficient boilers for heat supply.  A due diligence evaluation of 
compliance with national environmental standards for waste management, emission standards, 
wastewater disposal standards and the national environmental planning process will be 
conducted. Therefore, OP 4.01 is triggered and environmental impacts will be assessed and 
environment management plans (EMP) will be prepared to mitigate negative impacts.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project will require temporary use of small portions of public land for laying 
underground pipes to connect the heat lines from the newly converted CHPs with the existing 
networks, and construction of heat exchange stations. Use of private land will be avoided as the 
alignment of connecting pipes is designed. A due diligence evaluation will be carried out to 
further clarify whether temporary or permanent land acquisition impacts would arise.  Whether 
the OP 4.12 is triggered will be decided once the due diligence evaluation is completed during 
the project preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Darft EIA Report: 10/30/2007  
 
Draft Social Due Diligece Review Report: 10/30/2007  
 
Final EIA and EMPs: 12/31/2007  
 
Final RAP, if required: 12/31/2007   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jie Tang 
10/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
10/04/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
10/11/2007 
Comments:   
