Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC224 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P082992 
Project Name: Demonstration of alternatives to Chlordane and Mirex in Termite Control 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Helen Chan 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other industry (100%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.69 
 Financing 
Gap 
14.36
28.05 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of this project are to (a) eliminate use of chlordane and mirex in the  
 
demonstration areas (Jiangsu Province and Hangzhou City), (b) introduce IPM practices for  
 
termite control in the demonstration areas, and (c) gain experiences that can be applied to the 
rest  
 
of
China.  
 
Its principal outputs are (a) a technically, economically and environmentally feasible IPM  
 
strategy to replace chlordane and mirex for termite control in the demonstration areas, (b)  
 
development of policies and instruments conducive to the implementation and adoption of the  
 
IPM strategy in the demonstration province, (c) institutional strengthening and capacity 
building  
 
in the demonstration areas, (d) a .replication. or scale up program of the identified IPM strategy  
 
for the total elimination of chlordane and mirex production and use in the rest of China, and (e)  
Page  2
information exchange and awareness raising in the demonstration areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This proposed demonstration project is designed as the first step in meeting China.s  
 
commitment to total elimination in the production and use of chlordane and mirex for termite  
 
control in the country. This is a stand alone GEF full sized project and will follow standard 
Bank  
 
and GEF project processing procedures.  
 
Preliminary design of the project consists of six components. These are:  
 
a. Institutional strengthening & capacity building,  
 
b.
Creation of a collaborative management framework,  
 
c. Closure of one or two chlordane and mirex producers and cleanup of the  
 
contaminated sites,  
 
d.
Demonstration of IPM strategy to eliminate chlordane and mirex in the  
 
demonstration areas (Jiangsu province and Hangzhou city), including the  
 
incremental cost for the use of chemical alternatives  
 
e. Development of a monitoring and evaluation, and  
 
f. Design of a national scaling up or . replication. program of the identified IPM  
 
strategy.  
 
The GEF CEO has approved the preparation grant (PDF-B) and the entry into GEF  
 
Pipeline for this demonstration project on November 13, 2003. The PDF-B grant will support 
the  
 
following activities, which need to be finished within the next 6 months:  
 
a. Inception activities, including establishment of a working team in SEPA and  
 
conduction of a inception workshop (completed),  
 
b.
Selection of demonstration areas (Jiangsu province and Hangzhou city were  
 
selected as the demonstration areas),  
 
c. Information collection in the demonstration areas,  
 
d.
Related preliminary studies for the demonstration project, including (1) study  
 
on
the institution system and legal framework, (2) study on construction codes,  
 
and (3) preliminary assessment of social, economic, and environmental  
 
impacts,  
 
e. Assess the feasibility of closing chlordane and mirex production lines and on  
 
how
many tones of chlordane and mirex. This will include a cost analysis for  
 
gradual closure of production facilities,  
 
f. Development of the IPM strategy for the demonstration areas, including (1)  
 
study on the cost analysis associated with contaminated soil, water, and the  
 
structures in the immediate areas of the producers to be closed and (2) study on  
 
incremental cost associated with the use of safer, less toxic and less persistent  
 
chemical alternatives. In the case that chemicals will be part of the IPM  
 
strategy, then the selection of new chemicals should be acceptable to the Bank  
 
guidelines on pesticide use (Reference to the WHO recommended  
 
classification of pesticides by hazard ), and  
 
g. Preparation of the financing plan and the operation mechanism.  
 
The output of the PDF-B will be the project brief with a number of supporting  
 
documents, which will be used to prepare the PAD and for the appraisal and negotiations of the  
Page  3
project, specifically:  
 
a. Report on selection of demonstration areas,  
 
b.
Report on the production, sales, distribution and use of chlordane and mirex in  
 
demonstration areas,  
 
c. Assessment report on institutional/policy capacity building in demonstration  
 
areas,  
 
d.
Assessment report on social, economic and environmental impacts,  
 
e. IPM strategy for the demonstration areas  
 
f. Financing plan for the proposed project,  
 
g. Action plan of the project implementation, and  
 
h.
A
draft operations manual including a monitoring and evaluation plan.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Basic criteria in the selection of demonstration areas are (1) comparatively longer history  
 
in the use of chlordane and mirex, (2) a better termite control system at different levels of  
 
government -- province, county, and district, (3) typical soil and climate conditions, (4) the 
main  
 
species of termites causing serious structural damage (Coptotermes formosanus, Odontotermes  
 
formosanus, and Reticulitermes speratus) are present, (5) one or more production enterprise(s) 
of  
 
alternatives to chlordane and mirex, and (6) strong local government support.  
 
An inception workshop for the project was held in January 2004. At that workshop,  
 
Jiangsu province was selected as the demonstration province. In addition, Hangzhou city and  
 
Wuxi city were selected for termite case study funded by the Canadian Trust Fund.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The POP team in the Foreign Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) in SEPA is  
 
responsible for daily management of the project under the direction and guidance of a deputy  
 
director general in FECO. Other key players in the project include Ministry of Finance (MOF),  
 
Ministry of Construction (MOC), the National Termite Prevention and Control Center, and the  
 
local government as well as private sectors. SEPA, as the lead national agency, would fully and  
 
closely consult and collaborate with all other ministries, local government, and private sectors 
to  
 
guarantee their full involvement and participation. The inter-agency steering committee  
 
established under the NIP will guide and supervise this project in terms of coordination among  
 
various ongoing projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The main potential environmental impacts of the project would be the closure of chlordane 
and mirex producers and the cleanup of the POPs (chlordane and mirex) conta
minated sites 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
where the chlordane and mirex producers are to be closed. Environmental Assessment on the 
enterprise closure and decontamination of areas should follow both OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01 of 
the Bank and Chinese EIA procedures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
TBD   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Introduction of new non-POPs alternative for termite management.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
TBD   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Jiangsu Province has been selected for demonstration purpose.  The province is not known to 
have large ethnic minority groups.  The project sites will be screened for impacts on ethnic 
minority groups, and if necessary, mitigation measures will be developed in line with local laws 
and Bank policy.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project may finance closure of the chlordane and mirex producers and cleanup of the 
contaminated sites by chlordane and mirex in the demonstration province, which may entail 
impacts such as relocation of structures.  The project will develop resettlement action plans when 
these areas are determined.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/30/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be completed by 12/31/2005   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Helen Chan 
04/08/2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
04/15/2004 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Magdolna Lovei 
04/15/2004 
Comments:   
