Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1578 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/08/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P085376 
Project Name: Rural Migrant Skills Development and Employment Project 
Task Team Leader: Xiaoqing Yu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (40%);Vocational training (40%);Adult literacy/non-formal 
education (20%) 
Theme: Improving labor markets (P);Other human development (S);Access to urban 
services and housing (S);Access to law and justice (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to support the rural to urban migrants to access 
better employment opportunities that improve their incomes and working conditions.  This 
objective will be achieved by improving their access to skills development opportunities and 
enhanced employment services, and by strengthening worker protections.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation would support project provinces and the central government to carry out 
activities in the following five components: (a) Developing Policies, Institutions, and Capacity - 
to support policy analysis, the development of implementation guidelines that concerns 
migration, and capacity building to improve the management and delivery of programs and 
services; (b) Skills Development - to enhance access to quality and relevant training programs by 
building training capacity that is responsive to the needs of the market, to develop and test 
performance-based budgeting mechanisms, and to encourage programs that offer learning 
opportunities for the poor. It will support innovative interventions that promote more efficient 
Page  2
use of public resources; (c) Employment Services - to strengthen job placement and related 
employment services in order to channel labor market information more efficiently to rural 
migrants and to enhance the value of services for migrant workers and their potential employers.  
(d) Workers Protection - to support the protection of the basic rights of rural migrants in urban 
areas by assisting the government in developing policies and programs, piloting new 
implementation approaches, and empowering migrants with knowledge and information. (e) 
Monitoring and Evaluation - to implement a monitoring and evaluation framework that provides 
for evidence-based decision-making on optimal resource allocation and effective program 
design.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, Shandong province, Anhui province; Ministry of Labor and 
Social Security   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be directly implemented by the project management unit of the Ministry of 
Labor and Social Security, and the project offices that are established under the Labor Bureau of 
each project province. Specific safeguard requirements will be determined during preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
EA category C is recommended and will be formally established by safeguard review.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
No issues concerning indigenous peoples are envisaged. Social assessment will be 
conducted.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/20/2007 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Social assessment will be initiated in mid June, and the draft social assessment will be 
completed by July 15, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaoqing Yu 
11/20/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
11/20/2006 
Comments:  I have reviewed the PCN stage ISDS and have no comments at this time.  The task team 
should schedule a PCN safeguards review meeting. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ana L. Revenga 
11/20/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
