Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2237 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/19/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P084874 
Project Name: China Energy Efficiency Financing 
Task Team Leader: Leiping Wang 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P098916 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (90%);Banking (10%) 
Theme: Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
13.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
200.00
200.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to improve energy efficiency in medium 
and large-scale Chinese industries by developing sustainable energy efficiency project lending 
programs in selected banks to support energy efficiency investments in these industries. The key 
performance indicators of the project will be energy savings achieved in medium and large scale 
industries; and associated emission reductions of greenhouse gas and other pollutants. EE project 
lending increases in participating banks will also be a key output indicator.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The preliminary design of the proposed project was initiated jointly by the GoC and the Bank in 
2004. Since then, the concept of the proposed project has been developed gradually based on 
extensive consultations with major stakeholders and market assessments under the Three 
Country EE Financing Technical Assistance Project. Five commercial banks and two policy 
banks have shown strong interests in participating in the project as financial intermediaries and 
four of them (two commercial and two policy banks) have formally submitted project 
applications to the GoC.  
Page  2
It is proposed for the project to finance a line of credit to the selected domestic bank(s) with an 
IBRD loan of US$ 200 million. Under the project, the selected banks will establish EE lending 
business with the support of the proposed technical assistance (up to US$ 15 million including 
proposed GEF financing), and will utilize their own financial resources in addition to the Bank 
loan proceeds to increase the impact of the project. The proposed technical assistance may also 
support additional domestic commercial banks committing to EE financing but not participating 
in the IBRD on-lending support to further amplify the impact of the proposed project.  
 
Component I ??? Line of Credit for EE financing  
 
The proposed IBRD loan would be on-lent by the GOC to selected domestic bank(s)   which 
would in turn re-lend these funds, at market rates, to enterprises (regardless of public or private 
ownership) for medium- and large-sized EE investment sub-projects, according to the lending 
policies of the bank(s) concerned as well as the operational manual that includes procedures and 
eligibility criteria to be agreed with the Bank. The domestic banks will be responsible for loan 
repayment to the GOC and assume all the financial risks.  
 
As some of the EE subprojects may be potentially eligible for carbon credit trading under the 
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) scheme of the Kyoto Protocol, opportunities of carbon 
financing will be explored to enhance EE subprojects??? creditworthiness and improve their risk 
profiles. Approaches for such credit enhancement will be developed during the project 
preparation stage. These may include: (a) carbon credit payment escrowed as a debt service 
reserve by the subborrowers; or (b) assignment of carbon credits to the bank(s) concerned as part 
of the collateral for the bank loans.  
 
Component II ??? Technical Assistance  
 
Tailored technical assistance (TA) will be provided to the domestic banks for (1) EE lending 
business start-up; (2) capacity building and training; (3) development of necessary internal 
mechanisms, procedures, and a knowledge base adequate to evaluate and extend loans to 
industrial enterprises for energy efficiency projects; (4) lending subproject pipeline development; 
and (5) loan evaluation and due diligence. TA will also be provided to Chinese energy intensive 
industries through participating banks to mitigate technical risks of large scaled energy efficiency 
projects, especially those involving new technologies and/or comprehensive system re-
integration.  
 
Finally, technical assistance is proposed for GOC to (a) develop a set of government policy and 
regulatory vehicles to promote investment into the industrial sector for large energy efficiency 
projects and (b) strengthen the government capabilities, in the areas of enforcement of related 
laws, government regulations and standards, and supervision and monitoring of energy 
efficiency related activities by energy intensive industries.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower
’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
During project preparation the Task Team safeguard specialists will evaluate the institutional 
capacity of the Selected Domestic Banks for environmental assessment and environmental 
management supervision of sub-loans (implementation of safeguard framework procedures). If 
this capacity is deficient, technical assistance will be defined and incorporated into the project to 
strengthen this capacity accordingly.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project loan will be on-lent by GOC to selected domestic bank(s),that will in turn on-
lend these funds, at market rates, to enterprises (regardless of public or private ownership) for 
Energy Efficiency (EE) investment sub-projects in medium- and large-sized industries.  The on-
lending would be based on the lending policies of the bank(s) concerned, and the eligibility 
criteria and EA procedures agreed with the Bank and contained in the agreed project Operational 
Manual.The domestic banks will be responsible for loan repayment to the GOC and assume all 
the financial risks.  
 
The loans 
for energy efficiency improvements will target energy intensive industries such as  
cement, iron and steel, and petro-chemical sectors.  All the project works will be confined within 
the premises and facilities of the existing industries, and any new construction will be within the 
boundaries of these.  Typical energy efficiency improvements would consist of the use of waste 
energy (primarily to be utilized within the plant) and energy efficiency improvements through 
system optimization and re-integration.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2007 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The framework document for each of the participating banks will be prepared before 
appraisal. The framework documents will be included in the operational mannual of each 
bank for the proposed project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Leiping Wang 
06/19/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
