                                                                                                                                                                                                         43673


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 11/01/2007                                    Report No.: AC2611
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: China                                   Project ID: P099062
                                                                                                            Project Name: China: Shi-Zheng Railway
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: John Carter Scales
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: February 8,            Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008
                                                                                                            2007
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: EASCS                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                             Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Railways (100%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):           300.00

                                              Public                                                        IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    Borrower                                                      6,200.00
                                                                                                                                                                                  6,200.00
                                                    Authorized                                              Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                            Simple []          Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
                                                              Disclosure

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                        Public                              The development objective of the Project is to meet growing freight and passenger
                                                                                                            market demand in the railway corridor between Shijiazhuang and Zhengzhou, while
                                                                                                            substantially improving the level of service offered to customers.

                                                                                                            3. Project Description
                                                                                                            The project consists of a single component that is the construction of a new 355 km
                                                                                                            dedicated high-speed passenger rail line between Shijiazhuang in Hebei province and
                                                                              Authorized                    Zhengzhou in Henan province (ShiZheng line). In addition to the physical construction
                                                                                                            of the ShiZheng line the component will include related technical assistance.

                                                                                                             The existing double track electrified line between Beijing and Guangzhou is badly
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            congested. In order to handle the projected growth in passenger and freight traffic by rail,
                                                                                                            it is proposed to build a double track electrified, 2,100 km Beijing-Guangzhou dedicated
                                                                                                  Public    high-speed passenger line (JingGuang line).The proposed ShiZheng line forms part of the
                                                                                                            JingGuang line.

 This project aims to provide a major boost in rail transport capacity by increasing the
number of train paths to meet growing freight and passenger market demand in the
railway corridor between Shijiazhuang and Zhengzhou. This will be achieved by
dedicating the new high speed line exclusively to passenger services, concentrating the
freight services on the freed-up capacity of existing lines, and increasing train services
and performance standards in both market segments.

 The dedicated passenger line, capable ultimately of maximum train speeds of 350 km/h,
is planned to be constructed by 2010 in four sections (Beijing- Shijiazhuang,
Shijiazhuang-Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou-Wuhan and Wuhan-Guangzhou). The travel time
for passengers between Beijing and Guangzhou will be reduced from present 24 hours to
less than 10 hours and between Shijiazhuang and Zhengzhou from 3.3 hours to 1.3 hours.
The capacity freed up on the existing slow lines will provide the freight train paths
necessary to handle growing demand.

 This new ShiZheng line will consist of two tracks that run broadly parallel with the
existing JingGuang railway line but at some distance from it. In order to enable a high
operating speed it will have a relatively straight alignment with large radius curves of
9,000m or more. The terrain is flat and has low seismicity. This line will be electrified.

 Two types of trains would operate on the line. Type A trains shall have a maximum
speed of 300km/h while Type B trains shall operate at a maximum speed of 200 km/h. It
is planned to commence construction of this line in late 2007 and early 2008 and
commission the line by early 2011.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed high-speed railway line runs from Shijiangzhuang (Hebei Province) to
Zhengzhou (Henan Province), central part of China. The project area is rather flat land,
features with intensive human settlement and agricultural activities. Based on EA survey,
the land to be acquired will be either farmland (ca. 95%) or urban construction land.
There is no natural protected area or valuable habitat that would trigger the OP4.04
Nature Habitat.

 The proposed alignment is carefully selected to avoid densely populated areas.
However, there will be 158 residential sensitive sites (including 25 schools and
kindergartens) subject to noise impact and 112 sites subject to vibration impact. Due to
low coverage of cable-TV, there are 119 villages identified to be potentially impacted by
the electromagnetic radiation on TV signals. The proposed alignment will traverse ca. a
dozen of rivers, however, most of them are small/seasonal rivers and only four river
bridges will have piers inside water (two piers in water at most during construction
season).

 Based on the field survey and confirmation with cultural property authorities, it is
concluded that there is no cultural relic within the area of project influence. The nearest

cultural relic site is about 2km away from the railway alignment and will not be
impacted.

 Due Diligence. The project can is confirmed as a self-standing operation that does not
necessarily rely on the other sections of railway to achieve its objectives. While, as part
of a reputational risk management measure, the task team conducted a due diligence
exercise for both sections connected to the project. The task team reviewed the EIA
report for the north section (Beijing-Shijiazhuang), which was approved by SEPA in
April , 2006 and found no outstanding issue that could bring reputational risk to the
Bank. The south section, Shijiazhuang-Wuhan, is in the stage of. MOR has agreed to
provide a copy of this EIA to the Bank when it is available.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Songling Yao (EASCS)
   Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment:

 The major environmental safeguards issues are permanent land conversion of about
1174.5 ha and related loss of vegetation, common construction related impacts (i.e. dust,
noise, water pollution, soil erosion, waste management, health and safety, social
disturbance etc. during construction stage) and noise, wastewater/solid waste
management, traffic safety issues during operation.

 There will be 19 soil borrow pits, with total planned soil borrow of 19.95million m3
(while 16 of them will be used as spoil disposal sites to avoid site for spoil disposal). If
without soil erosion control measures, the total soil erosion will be 0.18 million tons.

 There will be 158 residential sensitive sites (including 25 schools and kindergartens)
subject to noise impact, 112 sites subject to vibration impact, and 119 villages identified
to be potentially impacted by the electromagnetic radiation on TV signals.

 A socio-economic survey was conducted and realized that the development objective of
the Project is to meet growing freight and passenger market demand in the railway
corridor between Shijiazhuang and Zhengzhou, while substantially improving the level of
service offered to customers. The potential negative social impacts include land
acquisition and resettlement. In the meantime, the survey didn?t find any minority
communities in the project area. Hence, only one policy of social safeguard of the Bank,
Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12 was triggered.

 The resettlement impact from the project is related to land acquisition and household
relocation. Measures were taken to minimize house demolition, land acquisition as well
as other resettlement impacts. The final project design requires acquisition of 17568 mu
(1171 hectares) of collective land on which 9815 persons live. The project will also
require relocation of 3029 households with 15087 persons, and otherwise affects 46
enterprises and 9 schools. During construction, an additional 13284 mu (886 hectares) of
collective land will be used temporarily, with compensation, and subsequently returned to
owners.

 The project stands alone to achieve its objectives without necessity relying on the other
sections of the railway. The TT also had a due diligence review on resettlement policy
and performance for the two railway sections at the two ends of the project. They consist
of Beijing-Shijiazhuang Railway in Hebei Province and Zhengzhou-Wuhan Railway in
Henan Province, which are also in preparation stage. Tianjin Design Institute has
investigated and concluded that the two railway sections are respectively managed by
Shitai Railway Company and Shiwu Railway Company, who will be also responsible for
the project and committed to execute the same resettlement strategies as that in the RP.
On the other hand, in the first two ongoing railway projects, the MOR confirmed that
they had followed and implemented the agreed RPs, and did not experience major non-
compliance issues.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
In the long-term, the project will significantly increase the service quality of railway in
term of both passenger and goods transportation, improve the infrastructure and promote
social and economic development of the corridor along the railway.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The EIA included comprehensive analysis of various alternatives, including ?without
project? scenario, and highway vs. railway, as well as six alternative railway sections for
alignment fine-tuning. This can be summarized as follows:
 -      Without project: given the already saturated railway capacity, ?without project?
scenario will increase the pressure of existing Jing-Zhu highway which could hardly

accommodate projected increase of passenger/freight transport load. Meanwhile, more
environmental, social and safety issues can be clearly expected.
 -      Highway vs railway: railway has obvious advantage for long-distance
passenger/freight transport. Construction of railway has relatively less environmental and
social impact both during construction and operation than highway. Therefore, railway is
the better option.
 -      Alternative sections: since the recommended alignment is generally parallel to the
existing Beijing-Guangzhou railway and expressway, the alignment selection is generally
limited in the existing corridor. Six alternative sections were carefully assessed in detail
for alignment fine tuning, with new stations as key control factor. The final alignment
was chosen based on integral consideration of technical, environmental and social
aspects, i.e. avoidance of environmentally sensitive areas, less social interference and
resettlement, shorter length, less land occupation, and compatibility with local master
planning.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental

 A stand alone EMP has been prepared for the project. The EMP specifies the
appropriate environmental management and supervision setup, mitigation measures,
environmental monitoring plans, training plans and budget allocation necessary to
implement the mitigation measures and strengthen the borrower?s capacity.

 A set of mitigation measures have been included in the EMP to avoid, minimize,
mitigate or otherwise compensate the negative impacts from the project. The main
measures are summarized below.

 Design Phase

 The railway alignment was carefully selected to avoid densely populated areas and
sensitive environmental and cultural sites. 19 soil borrow sites are identified using mostly
wasteland. Earth/stone works are carefully planned so that 16 borrow pits can be used for
spoil disposal without opening new disposal site. Temporary land/access road occupation
is planned to combine with permanent land acquisition/local road to the extent possible.
Ambitious re-vegetation plan has been developed for side slope protection, alignment
corridor greening and restoration of borrow areas. Large amount of bridges/culverts (246
km, ca. 69.3% of the total length) are designed to minimize disruption of surface water,
irrigation system and flood drainage.

 The entire line will adopt continuous welded rail and vibration-absorption subgrade to
reduce noise and vibration impacts. Noise mitigation measures are comprehensively
developed for all 158 sensitive sites to be impacted, including installation of noise
barriers (95 sites), noise insulation windows (151 sites) and resettlement.

 Septic tanks and secondary bio-contact treatment facility are designed for 6 new
passenger stations to ensure standard compliance discharge of sewage. Ground-source
heat pump technology is adopted for heating in these stations to avoid air emission from
boilers.

 Social severance impact is carefully considered in the project design stage. A total of
280 passageways/culverts have been designed, to reduce the social severance impact on
various towns, villages and residential areas, taking into account the requirements of
various agricultural vehicles. Given the whole alignment is highly developed transport
corridor with intensive human settlement and agricultural activities, there is no valuable
natural habitat to be impacted. There is no protected or endangered species presence in
the project area, but common local species (rabbits, rodent, etc.). With 69.3% of the
alignment is bridge and culverts, the severance impact of wildlife will be negligible

 Construction Period

 The land that is temporarily used will be re-stored promptly following its use. Top soil
(0.3-0.4m) of temporary land occupation and borrow area will be kept aside for later
reclamation purpose. Timely re-vegetation combined with engineering measures
(concrete and stone pitching) will be conducted for cutting/filling slope protection. A
comprehensive soil erosion prevention/control plan has been developed.

 Water-spraying will be carried out in construction sites and access road to suppress
construction dust. The frequency of watering will be increased in dry or blustery weather.
The construction access road will be paved or covered with gravel. Covering canvas will
be used for the transportation and storage site of bulk materials. Wheel washing before
leaving the site will be adopted for construction sites near cities/towns. Vehicles will be
properly maintained to minimize air emission pollution. Dedicated workers will be
assigned for site/road clean up.

 In order to minimize impact on surface water, during the construction period,
construction material storage sites will be kept away from surface water bodies and will
be properly managed (e.g. covered). Construction wastewater will be treated with settling
tank before discharge. Bridge foundation construction will be arranged in dry season, and
cofferdam method will be adopted. Wastewater from bridge foundation construction will
be drained into settling pond to minimize impact on surface water. Domestic wastewater
from the construction camps will be treated by septic tanks. Solid waste from the camps
and construction camp will be stored in specific enclosed sites and collected/transported
to municipal landfill sites for proper disposal. The parking and maintenance sites for
construction vehicles will be paved, and oil-containing wastewater will be treatment with
oil separation/collection tank.

 Construction sites and access roads will be carefully selected to avoid residential areas.
Public notice of construction commencement will be disclosed in local bulletins to inform
the public. Operation of high-level noise construction will be kept away from the
residential areas, and low-level noise equipment will be used. The main construction

activities will be strictly controlled during daytime. In case of night-time construction
near sensitive sites, local EPB?s approval will be needed and prior notice to public will
be provided. When necessary, temporary cover/noise barrier will be used in case
construction is close to sensitive sites.

 Before construction begins, the contractors will be notified of the procedure for treating
and reporting on cultural property and historical sites that may be encountered during the
construction. The contractors will be required to stop their construction immediately and
wait for the investigation and appraisal by professional archaeologists. The construction
can be resumed when approval has been obtained from the department in charge of
cultural property.

 Construction workers will receive education on basic knowledge of disease control,
especially some infectious diseases. Necessary self-protection devices, such as safety
helmets, earplugs and other safety protection devices, will be provided to workers.
Enclosures at construction sites and other dangerous place will be established to prevent
access by the public.

 Operation Period

 The new railway line will be fully fenced during operation stage, to ensure safety of
communities along the railway. Adequate passageways will be arranged to minimize the
social severance impact.

 Noise barriers will be properly maintained to ensure noise reduction effectiveness. New
sensitive sites (schools, kindergartens etc) shall be planned beyond recommended
distance of 390m.

 Management on wastewater treatment facility of new stations will be strengthened to
ensure compliance of discharge. Solid waste will be properly collected and disposed of in
local municipal landfills.

 Monitoring of electro-magnetic radiation impact on TV signal will be conducted during
operation to confirm whether provision of cable-TV access is needed. A total budget of
RMB 5.6 million is reserved for this purpose in the project budget.

 The proposed project will be the 11th World Bank project to be implemented by the
borrower MOR, who has developed ample in-house capacity to implement, supervise and
monitor both the EMP and the RAP.

 Social

 In the RP preparation, the MOR engaged, in early 2006, the Third Survey & Design
Institute of China Railways in Tianjin and the Southern China Communication University
to prepare the RP, compliant with the Bank policies and Chinese laws and regulations.
The TT reviewed the RP and concluded it satisfactory to the Bank requirements.

 The RP has investigated in-deepness potential resettlement impacts due to land
acquisition and house demolition by the project, and explored resettlement strategies and
compensation rates based on up-to-date Chinese land regulations and WB Involuntary
Resettlement, OP 4.12. In order that resettlement objective of keeping at least standard of
living for the affected can be achieved, the RP developed household relocation schemes,
livelihood development schemes, as well as restoration measures for other kinds of
impacts on enterprises, schools, infrastructure, and so on. Meanwhile, itemized budgets
for all the resettlement actions also have been made and integrated into the project cost
and investment plan.

 Livelihood development: The project will take 17568 mu of land from 316 villages,
totally resulting in about three percent decrease of land holdings in the affected villages.
Moreover, in the affected villages no more than 10 percent of their land will be
contributed. So, land acquisition impacts there seem minor. The most useful measure is to
redistribute the remaining land within villages. In addition, such effective measures are
planned as land redistribution, cash compensation, land improvement, and so on. In mean
time, there is about 13284 mu of land will be temporarily used, and it was planned in the
RP that ahead compensation will be paid according to compensation rates defined in the
RP to maintain the income of the affected. Those planned measures will be conducted
and monitored and evaluated by resettlement management system, including external
monitor.

 Household relocation: The 3029 affected households will relocate in their original
villages only after fully compensated, based on contracts reached with resettlement
offices. Compensation rates are sufficient to allow affected households to build up new
house of better quality within their same villages. During the restoration of housing, local
government will provided with supports in terms of approval of new residential plots,
waiver of house-related taxes, etc.

 Restoration of enterprises and schools: The project will affect 47 enterprises and 8
schools. In addition to compensation for assets and relocation costs, the RP includes a
transitional subsidy covering any lost wages or profits during relocation. These
enterprises are expected to relocate nearly. All workers are expected to maintain their
present employment with enterprises. The 8 schools are will be fully and timely restored,
just neighboring their present locations.

 Infrastructure restoration: those facilities will be affected in or after the project
construction have been investigated and planned to restore with consultation done and to
be done. The investment for the restoration has been estimated and integrated into the
project budgets, by which local sector authorities can be responsible for the adequate
infrastructure. At the same time, those actions are to be under management of the
resettlement supervision and monitoring.

 Organizational capacity: The proposed project will be implemented by the Ministry of
Railways, who is very familiar with the Bank?s safeguards policies. It has developed in-

house capacity to implement, supervise and monitor the RP. Meanwhile, tow Railway
Field Offices have also built up ROs and two provincial ROs will be established, in order
to properly implement the RP. An independent monitoring agency will monitor
compliance.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultations were carried out during the initial field survey stage and after draft
EIA is available and disclosed. People consulted include project affected people, local
governments and relevant experts. Various techniques were used in public consultation,
including survey questionnaires, public meetings, and interviews with affected groups
and individuals as well as small discussion groups.

 The primary concerns of the public include the noise and vibration, traffic safety, land
acquisition and compensation, and social disturbance during construction. The EA team
responded to the public concerns by ensuring that: adequate design of noise
barriers/sound insulation windows is provided for 158 sites, vibration absorption
techniques are adopted for 83 sections, and adequate compensation for resettlement (with
total budget allocation of RMB 337 million); full fencing of the railway line for traffic
safety; and other measures developed in the EMP.

 In compliance with EIA process requirements of the Chinese government and the World
Bank, the draft EIA was disclosed on July 12, 2006 with advertisement published in
China Environment News. The final EIA was locally disclosed on January 5, 2007.

 Social

 The project conceptualization is based on extensive consultation with stakeholders,
including diverse levels of governments, village leaders. All the affected households,
enterprises and schools were identified through the census and inventory. Project
information was provided to the affected via various channels such as newspaper, TV,
posters and public meetings. Focus group discussion and extensive key informant
interviews were conducted with local government officials and the affected villages to
finalization of the project location and schemes, compensation rates, relocation
arrangements and livelihood restoration measures. Peoples needs and concerns have been
incorporated into the RP. The DPs participated in the resettlement planning process,
particularly in the census, inventory and the formulation of the relocation and
rehabilitation programs. The RP was placed in the Bank?s InfoShop and was in all
project county libraries on Jan 10 2007, with an announcement separately on local
newspaper in Henan and Hebei.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes

  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     01/05/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 01/05/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  02/28/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                  03/06/2007
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     01/05/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 01/10/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  02/28/2007
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process            Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the      Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                            Name                    Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr John Carter Scales                   09/14/2007
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Hiroshi Ono                          10/31/2007
Social Development Specialist     Mr Chaohua Zhang                        10/04/2007
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan      10/31/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Ms Magdolna Lovei                       11/01/2007
 Comments:

