Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2435
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P092618 
Project Name:  China-Second Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Greg J. Browder 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 27, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (34%);Water supply (33%);Solid waste management (33%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
182.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
143.00 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - ASSOCIATED IBRD FUND 
5.00
148.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the performance and sustainability of 
water supply, wastewater, and solid waste services in the LMC-2 cities. Enhanced 
wastewater and solid waste services will also help reduce pollution into the Bohai Sea 
and contribute to improving Bohai Sea water quality.   
 
3. Project Description 
The LMC-2 project currently covers 8 medium-sized cities as follows. The LMC-2 
project currently covers 8 medium-sized cities as follows. i) Wastewater (US$129.9 
million): i) Panjin, Yingkou, Fushun, and Gaizhou; ii) Water Supply (US$105.5 million): 
Panjin, Yingkou, Anshan, Haicheng, and Xingcheng; iii) Solid Waste (US$54.6 million): 
Panjin, Anshan, and Yingkou EDZ.  
 
Component 1: Wastewater Infrastructure (US$129.9 million) This component covers 
four cities and includes the construction of new and rehabilitated wastewater collection 
systems in all four cities; the construction of new wastewater treatment plants in 
Yingkou, Panjin, and Gaizhou; and the construction of river embankment works in 
Fushun.  
Page  2
Component 2: Water Supply Infrastructure (US$105.5 million): This component covers 
five cities and includes the renovation of water distribution pipelines in all cities; 
installing around 200,000 water supply meters; upgrading treatment plants in Anshan and 
Haicheng; and the construction a new water treatment plant and transmission lines in 
Yingkou.  
 
Component 3: Solid Waste Infrastructure (US$54.6 million): This component includes 
the construction of new sanitary landfills in all three cities; closure of existing open 
dumps in Fushun and Yingkou EDZ; and solid waste collection and transfer works and 
equipment.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Development (US$8.0 million): The component covers the 
following activities:  
 
&#61656; 
Design Review, Advisory and Construction Management Technical 
Assistance (US$2.5 million). This assignment also includes assistance in the development 
and implementation of asset management planning for water supply and wastewater.  
 
&#61656; 
Public Utility Program (US$2.5 million-Funded by GEF): The program 
includes training and capacity building in public utility regulation and management at 
both the national and provincial levels. It also pilot activities in LMC-2 cities to 
demonstrate new approaches in utility benchmarking, private-sector participation, and 
utility regulation.  
 
&#61656; 
Solid Waste Technical Assistance (US$1.5 million-funded by GEF): The 
technical assistance will prepare strategic solid waste sector studies for Fushun, Yingkou, 
and Panjin.  
 
&#61656; 
Water Pollution Control Planning (US$1.0 million-funded by GEF): The 
technical assistance will prepare strategic wastewater sector studies for Fushun, Yingkou, 
and Panjin.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Location: Liaoning is a coastal province in the southern part of Northeast China which 
covers a total area of 145,900 km? and has a total population of 42 million. The province 
has jurisdiction over 14 cities, 17 county level towns and 17 counties. The provincial 
capital is Shenyang. The Liao River Basin, with a total catchment area of 220,000 km? 
accounts for 48% of the total land area of Liaoning Province. The rivers in the Basin 
drain through 11 of the most important industrial urban centres and cross large areas of 
agricultural land before discharging into the Bohai Sea.  
 
Climate: The climate in the basin is characterized by distinct seasons. Spring and 
summer are mild and the winter period from November to March is extremely cold, with 
minimum temperatures in January as low as -30?C. This is reflected in the long frost 
periods for the project cities, ranging from 130 to 150 days. The average annual 
Page  3
precipitation in the LRB is between 350 and 1200 mm and increases from northwest to 
southeast.  
 
Water Resources: The conjunction of the dry season with the ice bound period results in 
extremely low flows in the rivers, with low dilution of organic pollution. The 
phenomenon is even exacerbated by the reduced self-cleaning capacity of the river and 
the low efficiency of WWTPs because of the low temperature, resulting in high pollution 
levels in the rivers during winter. The denomination of Liao River Basin in Liaoning 
Province includes 3 independent river basins that discharge into the Bohai Sea: the Liao 
River proper, the Daliao River and the Xiaoling River. The available water resources in 
the LRB are limited. Average surface water resource in the catchment area is 535 m3 per 
capita per year, which is only 20% of the national average. Water resource available for 
agriculture is 220 m3 per mu (3,300 m3 per hectare) or 12% of the national average. 
River flows in the LRB vary dramatically in different months and seasons. In a typical 
year, July and August flows amount to 60% of the annual flow while that in the driest 
month (February) amounts only to 0.1% of the yearly total. In many stretches of LRB 
rivers in Liaoning province, there is little natural flow whereas wastewater flows are 
discharged from various industrial, municipal and area sources during the dry season 
(December to March).  
 
Bohai Sea: Bohai Sea is a part of China?s coastal waters and is a marginal sea in the 
west part of the Pacific Ocean. The Bohai Sea is a semi-closed water system which 
connects with the Yellow Sea through the Bohai Strait.  It consists of three bays, 
Liaodong Bay, Bohai Bay and Laizhou Bay. Yingkou and Yingkou EDZ are next to the 
Bohai Sea coastline, Panjin is 30 km from Liaodong Bay. Before the 1980s, more than 
200 species of fish and shrimp were recorded in the Bohai Sea.More than 100 species 
could be caught through normal fishing activities. The annual fishing production was 
ranging from 500 to 700 thousand tons, which accounted for 30% of China's fishing 
production. Because of sand beach formations shellfishes were an important part of the 
production and marine culture developed rapidly. However, since the 1980s, increasing 
pollution of the Bohai Sea coastal area and over-fishing have resulted in a strong decline 
of the fisheries.  
 
China has drawn up a great marine environmental protection plan to control pollution in 
the Bohai Sea area and to restore the favorable ecological environment there. The Bohai 
Blue Sea Action Program should be put into practice in three stages: 2000-2005, 2006-
2010 and 2011-2015. The program aims to halt discharge of industrial wastes, to monitor 
environmental pollution and to restore the damaged ecological system in the sea. LMC-2 
is a major contribution to the achievement of this program.  
 
Ethnic Minority Communities: Liaoning is a province with many nationalities. There are 
51 ethnic minorities including Hans, such as Man Zu, Mongols, Hu Zu, Korean and Xibo 
Zu. There are 6.7 million minority group people accounting for 16% of the total 
population in Liaoning province. The ethnic minority counties, whose population 
accounts for over 40% of the local population, are Xingcheng, Suizhong, Yixian, 
Kaiyuan and Xifeng; the others are scattered. In the municipalities of Anshan, Fushun, 
Yingkou, Panjin and Huludao (Xingcheng), minorities are not living together so LMC-2 
does not concern ethnic minority communities.  
 
WATER SUPPLY: The total annual volume of water resources in Liao River Basin is 
estimated 23.511 billion m3. In normal years, the amount of water available for use is 
Page  4
10.567 billion m3. Utilization ratio of surface water is 81.2% and of groundwater is 
43.1%. However the water is still in short supply: the annual amount of water supplied is 
7.836 billion m3 while the annual water demand is 8.370 billion m3.  
 
WASTEWATER: The surface water in Liaohe basin is heavily polluted; about 72% 
rivers within the province exceed the minimum permitted surface water quality of 
Category V (worst quality class). The total wastewater discharged within the province 
was 1.92 billion tons, of which 0.89 billion tons came from industry. The total COD load 
discharged was 546,000 tons of which 185,000 tons or 34 percent came from industry. 
Much of the industry fails to meet the standards for discharge water quality. The 
seriousness of the pollution within the Liao Basin has resulted in over 400 factories being 
closed down. The wastewater treatment ratio is only 40%; the remaining untreated 
wastewater is discharged directly to the nearest watercourse.  
 
WASTE MANAGEMENT: The urban residents in Liaoning Province are generally 
provided with waste collection systems consisting of daily refuse collection and daily 
street sweeping. Treatment facilities in the Province are strongly under sized compared to 
requirements. Disposal of solid waste is mostly done in simple dumping sites, without 
any pollution control measure. Sites are not lined nor leachate are collected for treatment. 
Only few sanitary landfills have been developed in the Province in Dalian, Anshan and 
Liaoyang. Present production of solid waste in Fushun, Panjin and Yingkou represents a 
total of about 2,000 tons/day.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The LMC-2 Project will result in an overall improvement of the environment and health 
of Liaoning Province. The project will reduce pollution to the Liao River Basin and 
Bohai Sea through the construction of wastewater collection and treatment systems and 
the installation of leachate treatment systems as part of landfill development and closure.  
Page  5
The Project will also result in environmental and health benefits through water supply 
improvements and improvement of wastewater and solid waste collection and disposal. 
The sustainability of these benefits will be enhanced through the improved financial 
performance of water, wastewater and solid waste operators.  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
The Environmental Assessment (EA) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
assessed the impacts associated with the different subprojects and suggested mitigation 
measures.  These are summarized below:  
 
Construction-related impacts: The major environmental impacts of project construction 
activities include those associated with construction site management (dust, erosion, 
noise, waste and spoil management, worker safety, disease) and rehabilitation of sewage 
and water pipelines (traffic disturbance, safety and chance finds of cultural property).  
Mitigation measures were developed and included in an environmental management plan 
that would be included in construction contracts.  The mitigation measures included 
chance find procedures for cultural property in compliance with OPN 4.11.  
 
Design and Operation of Water Supply Systems:  The five water supply subprojects will 
involve construction and upgrading of water treatment plants, network construction, 
rehabilitation and upgrading, installation of meters and raw water abstraction and 
distribution.  The major issues identified by the EA were sludge disposal, chlorine 
leakage and wastewater production from the workers. Disposal procedures for the sludge 
would be the same as the wastewater treatment sludge and measures to reduce the risk of 
chlorine leakage and to treat wastewater from the workers were included in the EMP.  
 
New water resources:  Both Haicheng and Yingkou water supply projects will result in 
the abstraction of additional raw water. Haicheng will increase groundwater abstraction 
by 130,000 m3/d, and a comprehensive hyrdogeological report has confirmed the 
availability and quality of the additional groundwater resources, Haicheng has received 
provincial permission for the increased abstraction. Yingkou will increase its water 
abstraction by 70,000 m3 by tapping into the Shimen reservoir which is currently used 
for irrigation and flood control purposes. A water balance study by the Yingkou Water 
Resources Bureau confirmed that sufficient water is additional water is available for the 
project, and the district government has entered into a raw water supply contract with 
Yingkou Water Supply Company  
 
Design and Operation of Wastewater Systems: The four wastewater subprojects will 
involve the construction and upgrading of wastewater treatment plants; and the 
construction, rehabilitation and upgrading of the collection and drainage network.  The 
main issues identified in the EA were sludge production, and odor and noise associated 
with WWTP operation.  Odor control measures will include ventilation systems, a buffer 
zone (100 m) around the plant, deodorizing measures in air and in situ and efficient 
storage and transport of sludge.  Noise mitigation measures include housing pumps and 
other loud equipment inside and a sufficient buffer zone (100 m) around the plant.  
Page  6
Design and Operation of Sanitary Landfills:  The project will finance the construction of 
sanitary landfills in Panjin, Fushun and Yingkou EDZ and the closure of two open dumps 
(Fushun and Yingkou EDZ).  The two new landfills to be constructed have been designed 
as modern sanitary landfills.  Some of the key environmental issues highlighted in the EA 
and EMP are:  
 
Landfill sites:  The sites were chosen from several options based on a variety of 
considerations including environmental.  The key characteristics of the sites are:  
 
Panjin:  The site is located in an abandoned residential area for oil field workers.  
Currently there are no residents in the area or the vicinity.  The nearby farm fields and 
ecologically important wetland are not impacted by the landfill construction and 
operation.  
 
Fushun:  The new sanitary landfill will be an extension of the existing open dump and 
the project will integrate its site remediation and closure with the establishment of the 
new facility.  The site is located within 500 m of two villages comprising 238 
households.  These villages will be resettled to avoid impacts of the solid waste facility.  
The site is adjacent to an area used for storage of coal shale overburden from local 
mining activities.  The landfill operation is not anticipated to impact or be impacted by 
these activities.  
 
Yingkou EDZ:  The Yingkou EDZ solid waste site is located within a hill valley, known 
as Sha Gong Tai which is 12.5 km from the city center and over 1 km from any 
settlements.  It contains some orchards for which the owners will be compensated.  
 
Environmental controls during operation: The newly constructed landfills will contain 
(using clay or HDPE liners), collect, recirculate, and treat (onsite and municipal WWTP) 
the leachate.  Monitoring of groundwater for contamination will also be undertaken.  
Passive venting of landfill gas will be done using vent stacks to prevent its accumulation 
in the landfill.  
 
Open dump closure: The project will close the open dumps in Yingkou EDZ and in 
Fushun.  
 
In Fushun the open dump closure will be integrated with the development of the new 
landfill.  Contouring and capping of the existing waste deposit area will be done using a 
clay liner and environmental control systems will be installed as described above for the 
new site.  To avoid potential impacts on the nearby villages, they will be resettled to an 
area further away from the landfill and the monitoring of groundwater will be done in the 
area.  Future land use will be limited to the new sanitary landfill operations until its final 
closure.  
 
The existing dump in Yingkou EDZ will be recontoured to allow for proper drainage of 
rainfall, and sealed with a combination of soil and clay to discourage leachate production.  
Page  7
A
leachate drainage system and collection pool will be installed and the leachate will be 
pumped into trucks for treatment at the WWTP. The stream and pond that receives 
leachate currently will be pumped dry and treated at the WWTP.  Monitoring of 
groundwater will be done and passive gas vents will be installed to ensure proper venting 
of landfill gas. The area where the landfill is located will be developed as an industrial 
park to house new shipbuilding and maintenance facilities, and the existing waste deposit 
area would be used as a green space for the industrial park after closure.  
 
Panjin Solid Waste Subproject: The Panjin solid waste subproject was added to LMC-2 
at a relatively late date. Although the landfill site and basic approach for the project is 
confirmed, the Feasibility Study and subproject EA can not been finalized before overall 
LMC-2 appraisal is completed. Bank acceptance of the Feasibility Study, EIA, and RAP 
(if necessary) will be specified in the legal agreements as conditions precedent for 
starting construction of the project.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
Eight subprojects involve land acquisition and resettlement.  Individual RAPs for each 
of these subprojects were prepared in Chinese by the respective design institutes, assisted 
by the respective PMO, house demolition offices, land resources bureaus, affected 
villages and communities, and potential displaced persons.  The RAPs were prepared in 
compliance with OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement and describe in detail the impacts, 
affected populations, consultation process, rehabilitation measures, budget, and 
implementation and monitoring arrangements. There are no resettlement impacts 
identified for the remaining four subprojects based on their current design and a brief 
note was prepared for each of them to explain why there are no resettlement impacts.  
 
Efforts have been made to minimize the resettlement impacts during project planning 
and design. The resettlement impacts have been significantly reduced through optimizing 
the project design and implementation arrangements. These are described in the analysis 
of alternatives in the environmental assessment section. In the process of project design, 
the project owners and design institutes assessed possible linkages with ongoing or 
previous activities and found no linkage. On the basis of individual RAPs, a Summary 
Resettlement Report was produced in both Chinese and English.  
 
Resettlement Impacts: The proposed project will affect 5,853 persons, with resettlement 
impacts are scattered in 23 villages of 8 districts or counties and 5 municipalities. The 
impacts in each village are minor, except in Fushun. The physical resettlement impacts 
include: (a) 1,1,689 mu (112 ha) of permanent land; (b) 14,347 m2 of housing 
demolishing, and (c) 1.091 mu (73 ha) of temporary use of collective land.  
 
The following basic principles were adopted for resettlement planning:  
 
?
Acquisition of land and other assets, and relocation of people, will be minimized 
as much as possible.  
 
?
All project affected people residing, working, doing business or cultivating land 
required for the project as of the date of the baseline surveys are entitled to rehabilitation 
measures sufficient to assist them to improve or at least maintain their pre-project living 
Page  8
standards, income-earning capacity and production levels.  Lack of legal rights to the 
assets lost will not bar them from entitlement to such rehabilitation measures.  
 
?
The rehabilitation measures due to land acquisition are: (i) agricultural land for 
land of equal productive capacity; (ii) compensation for land acquisition and resettlement 
subsidy for the farmers affected by land acquisition; and, (iii) other forms of assistance.  
 
?
Replacement of agricultural land will be, as much as is possible, similar to the 
land that was lost.  
 
?
Plans for acquisition of land and other assets and provision of rehabilitation 
measures will be carried out in consultation with the affected people.  
 
?
Financial and physical resources for resettlement and rehabilitation will be made 
available as and when required.  
 
?
Institutional arrangements will ensure effective and timely design, planning, 
consultation and implementation of the Resettlement Plan.  
 
?
Effective and timely supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the 
implementation will be carried out.  
 
Compensation Standards  
 
The compensation for land acquisition includes land compensation, resettlement 
subsidy, and young crop compensation. The land acquisition compensation is calculated 
based on annual production value according to the Law of Land Administration. The 
compensation rates of structures are determined based on their replacement cost. The 
detailed compensation rates are included in the RAPs.  
 
Rehabilitation Measures  
 
Persons affected by housing demolishing: 238 households in two villages will be 
relocated within the same village due to expansion of the landfill in Fushun.  
Consultation with affected households indicated they would all like to construct their own 
housing. To meet their requirements, housing plot and 700yuan/m2 cash compensation 
will be provided to affected persons.  
 
Persons affected by permanent land acquisition: Loss of collective land will not severely 
impact local residents as they derive less than 10 percent of their income from 
agriculture. Land compensation for collective land will be paid to the village committees 
for public use. The ?resettlement subsidy? will be paid to the affected households.  
 
Persons affected by temporary land use: The persons affected by temporary land use 
will receive young crop compensation according to annual production value of the land. 
The compensation rates are higher than the production value of the land in all cases. The 
construction contractors will be responsible for land recovery for cultivation.  
 
Affected public infrastructure: Compensation based on replacement value will be paid 
to the relevant government agencies or local governments to restore the affected 
infrastructure and services.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
Page  9
The Shimen Reservoir will be used as the water supply for Yingkou subproject, and is 
located at the upper reach of Daqinghe River in Gaizhou County. The dam and was built 
in 1971 with a height of 46.7m and a reservoir capacity 101 MCM. The design flood 
criteria was 1 in 50 (1/50) years, and check flood criteria was 1/200 years. The main 
structural features include a main dam of clay-core embankment type, a spillway and a 
bottom outlet, and a small hydro only operational in irrigation season. The upstream dam 
slope failed due to an earthquake in 1975, and repair works were carried out in the same 
year.  In 1986, following instructions from the Ministry of Water Resources, the design 
and check floods for the dam were raised to 1/200 and 1/10,000 floods, respectively by 
adding a second spillway and  riprap was placed on the upstream slope. However, some 
problems remained after the 1986 rehabilitation including dam slope stability, bottom 
outlet leakage, and cracks on the guide-walls of the 1st spillway.  
 
Dam Structural Integrity. As a result of a dam safety enhancement campaign initiated by 
the Liaoning Provincial Government in 1999, Shimen Reserivoir Management Bureau 
requested the Provincial Design Institute to conduct a strengthening design which laid out 
the following measures: (i) maintain the 1/200 year flood as design flood and lower the 
check flood to 1/3000 year flood (1/10,000 year flood was considered too high for this 
dam); (ii) upstream dam slope strengthening and shot-crete treatment of left abutment; 
(iii) bottom outlet leakage treatment; (iv) heighten and extend the guide walls of the 1st 
and 2nd spillways respectively, plus building the tailrace channel for second spillway; (v) 
upgrade leakage monitoring instruments; (vi) rehabilitate the access road to the dam site; 
(vii) upgrade the gates and hoists for the bottom outlets; (viii) relocate the sub-station and 
rehabilitate the transmission lines. Construction work started in 2000, and as of 2006 
some works have been completed, and with final completion acceptance expected in 
2008. A World Bank team visited the dam site, and a Bank dam safety expert has 
discussed the issues with the Gaizhou City Water Resources Bureau. The LMC-2 legal 
agreement includes a covenant that requires Liaoning to contract an independent dam 
safety expert to review and comment on the overall dam safety upgrading program and 
complete the works to the satisfaction of the Bank and the responsible dam safety 
regulatory agency in Liaoning by June 1, 2009.  
 
Dam Operations: The Gaizhou Water Resources Bureau has provided the Bank team 
with the existing O&M manual and the Emergency Preparation Plan (EPP). The LMC-2 
legal agreement includes a covenant requiring the Bureau to update these documents after 
the completion of the dam safety remedial works, and submit to the Bank for review and 
comment. In particular, the documents should include the following:  
 
&#61607; 
OM Manual: Improve and make available to operating staff, the rules/ 
procedures and technical/safety requirements for operation, maintenance and surveillance 
(monitoring and inspection) of the dam in accordance with the relevant Chinese 
Government?s technical criteria for large embankment dams/reservoirs.  
 
&#61607; 
Contingency plan:  Improve the annual ?Contingency Plan for Flood 
Control Dispatch? of each dam by adding inundation maps corresponding to different 
Page  10
flows up to design flood for various failure modes, and emergency communication with 
the local ?flood control commanding offices? and communities in the threatened areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will, combined with other initiatives in the province, contribute to the long 
term environmental improvement of the Liao River Basin and Bohai Sea.  The program is 
consistent with the marine environmental protection plan to control pollution in the Bohai 
Sea. In particular, the Bohai Blue Sea Action Program aims to halt discharge of industrial 
wastes, to monitor environmental pollution and to restore the damaged ecological system 
in the sea.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives considered in project design:  The project was designed as part of a 
comprehensive approach to environmental management in Liaoning Province. The basic 
project design and components were chosen to improve the waste, wastewater and water 
supply sectors and as a result considered the environmental and social benefits of these 
interventions in their conceptualization. The social and environmental impacts of 
different alternatives were considered during subproject and weighed with other 
economic, financial and technical factors.  Below is a summary of the major alternatives 
considered, the important environmental and social issues associated with those 
alternatives.  
 
No project alternative: The no project alternative would result in continued pollution 
from wastewater and solid waste leachate; environmentally unsound collection and 
disposal of solid waste; poor water supply systems; and inefficient use of water resources.  
 
Water supply pipeline alignments: The project considered the impact of different water 
supply pipeline alternatives on traffic, roads and land acquisition.  In most cases the 
relative environmental and social impact of different alternatives was negligible and 
therefore cost and technical considerations were major factors in subproject design.  
 
Water treatment plants:  Alternatives for water treatment plant sites and processes were 
considered in light of their ability to meet drinking water standards and the impact on 
land occupation along with other factors including cost, and water and energy usage.  The 
small land acquisition and ability to meet drinking water standards were important 
criteria in the choice of rapid sand filtration over slow sand filtration as a treatment 
process under the project.  Land occupation was also a major consideration in the siting 
and layout for the Haicheng and Yingkou water treatment plants.  
 
Wastewater collection system alignments: Alternatives for sewerage pipeline alignments 
considered the impact on traffic, land acquisition and resettlement along with other 
factors such as cost, and ease of construction and operation.  In Fushun and Panjin 
reduced resettlement impacts was a key factor in choosing the final alignments.  
 
Page  11
Wastewater treatment plant siting: Alternatives for siting of the WWTP were limited 
due to land availability and cost. Selection was based in part on the following criteria: 
located in the downstream part of town, has low wind frequency in summer, adequate 
geological conditions and land availability, has minimal farmland removal and available 
land for buffer zone, and convenience in terms of transportation, water, power supply and 
waste disposal.  Consideration of alternatives in Panjin resulted in a site that was further 
away from the residential areas and in Yingkou the site that was chosen involved less 
resettlement.  
 
Wastewater treatment processes:  The major environmental consideration in evaluating 
alternatives for wastewater treatment processes was the design effluent standard. Two 
options were considered for these subprojects: i) Class 1-A standard (10 mg/l BOD and 
SS; 0.5 mg/l Total-P; and 15 mg/l Total N) which is the highest effluent standard; and ii) 
Class 1-B which is slightly lower (20 mg/l BOD and SS; 1.0 mg/l Total-P; and 20 mg/l 
Total-N). The Provincial EPB has received direction from SEPA that all new wastewater 
treatment plants in critical water resource areas (such as the Liao River Basin) should 
adopt Class 1A standards to minimize nutrient pollution. A World Bank analysis showed 
that use of Class 1A standard results in around 15% increase in cost, with a decrease in 
2% in COD and 12% decrease in phosphorus and nitrogen. It was agreed that LMC-2 
project would finance plants designed to meet Class 1B standards, and the cities would 
overtime upgrade to Class 1A as required. The reasons for selecting Class 1B standard in 
the interim period are: i) cost savings could be used to fund expansion of the collection 
systems which results in greater pollution reduction; ii) the wastewater utilities are 
financially weak and increasing operational costs may impact their operational 
sustainability; and iii) programs to reduce nutrients in the Bohai Sea should focus on both 
municipal wastewater treatment plants as well as agricultural run-off, and not focuses 
exclusively on high municipal discharge standards. In terms of the treatment process 
chosen to meet Class 1B standard, SBR and A2/O processes were compared and there 
were only minor differences in land occupation and therefore other factors such as cost 
and operational familiarity and ease were more important considerations in the choice.  
 
Wastewater sludge disposal options:  The options for disposal of wastewater treatment 
sludge that were considered included composting and landfilling.  The major 
consideration was the quality of sludge, as much of the wastewater in the project cities 
comes from industrial sources that may include toxic metals and other pollutants.  
Although initial tests indicate the sludge will be adequate for agricultural use, the project 
took the precautionary approach of landfilling the sludge and only allowing composting if 
proper monitoring is undertaken to ensure standards for use are met. Panjin and Fushun 
will have new modern sanitary landfills financed under the LMC-2 which can 
accommodate the sludge. Gaizhou plans to dispose of its sludge in the new LMC-2 
financed Yingkou ETZ landfill. Yingkou will dispose of its sludge in a new (non-Bank 
financed) sanitary landfill which is under implementation.  
 
Solid waste disposal: Three options were considered in choosing solid waste disposal 
technologies: open dumping, landfilling, and incineration.  All of the subprojects chose 
Page  12
sanitary landfilling over incineration and open dumping as the technology can meet 
environmental requirements at relatively low cost and ease of operation.  
 
Siting of sanitary landfills:  Alternatives were considered in the selection of sites for the 
sanitary landfills.  In Fushun initial plans to site the landfill near the coal tip site next to 
the existing landfill were abandoned as that site is now reserved for oil refinery 
development.  Three additional sites were considered including a site connected directly 
to the existing landfill and two other sites located in farming areas.  The site next to the 
current landfill was chosen largely due to its limited land acquisition and low capital cost 
and the feasibility study?s assessment that with some resettlement and good engineering 
the site would be environmentally safe.  In Panjin, three options were considered and the 
final site was chosen largely due to the limited relocation and displacement of economic 
activities and confirmation by the feasibility study report that the relatively shallow 
groundwater can be safely accommodated through good technical design.  Yingkou 
considered three sites based on a multiple criteria scoring system.  The major factors in 
the decision were the limited relocation needed at the chosen site and the risky location of 
the two alternative sites which were in the same vicinity as the existing dump site and 
could have resulted in pollution of the Bohai sea due to leachate overflow.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
LUCPRO will have overall responsibility for coordination with and reporting to the 
World Bank on safeguards issues of the LMC-2 project.  They will also provide training, 
coordination and advice to the Environmental and Resettlement Management Divisions 
of the subproject PMOs.  
 
LUCPRO has extensive experience with the implementation of World Bank projects 
and ensuring safeguard compliance. LUCPRO has administered over five World Bank-
financed projects in the urban environment and transportation fields since the early 
1990s. LUCPRO has experienced environmental and resettlement specialists who oversee 
safeguard implementation at the subproject level. All of the prefecture level cities 
(Fushun, Anshan, Yingkou, and Panjin) have in the past implemented Bank projects and 
have PMO with resettlement and environmental specialists. The county-level cities under 
the project (Yingkou ETZ, Haicheng, and Xingcheng) will need additional training on 
safeguard issues. An independent resettlement monitor will be contracted under the 
project, and LUCPRO will prepare semi-annual environmental management reports for 
the Bank supervision teams.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during the course of environmental 
impact assessment. The first round was carried out in all 6 cities in September 2005, and 
the second round in December 2005. The primary objective of the first round was to 
gather information on public concerns about the Project, while that for the second round 
was to communicate the EIA findings and proposed mitigation measures and confirm 
public acceptance and satisfaction. Both rounds of public consultation focused on the 
Page  13
project-affected people and beneficiaries of different age groups, genders, educational 
backgrounds and occupations as well as other stakeholders. In addition, there have been 
many rounds of consultation with government agencies, local governments, non-
government organizations and other stakeholders of the project to discuss Project 
locations, scope, environmental and socio-economic concerns and environmental 
management and mitigation plans. The consultation exercise covered three forms: 
bulletins in the press, public opinion questionnaires and surveys of the public. 
Throughout the process of public consultation, a telephone hotline has been set up and 
maintained in each PMO to address EA-related issues of concern for the stakeholders.  
 
Public consultation and participation also has played a key role in formulating the 
RAPs. The affected residents, business people and district governments participated in 
the census, inventory and formulation of the livelihood rehabilitation strategy, measures 
and relocation sites, and their feedback has been incorporated.  Each RAP contains a list 
of major consultations.  Public consultation and participation will continue during the 
RAP implementation.  Project information will be provided to the affected people 
through TV, radio broadcast, newspapers, bulletins and posters.  The RAP will be 
summarized into a resettlement information booklet (RIB) and distributed to every 
affected household.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/25/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/19/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/03/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/03/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  14
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  15
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Greg J. Browder 
12/14/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hiroshi Ono 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
 
Comments:   
