                                                                                           41054


                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                   APPRAISAL STAGE

 I. Basic Information
 Date preparedfupdated: 09/14/2007                                             Report No.

 1. Basic Project Data
 Country: China                               ( Project ID: PI04601
 Project Name: Meishan CokeDry QuenchingProject
 Task Team Leader: Hiroshi Ono
 Estimated Amraisal Date: 0813112007           IEstimated Board Date:NA
 Managing unit: EASRE                          ILending Instrument: Carbon Finance
 Sector: Iron and steel industry
 Theme: Climate Change
 IBRD ~tnount(USS~>:              0.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
  GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
 PCF Amount (US$m.):              9.9
  Other financingamounts by source:
          BORROWER/RECIPIENT

I Environmental   Cateeorv: B Partial Assessment
                              -
  SimplifiedProcessing                          Simple [I          Repeater [I
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (EmergencyRecovery)        Yes [ ]      No [XI

  2. Project Objectives

  The development objective of the project is to reduce C02 emissions by displacing
  electricity consumption at a large iron and steel company (Meishan) compared with the
 baseline scenario - CWQ and purchase of coal-fired electricity from the grid - by
  installing energy recovery facilities with the leverage of a Carbon Finance transaction.
  This Carbon Finance project will contribute to enhancing sustainable development
  opportunitiesby mitigating global climate change and promoting the expanded use of an
  energy efficiency technology that also reduces local air pollution associated with the
  current CWQ operation.

  The primary project performance indicator will be the annual amount of CERs delivered,
 which will be calculated from the net annual amount of electricity supplied by making
 use of recovered heat from the CDQ units that will replace the use of electricityfrom the
  commercial grid.

3. Project Description

This Carbon Finance project consists of two distinct project components:

    a) Component A: the Phase I and I1 construction and operation of CDQ units and
        subsequent electricitygenerationthat will result in CERs; and

    b) Component B: a Carbon Finance transaction that will facilitate the purchase of
        the CERs.

ComponentA

CDQ Technology

The CERs will be achieved through recovery of the waste heat of hot coke from coke
ovens by introducing advanced CDQ technology replacing the existing CWQ process.
The hot coke produced from a coke oven has high energypotential. In the CWQ process,
hot coke is quenched by applying water and as a result, heat is lost to the atmosphere and
significant dust and other pollutants are generated. In the CDQ process, cold nitrogen gas
is used as a heat exchange medium to cool down hot coke. The heated nitrogen gas
produces steam in a waste heat boiler for electricity generation. The nitrogen gas, cooled
down after the heat exchange,is re-used for coolinghot coke in a circular process.


Project Description

This Carbon Finance project will address both Phase I and Phase I1construction of CDQ
units and their associated facilities and equipment that will result in CERs. The main
components of one CDQ unit include a CDQ chamber, dust collection system, waste heat
recovery boiler, and steam turbine generator. Both new CDQ units and the back-up
CWQ unit have a quenching capacityof 140tons per hour.

Phase I. The installation of the first CDQ unit in Phase I is associated with the
replacement of two of the three existing coke ovens and the associated CWQ unit which
are outdated and do not meet recommended Chinese sector cleaner production criteria.
The first CDQ unit and its back-up CWQ are expected to become operational when the
first two new coke ovens in the Overall Improvement Plan begin production in March
2008.' A 20 MW steam turbine generator will generate 126.48GWh of electricity
annually and the generated electricity will displace electricity supplied through the grid
that is produced from coal fired power plants that release large amounts of GHGs, thus
resulting in the project's CERs.

Phase 11. After the Phase I CDQ unit is operational, Meishan plans to construct a second
CDQ unit as part of a planned expansion of production capacityby 2010. Theproduction
capacity and technical specifications for the CDQ unit in Phase I1are identical to those in


1One CDQ unit requires approximately600hours (25 days) of maintenance per year. When a CDQ unit is
off-linethe CWQ unit will be used. This has been taken into consideration when estimatingpotential
CERs. Additionally,the probability of both CDQ units being off-line at the same time is deemed highly
unlikely and thereforethe project designrecommended constructionof only one CWQ unit.

Phase I. Once the Phase I1CDQ unit comes on-line, its associated 20 MW steam turbine
generator will be capable of generating an additional 126.48 GWh of electricityannually
and double the total amount to 237.68 GWh. The CWQ constructed during Phase I will
also be used a back-up for the Phase I1CDQ unit. The remaining original coke oven and
its CWQ unit will be decommissionedby the time Phase I1becomes operational.


ComponentB

The World Bank-managed Spanish Carbon Fund (SCF) will finance the purchase of
emission reduction credits resulting from the electricity supply derived from the project
to the commercial electricity grid. The expected total CERs produced from this project
are estimated to be 1.87million tons of COzequivalent (tCOze)over ten years (February
2008  - January 2018). The purchase will be a performance-based contract under which
payments are triggered by successful verification of the reduction of GHG emissions by
an accredited DOE under the rules of the Kyoto Protocol. The quantity of CERs to be
contracted, the length of time over which the purchase will be made, and the price paid
will be agreed during ERPA negotiations.

4. Project Location and SalientPhysical Characteristics Relevant to the Safeguard
Analysis

The project site is located to the southwest of Nanjing City in China's Jiangsu Province.
The area is planned as an industrial zone, but there are six communities around the
Meishan plant, which form a "corporate town."          The total population of town is
approximately 30,000. More than 95 percent of the families are employed by the
company. The project site is adjacent to and outside of the existing plant boundary. The
existing coke ovens and CWQ units will be demolished, and the new coke ovens and
CDQ units will be installed at this new site. The effluent from Meishan7swastewater
treatment plant is discharged into the Yangtze River, 2 krn away from the company.

5. Environmentaland Social SafeguardsSpecialists
   Mr PheishenWang (EASRE)
   Mr Jun Zeng (EASSO)

6. SafeguardPolicies Triggered                               Yes        No
EnvironmentalAssessment (OP/BP4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OPBP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management(OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical CulturalResources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10)                                          X
InvoluntaryResettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP4.37)                                              X
Projects on InternationalWaterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPBP 7.60)                                  X

11. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1.Describe any safeguardissues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversibleimpacts:

The installation of the CDQ units is part of the Overall Improvement Plan and will result
in significantbenefits for energyrecovery and emission reductions of GHGs and minimal
negative environmentalimpacts. Therefore, this Carbon Financeproject is categorized as
Category B. The project boundary for safeguards compliance is limited to the CDQ
related facilities, including: (i) CDQ chamber; (ii) dust collection system; (iii) waste heat
recovery boiler; (iv) steam turbine generator; (v) all equipment that supports the CDQ
technology (e.g., fans, pumps, ducts, pipes); (vi) all equipment whose performance is
affected by the characteristics of coke processed in the CDQ units (e.g., coke conveyors
and coke screens); and (vii) all equipment/systems necessary to compensate the low
availabilityof the CDQ units (e.g., backup CWQ unit).

The main pollution sources of CDQ includewaste gas from: (i) top of CDQ chamber; (ii)
blow-off outlet of the circulation fan; (iii) coke discharge point; (iv) coke transfer station;
and (v) coke screens. The main pollutant related to these processes is dust only. The
waste gases will be collected with a sucking system and treated through a bag filter, and
then discharged into the air. The dust collected from the bag filter will be reused in coal
preparationprocesses. There is no waste water from the CDQ unit. At the back-up CWQ
unit, water spraying and baffle stack will be used to treat top gas, while other waste gases
will be treated by a bag filter. The water will be reused in the quenchingprocess, and the
solid waste will be reused for coal preparation. The land to be acquired for the project is
farmland, therefore, no site contaminationby hazardousmaterials is envisaged.

This Carbon Finance project triggers OP 4.12 because of the expected land acquisition
and involuntary resettlement for Phase 11. The impacts of involuntary resettlement
include permanent land acquisition, residential house demolition, enterprise and shop
demolition, and infrastructure and ground attachment removal. It is estimated that the
project will result in the permanent land acquisitionof 180.5mu and the demolition of 27
residential houses with an area of 3935.25 m2; six enterprises with an area of 6890 m2
and six shops with an area of 185 m2. The total number of project-affected persons is
331. No temporary land use will occur for this project.

The Phase I of the project completed its land acquisitionof 515.75 mu before the Bank's
involvement in the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated hture
activitiesin the project area:

The motivation for the Overall Improvement Plan is to upgrade the production processes
of Meishan to be in compliance with the national cleaner production requirements,
improve environmental performance, promote energy efficiency, and improve product
quality.

The EIA report for the Overall Improvement Plan concluded that upon completion of the
Overall Improvement Plan, pollution discharges from Meishan will be substantially
reduced by 43 percent for dust, 7 percent for SOz,83percent for COD, and 98 percent for
suspended solid. As the biggest pollution load contributor in the project area (accounting
for 87 percent of air pollution and 89 percent for water pollution), implementation of the
Overall Improvement Plan will result in significant local environmental quality
improvements.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

There are two feasible technical options for the coke quenching process; i.e. CWQ and
CDQ. The options andjustifications for adoption or rejection are summarizedbelow.

CWQ Option. The company could continue to use water to cool hot coke and purchase
electricity from the grid. This is the most financially attractive, stable, and popular
option applied in the Chinese iron and steel sector. A recent study indicates that the
capacity of coke ovens equipped with CDQ units would only account for 13 percent of
the total coke oven capacity in China by the end of 2008. Therefore, CWQ technology
will continue to be dominant in the Chinese iron and steel sector for the near future.
Although air pollutants potentially generated by the CWQ process could be largely
prevented by employing extensive emission prevention measures, the waste heat would
be lost and there would be no reduction of GHG emissions and therefore no potential for
Carbon Finance revenues.

CDQ Option. The CDQ technology is categorized as a Level 1 Cleaner Production
Technology under the State Government Recommendations issued in July 2006. CDQ
has several advantages including energy savings, reductions of GHG emissions, and the
improvement of coke quality. However, the total investment for a CDQ unit including a
back-up CWQ unit (RMB 255 million) is approximately 25 times more expensive than
construction of a CWQ unit alone (RMB 10 million).                Furthermore, the annual
operational and maintenance costs for a CDQ unit including a back-up CWQ unit are
estimated to be approximately RMB 41 million while the same costs for a CWQ unit
alone are only RMB 0.3 million. As a result of such higher costs, the feasibility study
indicates that the IRR for this option without carbon revenue is below the recommended
industrial benchmark of 13 percent. In addition, there are considerable technical risks
and no compulsoryrequirements to install CDQ or replace CWQ with CDQ.

Meishan has selected the CDQ option due to its strong commitment to being a leader in
environmental protection and the incentive of revenue generated from the sale of CERs.
The feasibility study indicated that with carbon revenue the IRR would be improved to
13.4 percent which is above the recommended benchmark. This option offers the best
opportunity for achieving project development objectives and enhancing sustainable
development benefits for large scale steelproduction.

4. Describemeasures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implementthe measures described.

A comprehensiveEIA has been prepared for the Phase I Coke Oven Project, in which the
Phase I CDQ unit is covered. This EIA was approved by the Jiangsu Provincial
Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB) in November 2005. The EIA for Phase I1
coveringPhase I1CDQ unit was approved by SEPAin November 2005. These two EIAs
are found them in line with the nationalregulationsand acceptable to the World Bank.

A separate Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been developed solely for this
Carbon Finance project, which specifies environmental management practices for
Meishan with specific description of CDQ-related departmentlstaff responsibilities, staff
training plan, mitigation measures, environmental monitoring plan, and reporting
mechanism. The EMP will be attached to the ERPA and its implementation will be
monitored by the World Bank.

Though Meishan has not worked previously with the World Bank, it has strong capacity
in terms of the implementation of environmental measures and compliancewith national
and local environmental regulations. Meishan has been accredited for IS014001 and
Occupation Health and SafetyManagement System (OHSAS) 18001.

Although not included in the project boundary, the overall environmental performance of
Meishan was reviewed by the task team and an independent consultant for due diligence.
The results verified that Meishan has established a good environmental management
system and practice accredited with IS014000 and OHSAS18000. According to a result
of compliance monitoring by Nanjing EPB, there were no cases of serious violation of
national and local environmentalregulations over the last three years although occasional
excesses in wastewater and air emission discharges have been experienced at internal
measurements. It is also noted that the company is making continuous efforts to be an
environmentally and socially friendly enterprise.        Therefore, there will be low
reputationalrisk for the World Bank's involvement in this CarbonFinance project.

Meishan and Yuhua District Land Bureau have jointly prepared a Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) for Phase 11,which will be attached to the ERPA and its implementation will
be monitored. Because the Nanjing's income restoration arrangements (i.e. Social Basic
Livelihood Security Scheme) does not fully secure the opportunity of project affected
persons (PAPs) to explore their own choice, PAPs will be allowed in this project to
choose voluntarilywhether they enroll in the SocialBasic Livelihood Security Scheme or
not. In addition, Meishan will submit an updated resettlement implementation plan
satisfactoryto the World Bank prior to the commencement of Phase I1land acquisition.

The Meishan Resettlement Office has been established for the implementation of the
RAP, together with the Yuhua District Land Bureau. An independent monitor will be
selected for the assessment of resettlement implementation and livelihood restoration.
The Office has sound experience in domestic land acquisition and house demolition
practices and familiar with local land laws and regulations, however, the Office does not

have prior experience in the implementation of World Bank projects.             Therefore,
extensive training program has been designed and on-going to enhance capacity of the
Office to implementthe RAP in compliancewith the safeguardspolicies.

The land acquisition of 515.75 mu for Phase I was completed before the World Bank's
involvement in the project. A Post-Evaluation of Resettlement (PER) was conducted to
review retroactively compliance with Chinese laws and regulations and assess the
impacts on the livelihoods of the affected households. The PER concluded that the
resettlement practices were in line with the Chinese laws and regulations and the
livelihoods of affected households have been improved.            No resettlement-related
reputational risks have been identified.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describethe mechanisms for consultationand
disclosure on safeguardpolicies, with an emphasison potentially affectedpeople.

Public consultation was carried out for both EIAs through public meetings followed by
questionnaire survey. Five hundred four project-affected people were consulted. The
main concerns of the public are the enforcement of emission control during operation,
noiseldust issues during construction and resettlement issues, which Meishan addressed
in the project design and operation.

Key stakeholders in terms of involuntaryresettlement include the local communitieswho
live or work in and around the construction site of the project. Public consultation during
the preparation of this project was carried out using a questionnaire survey, expert
consultation, workshops and public hearings. With respect to the preparation of the RAP,
project-affected persons and organizations have been informed about the project and its
impact through meetings during the preparation of the RAP.                Comments and
recommendations received from these meeting have been incorporated as appropriate in
the RAP.      Public participation will continue during RAP implementation. Project
information will be provided to the affected persons through newspapers, bulletins and
posters. The RAP will be summarized into a resettlement information booklet and
distributed to affectedhouseholds.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date

EnvironmentalAssessmentlAudit/ManagementPlanlother:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     03/22/2007
                                                                 03/06/2007for Phase I
  Date of "in-country"disclosure
                                                                 07/03/2007for Phase I1
  Date of submissionto Infoshop                                   0811512007
  For categoryA projects, date of distributingthe Executive
                                                                     NA
  Summaryof the EA to the ExecutiveDirectors
ResettlementAction PlanIFrameworWPolicyProcess:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     0713112007
  Date of "in-country"disclosure                                  0811512007
  Date of submissionto Infoshop                                   0811512007

* If the project triggers the Pest ManagementandlorPhysical CulturalResources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
AssessmentIAuditlor EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,please
explain why:




C. ComplianceMonitoring Indicators at the CorporateLevel (to befilled in when the
ISDS isJirzalizedby theproject decision meeting)

OPIBPIGP 4.01 Environment Assessment
                  -
Does the project require a stand-aloneEA (includingEMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or SectorManager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilitiesfor the EMP incorporatedin the         Yes
creditlloan?
OPIBP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement
             -
Has a resettlementplanlabbreviatedplanlpolicy fiamework/process             Yes
framework (as appropriate)been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguardsor Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguardpolicies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documentsbeen disclosed in-country in a publicplace in a      Yes
form and languagethat are understandableand accessibleto project-affected
groups and localNGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactorycalendar,budget and clear institutionalresponsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementationof measuresrelated to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguardpolicy measuresbeen included in the project  Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluationsystem of the project includethe          Yes
monitoringof safeguardimpacts and measuresrelated to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactoryimplementationarrangementsbeen agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the samebeen adequatelyreflected in the project legal
documents?

D. Approvals


                             Mr Hiroshi Ono
  onmental Specialist:
   1 Development Specialist


