                                                                                                  36451

                             Integrated SafeguardsData Sheet (ISDS)
 SectionI -Basic Information
 Date ISDS Preparempdated: June 2, 2006                                               Report No.:
 A. Basic Project Data
 A.1. Project Statistics
 Country: China                                       Project ID: PO94795
 Project: Guangrun Hydropower Project - a new         TTL: Jie Tang (EASEG)
 component of Hubei Hydropower Development in
 Poor Areas Project
 Total project cost (by component):
 Appraisal Date: November 15,2005                     LoanICredit amount($m):
                                                      IBRD: 15.15(41.3% of total cost)
 Board Date: N/A
 Other financing amounts by source ($m.):             (a) Guangrun Power Development Company Ltd. -
                                                           equity $8.25 million (22.5%)
                                                      (b) Jianshi County Government - interest-fiee loan
                                                           $2.50 million (6.8%)
                                                      (c) Bank of China - loan $5.63 million (15.3%)
                                                      (d) Bank of Agriculture - loan $5.18 million
                                                           (14.1%)

 Managing Unit: EASEG                                 Sector: Hydropower
 Lending Instruments:
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery?         Yes?    [ I         No?    [x]
 Environmental Category: A
 A.2. Project Development Objectives

 The development objectives of the Hubei Hydropower Development in Poor Areas Project (the Project)
 remain the same: (a) facilitate economic growth in Hubei by expanding electric power generation capacity
 in an economically and environmentally sustainable manner; (b) enhance the efficiency of the electricity
 sector in Hubei by commercializing county level generation companies; and (c) contribute to poverty
 alleviation efforts in poor communities in Hubei; and the proposed new component-Guangrun
 Hydropower Development Project (GHDPjto use cost savings of the project falls within and support
 achievement of the development objectives.
1
 A.3. Project Description                                                                                  1
                                                                              I

 The GHDP includes two dams and three hydropower plants on the Guangrun River, which were covered by
 the county government's "Guangrun River Development Plan" completed in 1989. Due to remoteness of
 the project location and severe poverty of Jianshi County, project fmancing has been beyond the county
 government capacity and few outside developers shown interest. Recently a Feasibility Study Report for
 the proposed new component was completed by Hubei Water Resource and Hydro Power Investigation and
 Design Institute (HID1)-also     the designer of the Project supported by the Bank-in    October 2004,
 reviewed by Hubei Provincial Engineering and Consulting Company in October 2004, and approved by
 Hubei Provincial Development and Reform Commission on 3 November 2004. Following
 recommendations of the feasibility study, project desip for the proposed new component was completed
land approved by relevant authorities in October 2005.                         I
                                                                               I


 Project Description. The proposed new component GHDP includes a hydrodower station at Hongwawu
 and a hydropower station at Zhamushui, in Jianshi County, Enshi Prefecture, Hubei Province. Construction
 of Hongwawu Hydropower Station includes: (a) a concrete slab rock-fill dam about 41.5m high with a crest
 length of about 458m; (b) a fcst stage powerhouse with an installed capacity of 8 MW (2x4); (c) a second
 stage powerhouse with an installed capacity of 10 MW (2x4 and 1x2); and (c) an approximately 4.6 !an
 long 35 kV transmission line to Zhamushui step-up substation. Construction of Zhamushui Hydropower

Station includes: (a) a concrete double-curvature arch dam about 77.5 m high with a crest length of about
142m; (b) a powerhouse with an installed capacity of 10 MW (2x5); and (c) an associated step-up
substation and an approximately 12 km long 110 kV transmission line to connect the substation to the
electricity grid.

Status and schedule of project implementation. Construction of preparation works, including access
road, water and electricity supply, and river diversion tunnel for Hongwawu Hydropower Station was
commenced On January 1, 2006. The Implementation Schedules for both Hongwawu and Zhamushui
Hydropower Stations of GHDP are as follows:

A.        Hongwawu Hydropower Station: (i) commenced construction of preparatory works on January
1, 2006 and cofferdam on May 20,2006; (ii) commence construction of the dam in October 2006; (iii) start
insulation of power generating units in the frst stage powerhouse in May 2007 and commission the 1"unit
in November 2007, and the 2nd and 3rd units in January and February 2008 respectively; (iii) start
construction of the second stage powerhouses in June 2007 and commission the 1" unit in January 2008,
and the 2ndand 31dunits in March and April 2008 respectively; and (iv) projection completion by end May
2008.

B.        Zhamushui Hydropower Station: (i) Commence construction of preparatory works in December
2005 and cofferdam on October 1, 2006; (ii) concrete placement on July 1, 2007 and completion in April
2008; (iv) commissioning of the l", unit in July 2008 and the 2ndunit in August 2008; (v) projection
completion by end September 2008.




The project will be located in Jianshi County, Enshi Prefecture, Hubei Province, P. R. China. The
Hongwawu dam is to be located on the Majia River, a tributary of the main stem of the Guangrun River, 30
km northwest of Jianshi County seat. The catchment area of 18.02 km2 features with mountainous
topography. The Zhamushui dam, on the main stem of the Guangrun River, is about 3.5 km away from the
county seat. The catchment area, features mountainous topography, deep valleys and concentrated water
head, is one of heavy rainfall areas in Enshi Prefecture. Zhamushui dam is located approximately 10 krn
upstream of the existing Xiaoxikou dam on the same river. Both project dam sites are within Jianshi
County which was noted above as a remote area of severe poverty.




*
 By supporting theproposedproject, the Bank does not intend toprejudzce theJinal determination of thepartzes'
claims on the disputed areas

Section I1-Key SafeguardIssues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D.1.Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant andlor irreversible impacts.

Environmental issues:

(1) Environmental Assessment. GHDP is category A project and the EIA was made by independent EA
consultants and the EMP was prepared in line with relevant Bank policy requirements. The EIA also
includes an analysis of alternatives including other water diversion scenarios and thermal power
alternatives.The EIA covers all the project components.

The construction and operation of the dams will have significant adverse environmental impacts which
have been thoroughly analyzed and are understood by the task team, as presented in the EA and EAMP
documents. To manage these negative impacts, tangible mitigation measures that are fully funded have
been introduced into the project design, civil works contract documents and project operational documents,
where required, to ensure that they are implemented during construction and operations. Where further
analysis and investigation is required, the project company has committed to getting this work done in a
timely manner.

(i) Construction Stage Impacts

The major construction related impacts will be associated with soil erosion and sedimentation, spoil
disposal, management of concrete aggregates and earth fill material in terms of excavation, storage,
handling, transportation and placement, water quality of the Majia and Guangrun rivers, noise levels, dust
and handling of petroleum materials for use in construction equipment, The remote, mountainous and
generally difficult terrain will exacerbate much of these impacts. The EAMP, which the civil works
contractors will have to follow, contains the requisite measures to manage these issues in an acceptable
way. The EAMP contains a training program with budget, to ensure the contractors, local EPB's, project
company engineers and local county staff are trained to manage these issues.

Additionally,the engineering consulting fm that will supervise the construction works hired by the project
company, will also cany out regular and intrusive monitoring of the implementation of the EAMP by the
civil works contractors and will provide their periodic reports to the local EPB, project company, provincial
authorities and the World Bank.

Furthermore, the Task Team during project construction, will undertake periodic supervision missions
which will include visits to the sites to observe fxst hand information of the performance of the civil works
contractors, and will raise and discuss any concerns and will undertake any required measures to address
any unresolved and or repeatedly re-occurring issues.

With regards workers camps - most if not all of the required semi-skilled and unskilled workers will come
from the county of Enshi or other nearby communities and therefore they will live at home. For those who
will need to be camped, the plan at this time is for the workers to be housed in locally rented
accommodationwith closed drainage and sewage systems.

(ii) Operation Stage Impacts

During the operations stages, the potential adverse environmental impacts are also likely to be significant
and the general impact zones are the reservoir area and downstream areas.


The main reservoir impacts are
         water quality,

           loss of natural habitats
           loss of biodiversity -Fish, Caves, terrestrial species
           Inter tributary transfers
           loss of land

 The EAMP contains the required mitigation measures to respond to and manage these issues. Additionally,
 the project company will prepare a Reservoir Impoundment and Management Plan                   early during
 implementation of the project which will ensure that the measures in the EAMP are followed through
 during the operations stage of the project.

 Downstream Impacts are associated with the following issues
          riparian issues
          Impacts on Fish
          Variational river flowslriver morphology

 While the project is being implemented in a watershed that is already heavily damned both in its upstream
 and downstream end, the impacts in the downstream areas have also bepn analyzed as part of the EA
 process.

IWith regards riparian release, the dam itself will contain a structure that will allow for continued flows,
 albeit greatly reduced.

 Another key positive feature of the project is that the power houses are located immediately downstream of
 the Dams (less than loom), on land immediately adjacent to the river banks. Hence, the water once it leaves
 the turbines is being channeled back into the rivers immediately.

 Social Issues:

 (1) Involuntary Resettlement. The Guangrun Hydropower Project with two reservoirs and three power
 plants will involve acquisition of 2,566 mu of land areas (171 ha) with 20% being farmland, and 7182
 square meters of houses will be demolished. This would cause relocation of 27 households and 109
 individuals, and affect 206 households and 848 individuals in 9 villages in total. In average, each affected
 people will lose about 0.6 mu or 0.04 ha of farmland. Following the Bank OP, a detailed RAP had been
 prepared in March 2005. The RAP was well prepared with comprehensive impact assessment, detailed
 social economic survey, extensive consultation, adequate rehabilitation measures, and various
 implementation arrangements. The resettlement specialist of the team and the frst safeguard review
 meeting reviewed the draft RAP and provided a number of comments, including relatively low
 compensation rates and lack of details on affected ethnic minorities. These comments are being addressed
 by the client with assistance of an experienced design institute. The revised RAP was reviewed and
 approved by relevant provincial authorities in August 2005 following national laws and regulations. The
 final RAP was reviewed and approved by the bank in March 2006.
1
 (2) Indigenous Peoples.

 The proposed GHDP new component is located in Jianshi County, which is part of Enshi Tujia and Miao
 Autonomous Prefecture. As a result, about 30% of total population in Jianshi County is Tujia and Miao
 nationalities. Similar proportion is found among project affected township, villages, and individuals. Such
 proportion is smaller than that in Xuanen and Laifeng Counties, where two other project components of the
 on-going Project are located. They are Dongping Hydropower Plant in Xuanen County, and Najitan
 Hydropower Plant in Laifeng County. In the project affected areas for these two sub-projects, Tujia and
 Miao are two dominated ethnic minorities. Based on extensive investigation and interviews during the
 Project preparation on production patterns, housing conditions, living style and customs of the minority
 population, little difference between minority people and Han people were fund. It was concluded that the
 people within the project area were not intended targets of OD 4.20, and that an Indigenous People
 Development Plan (IPDP) was not required for the Project. Following review and discussion of the

safeguard review meeting in June 2005 and SA reports, a second round of SA was conducted in July 2005
in the project affected areas of the new component. The SA concluded that the same conclusions stated
above for the Project should apply to the GHDP new component.

(3) Dam Safety Issues:

The project includes a concrete slab rock-fill dam of 41.5 m high (Hongwawu) and a concrete double-
curvature arch dam of 77.5 m high (Zharnushui) to be constructed on the Guangrun River and its tributary
Majia River. It has been agreed that the scope of work of the existing Panel of Experts (POE), including
international experts and an environment expert for the on-going Project will be extended to cover the new
component. The quality assurance program and dam instrumentation plan have been reviewed and
approved by relevant government authorities. It has been agreed that Guangrun Company will prepare an
Emergency Preparedness Plan and Reservoir Operation Procedures for the dams and reservoirs 12 and 6
months in advance of reservoir impoundmentrespectively in line with relevant Bank policies.

D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area.

The long term impacts associated with this project are significant and will be associated with ;
          Loss of land and habitat
          Management of the reservoir.
     s    River morphology and riparian release
          Impacts on caves and fish.

The EA concluded that there were no endangered species that would become affected by this project and
those fauna that would become affected had adequate and equally sustaining habitat in surrounding areas to
migrate to.

Also, the existing flora that would be lost due to this project will not by themselves cause any impact on the
ecological balance in the long term.

Further analysis on impacts on fish as a species and on the caves is being undertaken under the close
supervision of the bank to ensure any impacts on them are clearly understood and included in the
management plans. On fish as a natural resource, the EA concluded that the livelihoods of local
communities will not become adversely affected as communities would be able to continue there socio-
economic activities in nearby and surrounding areas.

The EA confirms that the morphology of the river systems is unlikely to be significantly affected by this
project alone as the existing watershed is already heavily damned and that the water from the power plants
are being immediatelyre-introduced into the rivers.

Resettlement

Based on detailed survey in the project affected areas, the construction of these two hydropower plants will
involve acquisition of 171 ha of land areas with 33.8 ha being farmlands, which affect 206 households and
848 individuals in 9 villages. Most of acquired farmlands are low yield dry land. Along with land
acquisition, 7182 square meters of houses will be demolished, causing relocation of 27 households and 109
individuals.

D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)

The EA contains a section on this. While it was only marginally effective in affecting the location of the
pertinent structures during the planning phase, this analysis helped inform the process for the selection of
inter-tributary transfer locations in such a way that only marginal impacts, if any, would be caused in the
source tributary.

During project planning and design stages, efforts were made to reduce land acquisition and resettlement
impacts. For example, the dam site was selected in the narrow and steep area with no irrigated farmland
and house removal. The dam height and various reservoir water levels were rationally selected to minimize
the negative impact of the project to a possible extent. For other structures such as switchyard, powerhouse,
and surge tank, most of them have been located on the waste land to minimize farmland and settlements.

D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacityto plan and implement the measures described.

(1) Environmental issues. The borrower has made an EMP and has agreed to implement it. The EMP
    includes requisite training for Jianshi County Government PMO officials, staff of the Guangrun
    Company (the implementing agency of the GHDP new component), and environmental supervision
    engineers. The County Government environment and water conservation authorities will exercise
    independent monitoring of the environmental performance of the new component during
    implementation and operation in line with relevant national laws and regulations and the EMP.
    Trainings on relevant Bank policies and environment management practice will be provided to
    improve local capacity and facilitate EMP implementation.

    Furthermore, at the request of the Bank, the project team has agreed to undertake further investigative
    analysis on the fish and caves impacts to ensure these impacts are clearly understood and are
    effectively managed. The bank is closely supervisingthis process.

    The Provincial and other local agencies have significantly improved their capacity for the
    implementation of bank safeguards policies during the implementation of the existing 4 hydropower
    sub projects in this original project. Lessons from that experienced are being learned and during the
    implementation of those projects, the local institutions have been very willing to incorporate bank
    recommendations to improve their performance. While further improvements are clearly still
    necessary, the project company and other agencies have expressed their commitment to implement the
    EAMP and other management plans.

(2) Social issues. Following the World Bank policy on involuntary resettlement, a detailed RAP has been
    prepared by Guangrun Company based on extensive consultation with the affected people and
    communities. The RAP included comprehensive inventory survey, realistic land based rehabilitation
    measures, and detailed cost estimate, which is in compliance with both Bank's policy and Chinese
    laws and regulations.     To facilitate the implementation of RAP, Jianshi County has set up a
    resettlement leading group to oversee the overall resettlement implementation. A county resettlement
    office with experienced staff coming from key county departments and relevant townships has been set
    up to be responsible for implementation of the RAP in accordance with the contractual arrangement
    between the office and Guangrun Company. During the course of implementation, an experience
    independent external monitoring agency will be selected to carry out resettlement monitoring and
    evaluation for the new component. Trainings on Bank resettlement policy and resettlement practice
    will be provided to improve local capacity and facilitate resettlement implementation.

(3) Dam Safety Issues. It has been agreed that the TOR of the existing POE appointed for the on-going
    Project will review the design, instrumentation system, construction procedures, and quality assurance
    program and reservoir operation procedures during the project construction process. Same as for the
    four on-going hydropower sub-projects of the Project, the environmental expert member of the POE
    will also review the environmental performance of the new component. The Guangrun Company has
    committedto follow all requirements for preparation and implementation of a dam safety plan (DSP).
                                                                                                             I
In addition, the Implementing Agency has allocated adequate budget for the implementation of the RAP,
EMP and DSP.

D.5. Identifythe key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on             1

safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The key stakeholders for the project are the Hubei (provincial), Enshi (prefecture) and Jianshi (county)
governments, the project sponsors, Jianshi Power Company (which will purchase the power), and local
communities. The sponsors have encouraged local participation through meetings, surveys and public
awareness initiatives, including using television and radio. During site selection and design, project
sponsors and the Jianshi County government have met township and village heads and village
representatives. Relevant departments of local government have also been consulted.

In preparation of the EIA, meetings and a survey were undertaken covering local institutions (schools,
hospitals, museum, etc) local government departments (irrigation, environment, water supply, antique
protection) and the village committees. Their views have been recorded and responses provided.

Local governments, towns, villages and villagers have participated in the RAP process. A survey and
consultation process has been carried out and the EIA, EMP and RAP have been disclosed to public locally
in Chinese language in October 2005 as well as internationally (in the Inforshop of the Bank) in English. A
resettlement information booklet has been prepared and distributed to the affected persons. A feedback and
grievance procedure has been established. Consultation with affected persons will be continued throughout
the implementation process through meetings, workshops, etc..

E. Safeguards Classijication (select one)
[] S1.-The project has significant, cumulative andlor irreversible impacts; where there are significant
potential impacts related to several safeguard policies.
[X ] Sa -One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited to their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable.
[ ] S3.-NOsafeguard issues
[ ] SF.-Financial intermediary projects

F. DisclosureRequirements              Date
Environmental Assessment/Management Plan final):
Date of receipt by the Bank                              3011112005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          15/12/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                           21/03/2006
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                                                         Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Planfinal):
Date of receipt by the Bank                              3011112005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          30/06/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                           0910612005
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan(dra@):
Date of receipt by the Bank                              Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                           Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.
Date of receipt by the Bank                              Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                           Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30110/2006 (planned)
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          3011112006(planned)
Date of submission to InfoShop                           30111/2006 (planned)
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Section I11- ComplianceMonitoringIndicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP 4.01 Environment Assessment:
              -                                                                            - No
                                                                                           Yes
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                           X
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?            X
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the creditlloan?          X
OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats:
              -                                                                            Yes      No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                                                                     X
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Yes
Bank?
OP 4.09 Pest Management:
          -                                                                                Yes      No
                                                                                           7

Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                 N.A.    N.A.
Is a separate PMP required?                                                                          X
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?                                   N.A.    N.A.
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) CulturalProperty:
                               -                                                           Yes      -
                                                                                                    No
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                                               X
Does the creditlloan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts
on physical cultural resources?                                                                     X
OD 4.20 Indigenous Peoples:
          -                                                                                Yes     No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with
the Indigenous People?                                                                              X
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?                  X
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?                                          N.A.    N.A.
                                                                                                        ...

OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement:
              -                                                                             Yes      No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy fi-ameworkor policy process been prepared?            X
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan /
                                                                                             x7
                                                                                             A
policy framework / policy process?
OP/BP 4-36-Forests:                                                                         Yes      -
                                                                                                     No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been
                                                                                                      x,
                                                                                                      A
carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?                  X
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions
                                                                                                      X
for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams:
              -                                                                             Yes      No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                         X
Have the TORS-aswell as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                             X
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been
made for public awareness and training?      EPP plans will be finalized by November         X
30,2006 (12 months ahead of reservoir impoundment).
OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways:
          -                                                                                'Yes      No
Have the other riparians been notified of the pro.ject?                                     N.A.
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has
this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and           N.A.
sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?                                                     N.A.
     Please explain:                                                                        N.A.
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                     N.A.
OP 7.60 Projects in DisputedAreas:
          -                                                                                 Yes      NO
                                                                                            -        -
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the
project, including the procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing       N.A.
with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?                     N.A.
BP 17.50 Public Disclosure:
           -                                                                                - No
                                                                                            Yes
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?           X
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form andA
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local         X
NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                                     Yes      No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
                                                                                             X
for the implementation of the safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                                 X
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation?              X
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
                                                                                            X
safeguard impacts and measures?
~ a v satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the
       e
                                                                                            X
same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Signed and submitted by:                              -
Task Team Leader:                      Jie Tang                                              June 2,2006


                                :      James 0.Mon



Comments:
Sector Manager:                        Salvador Rivera (&ting sect& Manager)
Comments:
                                                    >-

