Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/12/2006 
Report No.:  AC2277
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P099992 
Project Name:  Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
218.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
306.50
306.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the project are to assist the Borrower in supporting the project cities in 
enhancing the:  (a) performance and quality of the existing urban transport infrastructure 
in terms of mobility, access and safety; (b) efficiency and effectiveness of the urban 
public transport and road maintenance services; and (c) responsiveness of the urban 
transport systems to the needs of the segment of the population without access to private 
motorized vehicles.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project covers the center cities of Panjin, Jinzhou, Fushun, Benxi, and Liaoyang 
municipalities, and the county town of Dengta in Liaoyang municipality.  The project has 
been designed to reverse the deterioration of the asset base, improve the “livability” and 
investment climate, and support initiatives that reflect national and provincial priorities 
related to urban transport.  The design has been refined through extensive consultation 
with user groups.  
 
A
brief description of the project components follows.  
 
The Road Infrastructure and Reconstruction Component [US$330.65 million, including 
resettlement costs of US$105.0 million] includes road improvements in the primary, 
Page  2
secondary and tertiary networks that would address current transport problems and 
bottlenecks.  
 
The Secondary Road Rehabilitation and Road Maintenance Equipment Component 
[US$113.48 million] will finance rehabilitation of major segments of the participating 
cities’ road network to improve last-mile access to pedestrians and bicyclists, and finance 
road maintenance equipment.  
 
The Traffic Safety and Traffic Management Component [US$22.17 million] supports 
the implementation of the NRSL through enhanced traffic management, monitoring and 
traffic control systems (including traffic signals and intersection improvements) to 
improve safety and traffic flow.  
 
The Public Transport Component [US$14.32 million] includes provision of bus priority 
facilities and improvements in public transport planning and operations in the project 
cities.  It includes investments in public transport infrastructure such as on-street bus 
priority and transit oriented traffic engineering, shelters, terminals and interchanges.  
 
The Institutional Development Component [US$4.85 million] supports technical 
assistance (TA) in transport planning and management, reform in road maintenance 
practices and in the structure of the public transport industry, and includes project 
management assistance for LUCRPO and the project cities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Liaoning Province, located in the northeast of China, is one of the heavy industrial bases 
in the country.  Fushun, Benxi, Jinzhou, Panjin and Liaoyang are important cities in the 
Liaoning regional development plan, and are located along the two priority development 
corridors that will receive financial and institutional support for infrastructure 
development in the context of the Revitalization of Northeast Program.  
 
Detailed geographical locations of these project cities are given below.  
 
Geographical Location of the Cities  
 
Fushun  
 
East longitude 123Â°39'-125Â°28', north latitude 41Â°41'-42Â°38'  
 
Benxi  
 
East longitude 123Â°34'-125Â°46', north latitude 41Â°49'-41Â°35'  
 
Jinzhou  
 
East longitude 121Â°8', north latitude 41Â°7'  
 
Panjin  
 
East longitude 123Â°31'-122Â°28', north latitude 40Â°40'-41Â°27'  
 
Liaoyang  
 
East longitude 122Â°35'-123Â°41'ï¼Œnorth latitude 40Â°42'-41Â°36'  
 
Dengta  
 
East longitude 122Â°54'-123Â°40'ï¼Œnorth latitude 41Â°13'-41Â°36'   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
From a social perspective, the project supports the improvement of the secondary and 
feeder road networks; the development of public transport, pedestrian, and bicycle 
facilities; and traffic safety measures.  The pioneering public participation process 
undertaken during preparation enables the project to address the transport-related needs 
of vulnerable groups.  It was also designed to be sensitive to gender issues by conducting 
women-only focus groups.  
 
From an environmental perspective, the project facilitates environmentally desirable 
planning and physical improvements in the urban transport networks of the six project 
cities by supporting safety, the development of secondary roads that promote NMV 
travel, pedestrian and bicycle ways and public transport.  In addition, all project 
investments have been designed to minimize any adverse impact on the physical 
environment; none of the components encroach on any environmentally sensitive terrain.  
 
The objective of the EA is to determine the potential negative impacts of the project at 
the project planning/design stage to ensure the development environmentally sound and 
acceptable. The EA has also identified and assessed, quantitatively to the extent possible, 
the project benefits and positive impacts to the natural and social environments.  
 
The Liaoning Academy of Environmental Sciences, a State Environmental Protection 
Agency (SEPA) Class A - accredited agency for EIAs in China, jointly with local 
environmental institutes, prepared Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for each project city, according to national 
policies and regulations as well as Bank guidelines.  The required two-step consultation 
Page  4
was conducted during the EIA preparation process.  These documents were disclosed 
locally and in Washington, D.C., in January 2006.  The final EIA reports were furnished 
to the Bank in mid-March 2006.  
 
Project resettlement impacts include permanent land acquisition, residential house 
demolition, demolition of buildings belonging to enterprises and public institutions, 
demolition of shops, infrastructure and ground attachments.  These impacts will be 
scattered in 12 districts/counties: Baita, Wensheng, and Taizihe districts of Liaoyang city; 
Linghe, Guta, and Lingnanxin districts of Jinzhou; Xinglongtai, and Shuangtaizi districts 
of Panjin; Xihu, Pingshan, and Mingshan districts of Benxi; Shuncheng district of 
Fushun; and two streets of Dengta.  The project will affect 4,994 households and 677 
enterprises and shops, and will affect 31,547 people in all.  The collective land acquired 
is currently being used primarily for housing and a very limited amount of farm land will 
be acquired.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project components will potentially cause a variety of short-term construction and longer-
term operational impacts.  A series of mitigation measures have been planned to reduce 
the impacts to acceptable levels during construction and operation.  Mitigation 
monitoring procedures have been established and the organizations responsible for 
monitoring have been designated.  
 
Construction Phase.  Project components could cause short-term impacts, such as dust, 
noise, traffic, soil erosion, workers’ safety, and solid wastes from construction activities, 
community activities and public health issues.  Various measures planned to reduce them 
to acceptable levels have been described in the EIA and the EMP, including restrictions 
on night-time construction, mandating the use of low-noise machinery and construction 
methods, and the development of detailed plans for the disposal of soil and waste 
disposal.  
 
Operation Phase.  Project impacts on air quality are limited and pollutant concentrations 
comply with applicable standards.  The primary negative impact of the project is 
predicted to be higher than standard noise levels at a selection of identified locations. 
However, some sensitive receptors in project locations have baseline noise levels higher 
than standard.  In other locations, the project is expected to lower noise levels through 
eased congestion and improved road quality.  The impact of the project on noise will be 
most significant in green field sites and alleys, where there is no motor vehicle traffic at 
present.  
 
During implementation noise levels at affected sensitive receptors will be monitored, 
and residents and other affected people will be consulted on the actual noise impact with 
regard to their life and/or work.  The results of this monitoring and consultation will serve 
to identify locations where window ventilation or air conditioners will be installed to 
mitigate noise impact.  Details of all mitigation measures and the responsible agencies for 
their implementation and supervision are provided in the EMP.   
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives were considered for each component during the preparation of the feasibility 
studies.  As has been described in the PAD, this resulted in enlarging the scope of the 
secondary road rehabilitation component, and focusing on reducing existing transport 
congestion on the road infrastructure component.  Most of the project investment focuses 
on reconstruction, rehabilitation, and traffic management of existing road construction.  
Choice of roads was based on a combination of a formal technical analysis based on 
overall traffic levels and the needs of bicyclists and pedestrians; and the preferences of 
the public expressed in the public consultation process.  In Fushun, the results of bicycle 
user survey provided additional insights with regard to traffic management.  
 
All projects that required significant stand-alone investment were subject to rigorous 
alternatives analysis including an effort to minimize involuntary resettlement and 
negative environmental impacts.  For example, the red line for Xinggong Road was 
modified to minimize resettlement impacts in Panjin.  Similarly, an analysis of 
alternatives considered for the proposed Hu Bin Road in Panjin led to a modification of 
the original design to avoid encroachment in a neighborhood lake.  Details of these and 
related analyses are in the component RAPs, Chapter 6 of the consolidated EA report and 
are summarized in the PAD.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
LUCRPO is very familiar with Bank safeguard policies (as the proposed project would be 
the fifth Bank-financed project managed by LUCRPO) and Liaoning has a good track 
record of implementing resettlement consistent with Bank guidelines.  A recently 
completed independent assessment of resettlement activities conducted as part of the just 
completed Liaoning Urban Transport Project found that resettlement had been properly 
implemented in compliance with Bank policies.  
 
Environment  
 
LUCRPO will manage the EMP implementation.  The staff responsible for EMP 
implementation at LURCPO and the city PMOs will be trained on environmental 
regulations and their application, mitigation measures, public consultations, 
environmental monitoring and producing progress reports.  An environmental specialist 
from the supervisory consultant team will ensure that construction is done in an 
environmentally sound manner.  
 
Supervision and Reporting.  The Bank will supervise project related environmental 
issues twice a year.  Semi-annual progress reports from LUCRPO will include a 
section/chapter on EMP implementation.  During project implementation, an annual 
report on the EMP implementation will be furnished to the Bank by March 31 of each 
year, along with any revisions proposed to the EMP to achieve its objectives.  
 
Page  6
Training Requirements.  To ensure smooth EMP implementation, staff will be trained 
on environmental issues, including appropriate responses to accidents.  The training 
program will covers issues such as environmental laws and regulations, standards, 
project-related environmental science and environmental management.  
 
Funding Arrangements and Schedule of Implementation.  Each city’s EMP includes a 
budget that the city has formally committed to. The costs of mitigating the effects from 
construction will be covered in the cost of facilities.  Monitoring of air and water quality, 
noise, worker health, and site safety/hygiene will be conducted by local environmental 
monitoring units or consultants, and financed from counterpart funds.  
 
Monitoring.  The EMP lists environmental performance indicators, such as air and water 
quality, noise levels, construction sites and camps, as well as details on where and when 
they will be monitored, and the agencies responsible for reviewing them.  LURCPO will 
be responsible for reporting on the environmental monitoring.  
 
Furthermore, a monitoring and consultation program has been developed to monitor 
actual noise impacts during operation.  The actual indoor noise levels at the affected 
sensitive receptors will be measured.  Residents and other affected people will be 
consulted on the impact of the noise on their lives.  The monitoring and consultation will 
serve as the basis for implementation of noise mitigation.  
 
Resettlement  
 
Resettlement Planning.  The project includes six cities. Individual RAPs were prepared 
for each project city in Chinese by following local policies and regulations, as well as 
Bank’s policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12.  A summary RAP was prepared in 
both English and Chinese based on guidelines provided by the Bank.  
 
Resettlement Implementation Capacity.  LUCRPO will take the lead to ensure 
compliance with Bank resettlement policies.  At the city level, Leading Groups, Project 
Management Offices, and Project Implementation Units have been established and 
resettlement officials are assigned in each of the municipal PMO.  
 
Resettlement Monitoring.  Internal and external monitoring has been designed as part of 
the project resettlement management.  The project resettlement offices will carry out 
internal monitoring of the resettlement implementation.  The monitoring procedures, 
content, staffing, responsibility, timeframe and reporting have been detailed in the RAPs.  
An external monitor has been selected for independent monitoring of the RAP 
implementation.  Independent monitoring will cover physical progress of RAP 
implementation, including compensation payment, allocation of residential sites, 
farmland allocation, and restoration of infrastructure.The independent monitor will also 
review the public consultation process, operation of the resettlement project offices, 
grievance redress mechanisms and restoration of livelihood of the affected farmers.  
Independent monitoring will be conducted twice a year during the project implementation 
period.   
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The PAD provides details on the public participation processes conducted both for 
project design, and under the EIA and resettlement planning processes.  
 
Public Participation in Project Design  
 
A
major achievement of this project has been the successful development of a 
meaningful public participation process that influenced project designs.  Public 
participation was integrated into the project cycle and carried out in three phases:  (a) 
Phase I (project design and feasibility stage), participation was designed to identify key 
issues of concern to the public; (b) Phase II (post appraisal stage), when solutions were 
presented to the public for review and comments; and (c) Phase III (project 
implementation stage), during which the satisfaction level of the public with project 
implementation will be ascertained.  
 
Public Consultation during Environmental Impact Assessment and Resettlement 
Planning  
 
Public Consultation during EIA Process.  Two rounds of public consultation were 
carried out during the EA:  the first round during the preparation of EA terms of reference 
(TOR), between August to November, 2005; and the second round at the draft EA report 
stage in early January, 2006 in the six project cities/county town.  The primary technique 
used in public consultation was public opinion survey through questionnaires and public 
meetings, or both combined.  This was supplemented by interest group interviews such as 
temple/mosque communities, cultural properties management, and relevant agencies.  
Consultation was focused primarily on the project areas, and the people consulted 
included mainly those who will be affected directly by the project.  Relevant government 
and non-government organizations, and experts from academic institutions on various 
environmental and socio-economic issues, have also been consulted.  In total, 599 
individuals responded to the questionnaire survey in the first round of consultation, and 
about 438 person-times have participated in the second round of consultation.  
 
The draft EIA reports were released on January 25, 2005 on the Liaoning Academy of 
Environmental Sciences website.  The printed city EIA reports were distributed during 
the week of February 6, 2006 to the city PMOs and/or local environmental protection 
bureaus for public review.  
 
Information about the project and the process of the EIA was published in the local 
media through advertisements or public notices. These include brief announcements of 
project content, the process of environmental impact assessment, the contact persons and 
their telephone numbers for the public to express their concerns or opinions on the EIA.  
The media disclosure is summarized in the table below.  
 
Summary of Media Disclosure  
Page  8
Benxi  
 
Date:  December 15, 2005  
 
Media: Benxi Daily  
 
Content:  Brief description; major environmental impacts, benefits, invitation for public 
opinions  
 
Contact persons: City PMO officials  
 
Fushun  
 
Date:  January 12, 2006  
 
Media: Fushun Daily  
 
Content:  Brief description; major impacts, invitation for public opinions  
 
Contract persons:  PMO official  
 
Liaoyang  
 
Date:  January 16, 2006  
 
Media: Liaoyan Daily  
 
Content:  Brief description; major impacts, invitation for public opinions.  
 
Contact persons:  PMO officials  
 
Panjin  
 
Date:  November 30, 2005  
 
Media: Panjin Daily  
 
Content:  Brief description; major impacts, invitation for public opinions  
 
Contact persons:  PMO officials  
 
Jinzhou  
 
Date:  January 13, 2006  
 
Media: Jinzhou Daily  
 
Content:  Brief description; major impacts, invitation for public opinions  
 
Contact persons:  EA team  
 
Public Consultation Process during Resettlement Planning.  The project RAPs have 
been prepared after consultation with the affected persons, as detailed in the tables below:  
 
Public Participation Process  
 
Content:  Physical quantity investigation in project areas  
 
Place:  Affected persons locus  
 
Participants:  PMO members, affected persons  
 
Method:  Interview  
 
Time:  Benxi - 2005.11; Dengta - 2005.6-7; Fushun - 2005.4-6; Jinzhou 2005.8; 
Liaoyang - 2005.6-8; Panjin - 2005.8  
 
Conclusion:  Data confirmed  
 
Content:  Project area social economy situation investigation and compensation & 
resettlement intent  
Page  9
Place:  Affected persons locus  
 
Participants:  PMO members, affected persons  
 
Method:  Interview  
 
Time:  Benxi - 2005.11; Dengta - 2005.7-8; Fushun - 2005.4-6; Jinzhou 2005.8; 
Liaoyang - 2005.6-8; Panjin - 2005.8  
 
Conclusion:  Data confirmed  
 
Content:  Compensation and resettlement policy  
 
Place:  Municipal PMO  
 
Participants:  PMO members, affected persons, representatives  
 
Method:  Workshop and discussion  
 
Time:  Benxi - 2005.11; Dengta - 2005.9; Fushun - 2005.1; Jinzhou 2005.8; Liaoyang - 
2005.8; Panjin - 2005.9  
 
Content:  Resettlement Plan  
 
Place:  Municipal PMO  
 
Participants:  PMO members, affected persons, representatives  
 
Method:  Workshop and discussion  
 
Time:  Benxi - 2005.12; Dengta - 2005.1; Fushun - 2005.12; Jinzhou 2005.8; Liaoyang - 
2005.8; Panjin - 2005.9  
 
Disclosure Procedure for Resettlement  
 
Topic/documents:  Project introduction  
 
Disclosure language:  Chinese  
 
Media:  Municipal radio and tv stations  
 
Period:  Benxi - 2005.12; Dengta - 2005.10; Fushun - 2005.12; Jinzhou - 2005.7, 
Liaoyang - 2005.10; Panjin - 2005.9  
 
Topic/documents:  General introduction of project land acquisition  
 
Disclosure language:  Chinese  
 
Media:  Municipal radio and tv stations  
 
Period:  Benxi - 2005.12; Dengta - 2005.11; Fushun - 2005.12; Jinzhou - 2005.10, 
Liaoyang - 2005.10; Panjin - 2005.10  
 
Topic/documents:  Municipal policies of land acquisition and house demolition  
 
Disclosure language:  Chinese  
 
Media:  Municipal websites  
 
Period:  Benxi - 2005.12; Dengta - 2005.12; Fushun - 2005.12; Jinzhou - 2005.12, 
Liaoyang - 2005.11; Panjin - 2005.12  
 
Topic/documents:  Resettlement plan report disclosure  
 
Disclosure language:  Chinese  
 
Media:  Municipal radio and tv stations, newspaper  
 
Period:  Benxi Daily - 2006.1.11 and Urban Infrastructure Construction Office, 
Demolition Department; Dengta Daily - 2006.1.12 and PMO library; Fushun Daily - 
Page  10
2005.1.25 and PMO; Jinzhou Daily - 2006.1.13 and PMO library, Liaoyang Daily - 
2006.1.12 and PMO library; Panjin Daily - 2006.1.11 and PMO  
 
Topic/documents:  Resettlement Plan Booklets  
 
Disclosure language:  Chinese  
 
Media:  Handhouts to displaced persons  
 
Period:  After Bank approval  
 
A
mechanism has been designed for grievance redress under each of the project 
components.  All grievances can be filed in both written and verbal forms.  The redress 
channel lies within the project management and government systems.  Recording 
requirements and timeframe have been established for grievance resolution. This 
mechanism will be disclosed as part of the resettlement information booklet (RIB).  
 
The project has obtained a waiver from Bank Management with regards to the current 
BP 4.01 requirement relating to translations of EIA reports.  Chinese language EIA and 
RAP reports have been prepared for project activities proposed in each city; these have 
been reviewed and disclosed separately in each project city and in the Bank Infoshop and 
in the Bank Beijing Office Website.  In addition, a Consolidated EIA and EMP for the 
project covering all cities, and a Summary RAP for the entire project, have been prepared 
in English and disclosed.  These documents include detailed findings and 
recommendations, and address in sufficient depth and detail all the critical issues and data 
needed to support their findings and recommendations.  Bank Management is satisfied 
that on the basis of staff review of these documents, as well as a review of the local 
language reports by qualified country office staff, that the Bank has complied with the 
review obligations set out in OP 4.01 without the need to resort to translate all of the 
detailed city specific reports into English.  In addition, Bank management is satisfied that 
the Bank would meet the disclosure objectives set out in the policy through disclosure of 
the above English language documents, together with the disclosure of city specific EIAs, 
EMPs and RAPs in the Chinese language.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2006 
 
Page  11
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
04/28/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
05/01/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
05/09/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
05/11/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
05/11/2006 
Comments:   
