                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDSDATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                      Report No.:41762




 Date ISDS Preparedmpdated: November 5.2007

 I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data



 Project ~ & e : Huizhou as-fired Combined Cycle Thermal Power Project
 Task Team Leader: Ranjit Lamech
 Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2007       Estimated ApprovalDate: December 2007
 Managing Unit: EASTE                           Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance

.Sector: Power (60%); Oil and Gas (40%)
 Theme: Climate Change, Energy and Environment
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):
 IDA Amount (US$m.):
 GEF Amount (US$m.):
 PCF Amount (US$m.):
 Other financing amounts bv source: Carbon Finance (US$m):43.8
 Environmental Category: B
 SimplifiedProcessing                 Simple U                   Repeater U
 Is this a transferred project        Yes     U                     No



 B. Project Objectives
 The objective of the project is to encourage the development of clean power generation options
 in China by purchasing Certified Emission Reductions (CERs) resulting from the generation of
 electricityby a gas-fired CCGT power plant.

 The key indicator is the annual delivery of CERs to be verified by the Designated Operational
 Entity (DOE) according to annual measurements of actual carbon reductions relative to those
 planned.

 C. Project Description
 The Huizhou CCGT Power Plant consists of three combined cycle units. At IS0 (International
 Standards Organization) conditions, the total installed capacity is 1,l70 MW (3 X 390 MW). The
 expected annual electricity output is 4,090 GWh. The electricity generated by the plant is
 delivered to the Southern China Power Grid (SCPG) which relies mostly on coal-fired power
 plants. The natural gas is supplied from a re-gasification terminal located near Shenzhen which

receives the Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) from Australia, under a take-or-pay agreement with
the Guangdong Dapeng LNG Co. Ltd.

The plant is located in Daya Bay Economic and Technical Development Zone in Huizhou City,
about 214 km from Guangzhou, Guangdong Province All three units are operating satisfactorily
and are supplying electricity to the SCPG. Full load operation of each unit has been achieved.
The operation of the entire plant at a full load is expected in November 2007. The plant owner
plans to install a second (Phase 11) gas-fired CCGT power plant with identical capacity at the
same location in the next few years.

The Huizhou Gas-fired CCGT Power Plant was approved as a CDM project by the National
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) of the People's Republic of China on December
13,2006- after around four years of review and preparation.

D. Project location and salient physicalcharacteristicsrelevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The Huizhou Gas-fired Combined Cycle Thermal Power Plant has a total land area of 41.5 ha,
which is located along the coast in Daya Bay Economic Development District under Huizhou
Municipality of Guangdong Province. About three quarters of the site is land area and one
quarter is sea area, and most of the land area is composed of construction areas acquired in the
early 1990s. In addition to the power plant, two 220kV transmission lines were constructed, with
a combined length of 40 kilometers, located in both Daya Bay District and Huiyang District in
Huizhou Municipality. The related Dapeng LNG Gas Terminal with 39 ha of land areas is
located in Dapeng Town, Longgang District, Shenzhen Municipality, Guangdong Province. The
LNG pipeline connecting the terminal and Huizhou Gas-fired Combined Cycle Thermal Power
Plant has a total length of 47 kilometers. The pipeline passes through Longgang District under
Shenzhen Municipality, and Daya Bay District under Huizhou Municipality. Majority of the land
acquired during the construction of the terminal (39 ha) and the pipeline were woodland, in
addition to a limited amount of farmland. Limited amount of permanent land acquisition and
temporary land occupation was required during the construction of the gas pipeline and
transmission lines.


E. Borrower's Institutional Capacityfor SafeguardPolicies:

The process of land use right transfer for Huizhou Gas-fired Combined Cycle Thermal Power
Plant and land acquisition for the LNG terminal, pipeline and transmission line was handled by
local land resources bureaus of the relevant districts and municipalities. The project sponsors,
including the Yudean Group and Huizhou LNG Power Company Ltd., have limited experience
with the Bank safeguard policies, but have provided all the relevant documentation to help in the
team in completing its post-review of the relevant safeguardpolicies and practices followed. .

The plant maintains an Environment, Health and Safety Department reporting to the Director of
Production. There are ten technical staff and twelve people performing environmental
monitoring. The plant has IS0 9001, 14001 and OHSA 18001 certification. Most of the

monitoring is confined to source monitoring: NOx stack emissions, and effluent discharge
analysis (chemical oxygen demand-COD, and residual chlorine, temperature rise across the
condenser). The mission visited the monitoring laboratory and found it to be neat, clean and
primarily set up for traditional "wet analysis". The Team believes there is adequate capacity to
perform the normal monitoring associated with discharge from this type of power generation
facility utilizing natural gas. Ecological monitoring of Daya Bay is the responsibility of the
Provincial OceanFisheries Bureau and Huizhou EPB.

F. Environmental and Social SafeguardsSpecialists on the Team:

Bernard Baratz -Environment Specialist
Youxuan Zhu - Resettlement and Social Development Specialist


11. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered(pleaseexplainwhy)               I Yes       INo         1 TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01)                              X
The Project involves a large (1,170 MW) Combined Cycle Power Plant, as well as connected
infrastructure(gas pipeline, LNG terminal,transmission lines, etc). EnvironmentalAssessments
have been prepared for the Huizhou Gas-fired Combined Cycle Thermal Power Plant, LNG
Terminal, Gas Pipeline and power transmission line and approved by the Chinese Government.
The Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) for the Huizhou Gas-fired Combined Cycle
Thermal Power Plant, and the LNG Terminal were all of high quality and consistentwith World
Bank good practice. The LNG Terminal EIA was prepared in accordancewith IFC guidelines.


Natural Habitats (OPJBP 4.04)                                     X
Impacts of water cooling water discharge on natural habitat and overall qualitative(anecdotal)
evidenceregarding general ecological character and use of Day Bay resources (fishing, coral
reefs, etc) will be evaluated.

Forests (OP/BP4.36)                                                            X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP4.11)                                        X

Indigenous Peoples (OPJBP 4.10)                                                X
The review of resettlementpractices for the Huizhou Power Plant and supportingconnected
infrastructurewill confirmthat indigenous peoples have not been affectedin anyway by these
developments.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12)                              X
The Huizhou Power Plant and the supporting connected infrastructure including the two
transmission lines and the LNG terminal and pipelines required land acquisition and

resettlement. According to the staff from Huizhou Power Plant and Dapeng LNG Co. Ltd., the
construction of these facilities involved permanent acquisition of 90.25 ha of land areas, with
90% of them as state owned land areas. In addition, about 102.6ha of land areas were occupied
temporarily and all of them were collectively owned rural lands.

Since the land acquisition and compensation for both Huizhou Gas-fired Combined Cycle
Thermal Power Plant and LNG terminal and pipeline as well as transmission line had already
been completed, a due diligence review of the land acquisition process and compensation
delivery is being carried out during project preparation. This is being done in order to ensure that
the land acquisition for all related components complied with PRC laws and regulations, and
basic entitlements for affected people were delivered and no remaining issues left for the Project.
Reports on this review will be made available to the Bank safeguard unit for review prior to
project appraisal.

Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                                               X
Subject to confirmation that the Dam is utilized as a general source of public water supply and
the amount provided to the project is a small fraction of the overall water supplyprovided by the
dam.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                          X


Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                   X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmentaland Social SafeguardIssues in Bank-
SupportedProjects (OP/BP 4.00)

111. SAFEGUARDPREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality EnhancementReview (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared:            There will be be QER for this project. The PAD-stage ISDS and
    Decision Package will be prepared for discussion in mid-November.

B. For simpleprojects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS:

C. Time frame for launching and completingthe safeguard-relatedstudies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing1should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

The adequacy of the safeguards procedures and practices followed, and the future mitigation
plans will be assessed for the CCGT project and the main connected infrastructure. A detailed



I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-counhy, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

due diligence document will be prepared before the Ilecision Meeting covering the safeguards
aspects including:
           EIA review for power plant and linked projects.
           Assessment 01' cooling water discharge and influe~lce,if any. on the psolcctcd Daya
           Bay zone and species.
           Resettlement practices followed

IV. APPROVALS


