Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/12/2006 
Report No.:  AC2238
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P081776 
Project Name:  CN--Second Guangdong Pearl River Delta Urban Environment Project 
(Foshan and Jiangmen) 
Task Team Leader:  Thomas L. Zearley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 23, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 21, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (70%);Flood protection (30%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
87.00
87.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To reduce water pollution in the Pearl River Delta originating from Foshan and Jiangmen 
municipalities through a package of key initiatives, including wastewater treatment and 
sludge disposal, industrial pollution control monitoring, sediment removal from 
waterways, and river bank clean up and restoration.   
 
3. Project Description 
Foshan Components:  
 
(a) 
Wastewater Management.  Expansion of Zhen?an wastewater treatment plant 
(Phase III) by 50,000m3/d, and construction of interceptors, secondary sewers, and 
pumping stations;  
 
(b) 
Wastewater Sludge Treatment and Disposal. Construction of a 400 tons/day 
capacity centralized sludge treatment and disposal facility at Nanzhuang to treat sewage 
from five wastewater treatment plants in Chancheng district;  
 
(c) 
Flood Protection and Embankment Rehabilitation.  Improvements of embankment 
along north side of Fengjiang River for improved flood protection and environmental 
conditions in areas along the river bank, and development of an urban management 
information system;  
Page  2
(d) 
River Water Quality Improvement.  Dredging of sediment from Foshan Waterway 
and Foshan Creek and transfer, treatment and disposal of the sediment in a sanitary 
landfill; construction supervision services; construction of four automatic water quality 
monitoring stations; and development of a water environment management information 
system;  
 
(e) 
Institutional Strengthening and Training.  Technical assistance for (i) project 
management services including contract management and monitoring of safeguard 
implementation; (ii) evaluation of designs in bids for the central sludge treatment and 
disposal component (iii) study on environmental impact on growth of green GDP; and (v) 
training and study tours.  
 
Jiangmen Components:  
 
(f) 
Wastewater Management.  Expansion of Wen Cheng Sha wastewater treatment 
plant by 50,000 m3/day (to increase capacity to 200,000 m3/day), and construction of 
interceptors, secondary sewers, pumping stations, and sludge treatment and disposal 
facilities; improvements in water quality monitoring comprising purchase of three in-line 
monitoring sets and one mobile set;  
 
(g) 
Institutional Strengthening and Training.  Technical assistance to enhance 
operational and business management capacities of the new Jiangmen Bi Yuan 
Wastewater Company.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project includes two municipalities (Foshan and Jiangmen) located in Pearl River 
Delta (PRD) region of south China.  Foshan municipality is situated in south-central 
Guangdong province, adjacent to Guangzhou city.  It has a total population of 5.6 
million, and has a long history as a cultural and industrial center in south China.  Its 
economic growth has been particularly impressive recently, with GDP expanding by 19 
percent in 2005.  Foshan?s political leadership wants urgently to improve environmental 
conditions in the city.  Currently, only 32 percent of the wastewater in Foshan is treated, 
and the lack of an adequate wastewater treatment system is increasing pollution to the 
PRD rivers and creating public health concerns.  The highly-polluted waters running 
through the city, especially in the Foshan river, are smelly and foul, and are discouraging 
investments in urban upgrading along the river banks.  
 
Jiangmen municipality is located west of Foshan.  It has a population of 1.3 million, 
with 62 percent of the population engaged in agricultural activities. While Jiangmen?s 
economic development is somewhat behind other cities in the PRD region, its economy 
has started to grow rapidly (around 12 percent GDP increase last year).  Jiangmen ranked 
high in the Bank's recent survey of investment climate competitiveness of Chinese cities, 
in part because of its attractive environmental conditions.  But, continuous efforts will be 
needed to protect the environment, as several rivers running through the municipality 
have become highly polluted. At present, about 32 percent of the wastewater in 
Jiangmen?s town center is treated, and a new wastewater company has just been 
established to manage services.  
 
Page  3
Foshan and Jiangmen municipalities have requested Bank assistance in reducing river 
water pollution and improving living conditions in areas along the river banks.  Both 
municipalities have had their project proposals reviewed and endorsed by Central 
Government (NDRC).  Each municipality has hired local consultants to prepare 
engineering feasibility studies, resettlement plans, and environmental assessments.  This 
work is being overseen by two different international consulting firms (Sogreah for 
Foshan, and Metcalf and Eddy for Jiangmen) funded by donors (France and USA).  
 
At a broad strategic level, Bank involvement will facilitate work started under the 
ongoing PRD 1 Urban Environment Project (mainly for Guangzhou) on inter-municipal 
cooperation and improvement in wastewater management planning and financing.  At the 
project level, the Bank's role is to ensure that the lessons learned from previous 
experiences in the PRD region and elsewhere are reflected in the design, planning and 
management of the proposed investments.  Attention would be paid to reviewing options, 
selecting least cost solutions and appropriate technologies and practices in wastewater 
and sludge management.  The Bank would also give emphasis to improving the 
sustainability of the wastewater services through the introduction of proper institutional 
arrangements and tariff policies.  And, the Bank would look for ways to enhance the 
urban planning and economic competitiveness of the two cities, and strengthen the 
regulatory framework for public-private partnership.  All of these aims are consistent 
with the objectives of the China Country Assistance Strategy related to environmental 
protection and infrastructure and urban development.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Andres Liebenthal (EASES) 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASSD) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASSD) 
Mr Dahong Li (EASTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment:  
 
The project, which consists mainly of wastewater collection and expansion of treatment 
plants (both cities), sludge treatment, river dredging and river embankment (Foshan 
only), is classified as Category A under OP 4.01.  Environmental Assessment (EA) has 
been prepared with the assistance of two international consulting firms for each of the 
project components by Zhongshan University and Changjiang Hydraulics Design 
Institute for Foshan and Jiangmen, respectively.  The EA concludes that the project will 
bring significant positive impacts to the natural and socioeconomic environments 
participating cities.  The EA has not identified serious adverse environmental impacts 
which cannot be effectively mitigated to acceptable levels.  
 
More specifically, the project will intercept a large volume of wastewater currently 
discharged directly to the rivers flowing through the urban centers, improved water 
quality to the designated surface water quality standards (from worse than Category V to 
designated Category V for Foshan waterways and from Category V to Category IV for 
Jiangmen and Tian Sha rivers in Jiangmen), increased navigation capacity in Foshan 
waterways (from 200 ton to 300 ton ship capacity), improved environmental aesthetics, 
improved flood control capacity, appreciation of land values in areas near and around the 
rivers, contribution to community and economic developments, and  enhanced livable of 
the cities, their economic competitiveness, and the standard of living for the 
cities'residents.  
 
Major potential adverse impacts will mostly occur during the project construction phase. 
Construction of the sewer network and wastewater treatment plants, river embankment 
and sediment dredging will involve land occupation, airborne dust, noise, soil erosion, 
discharges and/or disturbance to the rivers, and traffic and urban service disruptions. The 
dredging component will involve odor from the sediment dredging and handling 
activities particularly in the urban areas, sediment transportation, dewatering, leachate 
treatment and final disposal. It is noted though that a detailed and systematic sediment 
sampling program has demonstrated that the sediment is not hazardous and can be 
disposed of at a properly designed sanitary landfill.  
 
Impacts during the operational phase of the project will involve noise and odor in the 
immediately adjacent areas of the wastewater treatment plants and sludge treatment 
facility, as well as activities around the sludge disposal landfill, which will be dedicated 
cells in an operating sanitary landfill.  
 
Resettlement:  
 
As land acquisition was initially expected to occur in both Jiangmen and Foshan, both 
cities were requested to prepare a resettlement plan (RP).  During project preparation, 
however, Jiangmen dropped two proposed investment components due to local concern 
Page  5
about a shortage of counterpart funds.  Siting for the remaining component - expansion of 
the Wen Cheng Sha wastewater treatment plant-requires only a transfer of unoccupied 
and unutilized state-owned right-of-way.  As there will be no land acquisition, structural 
demolition, or other resettlement-related impacts, no RP is required.  
 
In Foshan, land is required for construction of a wastewater treat plant, river dredging 
and river bank rehabilitation, and for sewer construction.  For Foshan components, land 
acquisition will total 188 mu (12.5 hectares), including 157 mu (10.5 hectares) of state-
owned land, and 30 mu (two hectares) of collective land. Land acquisition will affect 10 
households, 41 enterprises and 18 shops, with 1,980 affected people in total. Another 494 
mu (33 hectares) of land will be acquired temporarily during implementation.    
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project would not have important adverse indirect or long term social impacts. 
Significant environmental and social benefits are expected over the long term, directly 
and indirectly, in the project areas, as described above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative dredging, transportation and drying methods, sediment dewatering and 
disposal sites, sludge disposal processes, sludge treatment facility and disposal sites, 
pumping station sites, wastewater treatment designs, effluent discharge locations, and 
river embankment designs have been identified during the EA with the objective to avoid 
or otherwise minimize adverse environmental and social impacts and to maximize project 
benefits.  The EA teams have worked with the project planners/owners and the feasibility 
study teams to compare and evaluate alternatives and optimal alternatives were selected 
based on the avoidance of or least adverse impacts on the environment and communities 
as well as engineering and economic considerations for the least cost solutions.  Both 
project cities have also considered the without project scenario as an alternative.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment:  
 
The EA documents including EA reports, EMPs and a city-wide EA Summary for 
Foshan have been prepared, incorporating Bank's comments during project preparation 
and pre-appraisal, and found to be satisfactory.  All individual EA reports have been 
reviewed and cleared by expert review panels convened by the project approval agencies, 
Guangzhou Environmental Protection Bureau and official. Local approvals of all EA 
reports are expected in May 2006.  
 
The EA covers the project description, baseline environmental conditions, 
environmental benefits and project justifications, analysis of alternatives, potential 
environmental impacts and mitigation measures both at the construction and operation 
stages, environment management plans, public consultation and information disclosure.  
The EMP specifies the environmental management and supervision mechanisms and 
Page  6
institutional arrangements, mitigation measures, environmental monitoring plans, training 
plans and estimated budget allocations necessary for implementing the mitigation 
measures, monitoring plans and ways to strengthen client capacity.  Key environmental 
mitigation measures during construction include dust suppression; erosion control; use of 
low noise construction equipment/machinery, proper arrangement of construction 
activities to avoid sensitive time and locations, traffic management during construction, 
pollution control design and environmental management for sediment disposal site, and 
use of proper operational procedures by the contractors during construction.  Major 
mitigation measures during operation include noise and odor control at the wastewater 
treatment plants, sludge treatment facility and pumping stations.  
 
The owners of each project components will either have environmental specialists on 
staff or engage specialists/consulting firms during project construction and/or operation 
as may be appropriate to supervise, inspect, coordinate and manage environmental 
performance, to ensure implementation of EMP and compliance with regulatory and 
project requirements for pollution control and environmental protection.  The supervision 
will be particularly enforced in sensitive locations or for specific activities, such as 
dredging and river embankment in the urban built up areas, sediment disposal site, etc.  
 
Each project cities have also developed detailed environmental monitoring plans.  These 
plans basically have two tiers.  The first tier involves daily and regular monitoring by 
contractor and environmental supervision staff through visual observations and simple 
apparatus such as hand hold noise meters.  This would ensure timely identification of 
environmental issues during construction so that appropriate mitigation and corrective 
actions can be taken promptly.  The second tier comprises periodical compliance 
monitoring by professional environmental monitoring stations.  This monitoring will 
determine compliance status of construction and operation activities.  In particular, the 
sediment dredging and sludge treatment and disposal components have a follow up 
monitoring program during the construction or operation phases to further confirm the 
findings that the materials are not hazardous.    
 
Considering the lack of environmental knowledge and monitoring methods of 
contractors and construction supervision companies in general, a mandatory training of 
all contractors and construction supervision companies have been developed.  The 
training will be held prior to the commencement of construction and will be attended by 
at least one senior management staff and one environmental staff from each of the 
contractors and supervision companies. The training programs will include project EA 
results, introduction of EMPs, technical background about mitigation measures, detailed 
methodologies for the daily monitoring, mitigation and corrective action designs, and 
reporting requirements.  The cities will also provide training to environmental staff of 
PMO and individual project owners as part of capacity building.  The training programs 
will include environmental regulations, policies and standards, environmental 
management, and general pollution control and environmental management technologies.  
 
Resettlement (Foshan only):  
Page  7
Compensation for assets: Compensation for land and structures is based on relevant 
national and provincial regulations, and has been found by Bank staff to be consistent 
with the Bank's replacement cost criterion.  Compensation for collective-owned land is 
set at RMB 65,000 per mu. Structural compensation varies, depending on structural type 
and market prices. Compensation for fixed attachments and for relocation-related costs 
are also established in the RP.  Compensation for temporary land use has been integrated 
into the budget for civil works.  
 
Livelihood development: Loss of collective-owned land will not have a severe impact 
on local residents, who derive less than 10 percent of their incomes from agriculture. 
Compensation for the collective-owned land will be paid to the village committees for 
public use. The ?resettlement subsidy part of the land compensation will be paid to the 
households actually affected by loss of land. Those losing access to land also can receive 
job training from the township government. Jobs with a monthly salary of RMB1,000 or 
more are readily available in an area of labor shortages and annual GDP growth of about 
19 percent. Among the 41 affected enterprises, only seven need to be relocated. In 
addition to compensation for assets and relocation costs, the RP includes a transitional 
subsidy covering any lost wages or profits during relocation. These enterprises are 
expected to relocate in nearby industrial parks or other commercial urban areas.  All 
workers are expected to maintain their present employment with enterprises or shops.  If 
any workers were to lose employment because of the relocation, they would be informed 
three months in advance, or would be paid an extra month's salary as a remedial measure. 
The remaining 34 enterprises are only partly affected and will continue operations at their 
present site. The 18 small shops are operating in rented space, which is readily available 
in the area.  They will receive compensation for relocation costs.  
 
Household relocation:  The 10 affected households will relocate only after fully 
compensated, based on contracts reached with resettlement offices. Compensation rates 
are sufficient to allow affected households to obtain replacement housing of equal or 
better quality in a booming local real estate market..  
 
RP implementation arrangements: The RP contains a detailed resettlement budget and 
funding plan developed on the basis of a complete asset inventory and agreed 
compensation rates. The total resettlement budget is estimated at RMB 251 million, 
which is integrated into the project total cost. To implement the RP, the Foshan PMO has 
set up a resettlement office to manage land-related issues. As Foshan lacks relevant 
experience, the Bank mission and Hohai University have provided training sessions on 
how to prepare and implement the RP, which itself provides for specific training 
programs and future budget requirements for training staff at the city level. Moreover, the 
provincial PMO has substantial experience in resettlement for Bank-financed projects, 
and has agreed to assist Foshan as necessary on resettlement implementation.  
 
RP monitoring arrangements: The Foshan PMO has designed internal and external 
monitoring mechanisms for RP implementation. Internal monitoring will be conducted 
through the Foshan PMO itself, and will focus primarily on physical progress.An external 
monitor will be engaged to report on broader aspects of RP implementation every six 
Page  8
months. The RP describes monitoring purposes, responsibilities, indicators, 
methodologies, procedures and reporting requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environment:  
 
Two rounds of public consultation have been conducted in both project cities. The 
consultation was primarily through questionnaire surveys supplemented by public 
meetings of key affected people and other stakeholders. In total, 632 people in Foshan 
and 149 people in Jiangmen, mostly project directly affected, have been consulted for 
their opinions and concerns about the project.  In addition, special meetings or interviews 
were held with concerns expressed by the public and other stakeholders already 
incorporated in the project EA and preparation of the EMP.  
 
Project information including major anticipated adverse environmental impact and 
mitigation measures has been disclosed to the public through public notices in local 
newspapers and radio in each of the two project cities.  The draft final EA reports and 
EMPs have also been made available at the community centers (neighborhood committee 
offices of the project areas) and on websites.  
 
Resettlement:  
 
Local governments, community and village leaders, the affected households, and 
affected enterprises and shops were consulted in census and asset inventorying processes, 
and on finalization of the project location and schemes, compensation rates, relocation 
arrangements and livelihood restoration measures.  The RP contains procedures for 
grievance redress. The draft RP has been disclosed to the public, as announced in a local 
newspaper. The final draft will be disclosed in May 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  9
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thomas L. Zearley 
05/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Andres Liebenthal 
05/15/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson 
05/16/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
06/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
06/09/2006 
Comments:   
