Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2473 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/27/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P087224 
Project Name: Han River Urban Environment Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Hiroaki Suzuki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (50%);Solid waste management (48%);Sub-national government 
administration (2%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
57.60
57.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to reduce the pollution caused by wastewater and solid 
waste in selected secondary cities, primarily located in the Han River Basin areas in Hubei 
Province. This will be achieved by undertaking high priority investments in wastewater 
collection and treatment system and solid waste management system as well as institutional 
development and capacity development in the areas of project implementation management, 
utility management and water pollution control.  
 
Key performance indicators would include quantified targets for improved services such as the 
collection and treatment of domestic wastewater, collection and safe disposal of domestic and 
commercial solid waste, the financial sustainability of these utilities, reduction of industrial 
pollution discharge and eventually the water quality of the Han River in the project area.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The Province identified a total of 13 sub-projects in 9 cities with a total estimated cost of RMB 
934.5 million ($ 116,8 million) of which the Bank financing would amount to approximately 
$61.9 million.  The project activities are grouped into the following three components:  
 
Component 1: investment in wastewater collection and treatment facilities; this will comprise 
nine wastewater treatment plants ranging in maximum capacity from 30,000m3/d to 50,000m3/d, 
and two sewer network expansions. Various treatment processes have been proposed and 
reviewed.  
 
Component 2: investment in solid waste management facilities; this will comprise 7 sanitary 
landfills ranging in size from 160t/d to 500t/d.  
 
Component 3: institutional development and capacity building in project implementation, water 
quality monitoring industrial pollution control, and utilities management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
A
total of 13 sub-projects in 9 cities in Hubei Province, China   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Province Project Management Office is new, has limited capacity, and no experience in 
preparing a World Bank project. A Design Review Advisory (DRA) consultant is put in place to 
help the PMO during the period of the preparation and a consultant will be selected to assist the 
PMO during the project implementation. Nevertheless, the effectiveness of the PPMO has to be 
monitored. The project team held discussions on this matter with the General Vice Governor, the 
chairman of the leading group, the Environmental Protection Bureau, the Finance Bureau, the 
Construction Bureau at provincial level as well as  the Ministry of Finance and the National 
Development and Reform Commission at national level. The Provincial Government agreed to 
strengthen PMO?s capacity by recruiting more experienced staff and increasing operational 
budget..  
 
Two Wuhan based EA Class A certificate holding institutes - Hubei Academy of 
Environmental Sciences (HAES) and Hubei Junbang Environmental Technology Company 
(HJETC) have been selected to prepare the component EA reports and the consolidated EA 
report for the proposed project. Since these two institutes have been involved in EA preparation 
for the World Bank or Asian Development Bank funded projects, they have reasonable 
understanding of Bank's environmental safeguard policies and requirements.  
 
The National Research Center for Resettlement at Hohai University has been engaged in RAP 
and SA report preparation. This institute has also ample experience in preparing RAPs of the 
projects funded by the Bank. However, the project team noticed that the quality control of draft 
by its management was not adequate. At the recent mission in September, it was agreed that 
Professor Shi from Hehai University will lead the social inventory aspect survey in the fields, 
screening all issues related to the negative impacts caused by the project, conduct interviews to 
the project stakeholders, identify potential social risks, analyze questionnaires, and prioritize the 
risks and requests from the project stakeholders.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASSD) 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Because the proposed project will finance investment mainly in wastewater collection and 
treatment and municipal solid waste collection and solid waste landfills in a number of 
municipalities located in the Han River Basin, categorization of the EA for this project is 
considered by the Bank as Class A EA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The specific sites of some subprojects have not been identified.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will involve land acquisition and resettlement of residents and farmers in the 
areas where the sewage networks, waste water treatment plants, solid waste landfills, and 
collection stations are to be constructed.  
 
Following a survey of all affected persons, a resettlement team of national consultants has 
conducted the field survey in each affected area and the Bank received 9 Resettlement Action 
Plans for its review. The Bank commented on the RAPs for further modifications and 
recommended the Province ensure broad consultations with stakeholders and their full 
participation, in accordance with the Bank's social safeguards policies and practices.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/28/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
i) Revision of draft EAs, SAs, and RAPs of 8 pilot projects in consideration of the comments 
made by BRLi/Girus, (DRA), and the Bank team by November 15, 2006;  
 
ii) Preparation of the draft EAs, SAs, and RAPs for remaining 5 sub-projects by the end of 
November, 2006; and  
 
iii)Preparation of the draft consolidated EA and RAP by the end of December, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hiroaki Suzuki 
08/29/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
08/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
08/29/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
