Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2170 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/16/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P099992 
Project Name: China-Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader: Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
200.00
200.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objective of the proposed Liaoning Medium Cities Urban Infrastructure 
Project (LMC) is to contribute to the economic revitalization of medium-sized cities in Liaoning 
through the provision of infrastructure and improved urban management.  
 
The objectives of the urban transport part of the project are to relieve existing transportation 
bottlenecks, improve the quality of the overall urban transport network and to build capacity for 
urban transport planning and implementation in a fiscally, socially and environmentally 
sustainable manner.  The objectives of the urban environment part of the project are to improve 
the service levels in water supply, wastewater, and solid waste in existing urban areas through 
the provision of infrastructure and enhancement of utility performance. The project will also aim 
to improve to overall urban management, with a special emphasis on municipal financial 
management and utility regulation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Part 1: Urban Environment: At present the estimated costs for the urban environment component 
are approximately US$350 million, with around US$190 in IBRD financing.  Sector issues 
related to urban environment part are presented in Annex 1. Components include:  
Page  2
A. Water Pollution Control Infrastructure (US$168 million): Construction of wastewater 
collection systems, treatment plants, and water reuse facilities in the following cities: Fushun, 
Tieling, Yingkou, and Panjin.  
 
B. Water Supply Infrastructure (US$98 million): Rehabilitation of water distribution systems 
and upgrading of water treatment plants in the following cities: Fushun, Liaoyang, Anshan, 
Haicheng, Xincheng, and Tieling.  
 
C. Solid Waste Management Infrastructure (US$65 million): Development of solid waste 
collection, transfer, and landfill facilities in the following cities: Fushun, Liaoyang, Xincheng, 
Yingkou, Huludao, and Panjin. The component also includes closures of existing landfills that 
pose environmental risks.  
 
D. Urban Environment Capacity-Building (US$12.5 million): Technical assistance will be 
provided for the following activities: a) design review and advisory Services; b) Fushun water 
supply master plan; iii) pilot pollution control projects and d) small city environmental planning 
and feasibility study preparation.  
 
The World Bank is working with Liaoning Province to prepare a US$5.0 million GEF grant to 
support the urban environment component of LMC under the GEF-World Bank Partnership 
Investment Fund for Pollution Reduction in the Large Marine Ecosystems of East Asia.  
 
Part 2: Urban Transport: At present the estimated costs for the urban transport component are 
approximately US$335 million, with about US$145 million in IBRD financing.  Sector issues 
related to urban transport part are presented in Annex 2. Project cities include Fushun, Liaoyang, 
Panjin, and Jinzhou with the following components:  
 
A. Road infrastructure investment (US$270 million): targets arterial road improvements that 
relieve existing bottlenecks and in a few selected cases support strategic urban expansions.  
 
B. Secondary road improvement and maintenance (US$40 million):  targets improvements in 
the secondary road networks of the project cities to (i) relieve the pressure of local traffic off the 
major road network, and to (ii) enhance "last mile" access for pedestrians and bicyclists.  
 
C. Traffic management and safety ($17 million) focuses on supporting the implementation of 
the road safety law with enhanced traffic management monitoring and control systems and 
investments in traffic management equipment (traffic signals etc.) and intersection improvements 
(junction channelization etc.) to improvement traffic flow and safety.  
 
D. Public transport (US$5 million) that includes provision of bus priority facilities and 
improvements in public transport planning and operations; and  
 
E. Transportation Capacity Building (US$5 million) transport planning practices, safety 
monitoring and policy, traffic management practices, road maintenance planning and 
Page  3
implementation practices, and public transport planning and reform to promote provision of bus 
services by the non-government sector.  
 
Part 3: Municipal and Utility Institutional Development:  
 
A. Municipal Financial Management Capacity Building (US$5 million) to support 
improvements in analysis of expenditures and revenue structures, capital planning, financial 
forecasting, financing options, etc. The activities will target the LMC cities in partnership with 
provincial government.  
 
B. Utility Capacity Building and Regulation (US$5 million) to improve the management 
capacities of water, wastewater, and solid waste utilities, and develop the provincial level price 
and service regulatory oversight system and capabilities. The activities will target the LMC cities 
in partnership with provincial government.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Liaoning was one of the first provinces in China to industrialize, first in the early 20th century, 
and then even more in the 1950s and 1960s. The city of Anshan, for example, is home to one of 
the largest iron and steel complexes in China. In recent years this early focus on heavy industry 
has become a liability, as many of the large state-run enterprises have experienced economic 
difficulties. Recognizing the special difficulties faced by Liaoning and other provinces in 
Northeast China because of their heritage of heavy industry, the Chinese central government 
recently launched a "Revitalize the Northeast Campaign".  
 
Main agricultural products of Liaoning include maize, Chinese sorghum, cotton, and soybeans. 
The region around Dalian produces 3/4 of China's exported apples and peaches. Liaoning has the 
most iron, magnesite, diamond and boron deposits among all provinces in China. Liaoning is 
also an important source of petroleum and natural gas. Salt is produced along the coast. Liaoning 
is one of China's most important industrial bases, covering a wide range of industries, such as 
machinery, electronics, metal refining, petroleum, chemical industries, construction materials, 
coal, and so on. In recent years, the city of Dalian has, in particular, been developed as a major 
port and the economic gateway to all of Northeast China. In 2003, Liaoning's GDP was about 
72.5 billion USD --ranking 8th in the PRC. The per capita income is 14,000 RMB, or US$1,700.  
 
The main population centers of Liaoing are located in Liao River Basin or are located along the 
coast of the Bohai Sea. The Bohai Sea is the largest semi-enclosed sea in the People's Republic 
of China and is surrounded by the provinces of Liaoning, Hebei, Shandong, and Tianjin 
Municipality, and is connected to the Yellow Sea Large Marine Ecosystem (LME). The Bohai 
Sea has a unique shallow marine eco-system and rich coastal wetlands which provide 
reproduction and nursery grounds for fish, shrimp, crab, and migratory birds. The Bohai Sea is 
also the most important center of shellfish aquaculture in China.  It is, however, under severe 
stress due to land-based pollutants, over-fishing, and wetland degradation. Liaoning Province, 
with a population of 42 million people and an economy based primarily on heavy industry, is a 
major contributor to pollution and wetland loss in the Bohai Sea area.  The Province, with the 
assistance of the European Union, completed the "Liao River Basin Plan" in 2002. The Plan 
Page  4
establishes the waterpollution control priorities for the basin and pollution reduction into the 
Bohai Sea and forms the analytical framework for pollution control activities under the project.  
 
The project cities under LMC and their populations are listed below. Information on the two 
largest cities, Shenyang and Dalian are also presented for reference. Over the last decade, the 
Bank has been actively supporting infrastructure development in Liaoning, with four urban 
infrastructure projects.  About forty percent of the Bank financing has gone to support water 
supply and transport in Shenyang and wastewater in Dalian, and the balance has been to support 
urban transport, water supply, and wastewater subprojects in medium-sized cities. World Bank 
support in the urban transport field has focused on alleviating transportation bottlenecks through 
road construction, improving road maintenance, enhancing traffic management, and increasing 
the efficiency and effectiveness of public transport. Bank interventions in the urban environment 
sector originally concentrated on water supply provision, and then later on wastewater 
management. Water pollution control efforts have been set in the context of improving 
environmental conditions in the Liao River Basin and reducing pollution into the Bohai Sea.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Several Bank projects have been implemented in Liaoning Province and have been managed by 
the World Bank Project Office (LUCRPO) located in Provincial Construction Department. The 
experiences and knowledge accumulated will continue to support preparation of this project. 
However, at municipality level, there are a few municipalities who are relatively new to the Bank 
project, such as Tieling, Huludao, Liaoyang, and Xingcheng. With regard to EA preparation, 
Liaoning Academy of Environmental Sciences (LAES) has been contracted to prepare the EA 
and EMP for both urban environment and urban transport components. LAES is a Class A EA 
certificate holding institute based in Shenyang. This institute has been involved in EA 
preparation for several Bank funded projects, and are familiar with Bank's safeguards policies. In 
addition to domestic consultants, an international consulting firm, Sogreah, funded by the French 
Government, are engaged to assist Liaoning to prepare the project, including EA documents. As 
needed, Liaoning has also stated its intention to hire an international consultant experienced with 
Bank EA requirements to help prepare the EA documents for the urban transport component.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
General: The LMC is a Category A project involving wastewater, water supply, solid waste, 
and urban transport subprojects. Standard environmental assessment and management 
methodologies will be followed for each subproject. A separate EIA will be prepared for each 
subproject, and consolidated reports will be prepared for the urban environment part and urban 
transport part.  
 
Wastewater Projects: Water pollution control subprojects will be guided by the Liao River 
Basin Plan which was prepared in 2002 by the Liaoning Environment Bureau with assistance 
from the European Union and in coordination with the World Bank. The Basin Plan prioritized 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
water pollution control investments and formed the basis of the 10th and 11th Five Year Plans, 
as well as the on-going World Bank-financed Liao River Basin Project (LRBP) and the proposed 
LMC project. The three highest priority municipal wastewater programs identified in the Basin 
Plan are Shenyang, Yingkou, and Panjin. LRBP financed Phase 1 of the Yingkou and Panjin 
programs, and the LMC will finance Phase 2 programs in both cities. The project will also 
follow-up with improvements to wastewater collection systems in Liaoyang and Fushun, which 
received financing for the wastewater treatment plant and collection mains under the 1st 
Liaoning Urban Environment Project (1995-2001).  
 
Water Supply: Liaoning is a water short province, and the Liao River Basin Plan 
highlighted the need to reduce water loses. LMC will focus on water conservation through 
improved metering and distribution system rehabilitation in Anshan, Haicheng, Fushun, 
Xincheng, Tieling and Liaoyang. Water reuse schemes are include in Tieling, Yingkou, and 
Panjin.  
 
Solid Waste: Solid waste management in the medium-sized cities in Liaoning is still as 
rudimentary level, with incomplete collection and unsanitary disposal of waster. Under LMC, 
most cities will adopt a "system-wide approach" in planning for municipal waste which involves 
improvements to waste collection, transportation, disposal, and remediation/closure of existing 
unsanitary dumps. The technically most complex activity will be the closure of existing dumps.  
 
Urban transport:  The urban transport component includes proposals for new roads and 
upgrading existing roads. A full alternatives analysis will be an essential element of all major 
investment programs.  Many elements of the project including traffic management and secondary 
road enhancement (both of which will improve conditions for bicyclists) are expected to have a 
marginally positive impact on urban air quality.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
No natural habitats impacted by the project have been identified yet, and since the project is 
focused on urban environment the potential appears to be minimal. This issue will be 
investigated further during the environmental assessment process. Landfill sites are the only 
facilities located outside of the urban area and will be screened for their impact on natural 
habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
It is not expected project activities will affect any above-ground artifacts with archeological, 
paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values as defined under OPN 11.03, but 
this will be confirmed during the environmental assessment. However, most of the construction 
activity will involve excavation work and thus all contracts will include standard clauses which 
follow Chinese law and regulations regarding chance finds during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Under the on-going Liao River Basin Project (LRBP), some minority ethnic households as 
defined by the government, including Manchurian, Koreans, and Mongolians were impacted by 
resettlement activities. A survey conducted under LRBP indicated that all affected persons were 
urban residents, scattered throughout the project area, and the project would not have specific 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
impact on ethnic minority communities. A similar survey will be conducted under LMC to 
determine the number ethnic minority households impacted by LMC and the nature of the 
impact.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There will be resettlement associated with the transportation subprojects, and moderate 
amounts of temporary and permanent land acquisition connected to the urban environment 
subprojects. A RAP which complies with Bank policies will be prepared for each subproject, and 
a
summary RAP prepared for all of LMC. Since some works may not be fully identified at the 
time of appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework will also be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Fushun receives its water supply directly from Dahuofang Reservoir which is located directly 
upstream of Fushun City. Dahuofang reservoir has a storage capacity of 2.2 billion m3, and 
serves as multi-purpose reservoir for municipal and industrial water supply, irrigation, and flood 
control for the cities of Fushun and Shenyang. The safety status of the Dahuofang dam will be 
investigated during project preparation, and the dam safety management program discussed with 
the Liaoning Water Resources Bureau.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Timetable for EA Preparation: There are approximately 22 infrastructure subprojects, and a 
separate EIA will be prepared for each subproject. Some project EIAs are more advanced 
than others, and the drafting of the he consolidated EIA reports for urban environment and 
transport will depend on subproject EIA preparation. The estimated schedule is as follows:  
 
First Draft of Subproject EIAs, Consolidated Reports, and Consultations:  
 
--December 2005  
 
Draft Final Subproject EIAs, Consolidated Reports, and Consultations:  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
--March 2006  
 
Final Subproject EIAs and Consolidated Reports:  
 
--June 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
09/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Lars C. Lund 
09/29/2005 
Comments:  Acting for Glenn Morgan 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hiroaki Suzuki 
10/11/2005 
Comments:  Acting for Keshav Varma 
