Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2352 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P096556 
Project Name: Eco-Farming Project 
Task Team Leader: Sari K. Soderstrom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 27, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Renewable energy 
(30%);Crops (15%);Animal production (15%);Agricultural extension and research (10%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Land administration and management (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
120.00
120.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project aims to achieve household and farm level environmental improvements 
through the establishment and improvement of biogas systems and biogas related on-farm 
investments.  
 
Benefits and positive externalities would accrue at various levels. More specifically: (i) public 
benefits would occur at the local level in the form of a better village environment with improved 
waste management and consequent impact in improved health; (ii) household sanitary conditions 
are expected to improve because of integrated toilet facilities and waste digestion and improved 
kitchen conditions; (iii) beneficiary incomes are anticipated to increase due to reduced energy 
expenditures and increased agricultural revenues from enhanced agricultural production. Women 
in project households will also save time by not having to collect fuel wood and by shorter 
cooking time.  
 
Page  2
Local and regional environmental benefits would accrue through reduction in local biomass 
(firewood and straw stalks) use, decreasing the pressure on forests and shrubs, therefore reducing 
forest degradation and desertification. This in turn would reduce soil erosion and occurrence of 
landslips, thus enhancing water resources management. It is also likely that local water quality 
would improve through increased use of organic fertilizer (created in the process of biogas 
production) and a consequent reduction in the use of in-organic fertilizers.  
 
Global positive externalities would accrue in the form of increased carbon recycling from 
reduction in firewood and stalk combustion, reduced coal use, and combustion of methane that 
would otherwise be emitted into the air.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would have four main components:  
 
Component 1: National Program Support. Support would be provided to the Ministry of 
Agriculture to: (i) develop a national monitoring and evaluation system for the Government?s 
various biogas programs; and (ii) develop a national replication and dissemination strategy for 
best practices that would define various government levels' roles in biogas planning, facilitation, 
training and information dissemination.  
 
Component 2: Integrated Eco-Farming Systems. The component would assist farmers, selected 
larger farms, and farmers groups to integrate biogas into their production activities to achieve 
integrated farming systems that improve the quality and efficiency of farm production.  The 
component will comprise approximately 80% of the investment, and will have two 
subcomponents:  
 
1. Household Biogas Development, comprising: (i) biogas infrastructure ? digesters and related 
equipment; (ii) biogas-related household infrastructure, such as animal sheds, toilets, kitchen 
improvements, stoves, water heaters, village roads, water supply; (iii) farm production 
improvements related to use of biogas residues, farm infrastructure, production management 
(e.g. new varieties, orchard rehabilitation) that would lead to improved utilisation of biogas 
residues to improve quality and efficiency of farm production.  The farm production 
improvement subcomponent would be no more than 25% of the total project investment.  The 
project will not support additional livestock purchases.  
 
2. Biogas for Larger Farms, comprising support for biogas technology, equipment and training 
for staff in operation and maintenance of larger scale biogas plants.  
 
Component 3: Local Technical Extension and Service System. Strengthening and expanding the 
existing rural energy and extension agricultural service through (i) upgrading of technical 
extension and training facilities; (ii) equipment and materials for extension and biogas service 
systems; (iii) training for technicians (county, township) and farmers; (iv) applied research, 
including improved crop management using biogas residues; and (v) support to farmer biogas 
co-operatives.  
 
Page  3
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation. This component will support 
management, and monitoring and evaluation activities for the project.Investments will include: 
(i) equipment for PMOs; (ii) training; (iii) monitoring and evaluation; (iv) technical assistance; 
and (v) management costs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project would be implemented in 5 provinces (Anhui, Hunan, Hubei (Enshi 
Prefecture), Chongqing Municipality, and Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region) and would be 
centrally coordinated by the Ministry of Agriculture. It would directly benefit about 500,000 
farmer households and a limited number of larger demonstration farms. The household coverage 
of biogas systems in each project villages would be about 80%.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be coordinated by Ministry of Agriculture who has long experience in preparing 
and implementing Bank financed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASSD) 
Mr Farzad Dadgari (EASRD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is a part of a larger government program. Environmental impacts are 
anticipated to be largely positive.  The EIA will take a sectoral approach evaluating impacts at 
household and village levels.  Instead of a regular EMMP a "Good Practice Management 
Guidelines" for household and village level biogas development and operation will be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Several of the project provinces have ethnic minorities in the project areas.  Participation in 
the project is voluntary and project impacts take place at the household level, thus an IPP would 
not be needed.  Instead, a communication strategy would be developed to facilitate appropriate 
and fair inclusion of ethnic minorities in project activities.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Construction of farm access roads could require limited land acquisition.  A (policy) land 
acquisition framework would be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/13/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/13/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Impact Assessment and Social Assessment TOR have been reviewed by the 
Bank.  A draft EIA is expected to be ready by September 10, 2006.  A draft SA is expected to 
be ready by September 15, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sari K. Soderstrom 
09/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
09/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
09/14/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
