Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  36580 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/26/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P093963 
Project Name: Guiyang Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: John Carter Scales 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (10%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
100.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to promote balanced and sustainable growth through the 
implementation of transportation infrastructure improvements that increase the access and 
mobility of Guiyang Municipality???s transport users.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Municipality of Guiyang is the borrower for this project.  The municipality covers four 
counties and six districts.  The main counterpart and manager for the project is Department of 
Communications.  The project is comprised of the four components summarized below.  Details 
are available in the PCN.  
 
1. 
Youxiao Road - Youzhajie to Xiaobi -- proposed 6-7 km Youxiao road to link Youzhajie 
in the southeast corner of downtown Guiyang to a proposed development area adjacent to the 
Page  2
airport, Longdongbao.  The feasibility study will analyze several alternative alignments, all of 
which will avoid a mountain-top forest park located between the origin and the destination.  
 
2. 
Rural Transport  
 
?
Rural Roads -- proposed 1,036 km of high priority rural roads to be upgraded.  
Approximately 40 road segments, totaling about 500 km, will be selected for upgrading from 
unclassified to either Class III or Class IV.  
 
?
Rural Passenger Depots and Freight Transfer Facilities -- construct 65 rural passenger 
and freight facilities in or adjacent to rural villages (60 primarily passenger depots, 5 primarily 
freight transfer facilities).  
 
?
Jiuchangzhen Maintenance Facility -- construct a maintenance facility to facilitate rural 
road maintenance, primarily by reducing response time, by relocating asphalt storage facilities 
closer to the demand.  This includes enhancing the maintenance and operational capacity of the 
Guiyang Communications Bureau.  (Subsequent to the meeting the Borrower, with the support of 
the Bank, decided to drop this subcomponent.)  
 
3. 
Capacity Building -- build capacity in two specific and integrated areas:  
 
?
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of Guiyang Municipality?s urban and 
transport planning, which is expected to be available by mid-2007; and  
 
?
Comprehensive Travel Demand Model for Guiyang Municipality.  
 
Since the Concept Meeting in February 2006, the original Component 3, which involved the 
building of transport terminals, was dropped.  The funding will now be used for upgrading 
additional rural roads segments under Component 2.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Guiyang Municipality, Capital of Guizhou Province.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency, Guiyang Municipal Communications Bureau, as a first-time 
borrower, is new to the Bank???s safeguards policies. The EA consultant, Guizhou Provincial 
Environmental Science Institute, is also new to the Bank.  Safeguards training to Guiyang PMO 
has been provided. Additional training to the PMO/EA consultant will be provided during the 
preparation stage, and the Task Team will closely work with the PMO/EA consultant to provide 
technical guidance and to strengthen their capacity in document preparation as well as 
implementation management. The PMO has assigned a staff member to be in charge of social 
safeguards. Institutes with experience in social assessment, ethnic minorities and resettlement 
were recommended.  Field work will be started as soon as the institutes are selected and the 
project concept is confirmed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Youlan Zou (EASSD) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The task team informed the meeting that EA package will contain two separate EIAs for the 
two components (Youxiao Road and Rural Transport), one overall EMP for the project, and one 
summary EA.  The project related EIAs, EMP, and Summary EA are expected to be complete by 
the scheduled appraisal in November 2006.  
 
The task team confirmed that they will identify all the rural roads components prior to 
appraisal.  The project also expects to have all the feasibility studies completed and the EAs 
prepared for these alignments by appraisal.  The possible use of the framework approach was not 
approved by the Municipality.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The screening mechanism incorporated into the EA will be used to ensure that impacts on 
protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical natural habitats as 
defined under the policy are identified and mitigated.  The need for further action under this 
policy remains to be determined, specifically in relation to the mountain-top forest park possibly 
affected by the Youxiao Road, although it is unlikely that the park will meet the policy definition 
of natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The screening mechanism incorporated into the EA/subproject selection process will identify 
culturally significant sites, if any. The need for further action under this policy remains to be 
determined.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The task team has reviewed the first draft of the Social Assessment, which was found to be 
unsatisfactory.  The task team requested that a second round of consultations be carried out 
during May-June for the SA with ethnic minorities (and people affected by land acquisition).  
 
The SA survey determined that 42 percent of the rural population are ethnic minority 
groups, mainly Buyi and Miao, in the project area of Guiyang.  Some of the rural roads will 
serve the areas where these minorities live.  One of the criteria for selection of rural roads for 
improvement is poverty, which is more pronounced among ethnic minorities.  The project has 
determined that an IPDP will be prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The university selected to prepare the RAP is quite experienced and has done substantial 
work for the Bank in the past.  The task team requested an improvement of the capacity of the 
local consultants in preparation of the RAP and provision of training to the Guiyang resettlement 
staff.  The project will prepare one RAP to cover both the Youxiao Road and the Rural Transport 
components, including all rural roads.  It is expected to be complete by pre-appraisal.  
 
Passenger Depots and Freight Transfer Stations.  The task team clarified that these are very 
small units, and the task team has not yet determined whether there will be land acquisition for 
these stations.  Similarly on the issue of the asphalt storage facility, which is going to be in a new 
site, the team is yet to determine its location and the amount of land needed for this purpose.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Linkage.  The task team confirmed that there are no linkage issues related with this project.  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/24/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The first draft EAs (one EA for each of the three components) will be available by mid-Augst 
2006, and the final EA package (three EAs, one overall EMP and one EA Summary) will be 
completed by October 2006.  
 
The draft Social Assessment Report, draft IPP, and the draft Resettlement Action Plan will 
be completed by June 30, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Carter Scales 
06/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
06/20/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
06/15/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
