Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/21/2007 
Report No.:  AC2689
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P093963 
Project Name:  Guiyang Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  John Carter Scales 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (10%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
192.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
192.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's development objective is to assist the Borrower to increase the access and 
mobility of Guiyang Municipality's transport users through priority infrastructure 
investments and while establishing more sustainable mechanisms for rural road 
maintenance; all while enhancing capacity for keeping municipal debt under control.   
 
3. Project Description 
In order to achieve the stated development objective the project includes three 
components: two transport infrastructure components and a third capacity building 
component: 1) Youxiao Road; 2) Rural Transport; and 3) Institutional Development.  
 
Component 1. Youxiao Road (estimated cost US$127.05 million - 43% of the total 
project cost - of which US$48.61 million would be financed by the Bank)  
 
Page  2
The physical output of the Youxiao Road component will be the construction of a 7 km 
four to six-lane divided urban arterial road that connects the southeast corner of the 
Guiyang urban core, Youzhajie, to Xiaobi in Longdongbao.  This proposed road serves a 
primary function as a connector from the urban core to the Longdongbao area.  Separated 
by mountains, Longdongbao is in need of a direct connector in order to serve 
commercial, commuting, and schooling traffic to and from the urban core  
 
Component 2. Rural Transport (estimated cost US$128.52 million - 4% of the total 
project cost - of which US$36.82 million would be financed by the Bank)  
 
The physical output of the rural transport component consists of the construction or 
rehabilitation of rural roads and rural bus stations.  There are 44 road segments totaling 
approximately 661 kms to be constructed or rehabilitated as Class III or Class IV rural 
roads together with approximately 270 kms of access roads (low volume roads 
constructed or rehabilitated as less than Class IV roads).There are also 46 township level 
rural bus stations, one of which will also include a freight depot, to be constructed. The 
proposed bus stations are fairly simple; category IV and V, which according to national 
standards, are the lowest categories.  
 
Component 3. Institutional Development (estimated cost US$1.20 million - 0.4% of the 
total project cost - of which US$1.20 million would be financed by the Bank)  
 
The project will develop the institutions of Guiyang municipality through studies, 
improvement of systems and training.  These specific technical assistance activities were 
selected during the preparation process in order to address specific areas requiring 
capacity building and are well suited to Bank assistance.  
 
(a) 
Rural road maintenance system (approximately US$350k)  
 
(b) 
Strategic Transport Studies (approximately US$250k)  
 
(c) 
Training (approximately US$500k)  
 
(d) 
Debt Management System (approximately US$100k)   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed You-Xiao road links two parts of urban areas of Guiyang city, with land 
acquisition of mostly urban construction land, farmland and wasteland. The road will 
traverse the City Forest Park via a 1.8 km tunnel. Based on ecological survey and 
consultation with Guizhou Forestry Institute (the park management authority), it is 
concluded that the natural forest in the park has been destroyed several times historically, 
and current vegetation are secondary and tertiary forest. The main purpose of the park is 
for relaxation and recreation of the public, and there is no endangered or protected plant 
or animal in the park area. The surface vegetation depends up moisture contained in 
surface soil and weathered clastic rock of depth less than 10m, without hydrological 
connection with the mountain body where the tunnel will be constructed about 80m under 
the mountain. The tunnel is designed with both ends at the edge of the boundary of the 
forest park, therefore, the environmental impact of the road construction to the park will 
be of minimal.  
Page  3
Cultural relics surveys have been conducted by Guizhou cultural property authority as 
part of EIA preparation practice. It is concluded that there is only one city-level cultural 
relics, Tuyunguan stone carving, on top of the forest park mountain. With a depth of ca. 
80m under the mountain, the construction of You-Xiao road will have no impact on this 
cultural relics site.  
 
The Rural Transport component includes rehabilitation of 44 rural roads (all of them are 
local class III and IV roads linking villages to current road network) and 46 rural bus 
stations. These roads and stations scatter in the whole Guiyang municipality. Baseline 
information was collected for all these sub projects through extensive field survey and 
consultation. It is concluded that there is no protected area or cultural relics to be 
impacted by these sub projects.  
 
There are four provincial level tourism areas by the side of four rural roads. The main 
function of these four roads is to improve access and mobility of the local villages to 
market. Meanwhile, the roads will also induce increase of tourism which will promote 
economic development of local communities. It is foreseen that development of tourism 
as an indirect impact of road projects will put increasing pressure to the local ecological 
environment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment:  
 
A
major environmental issue for You-Xiao road is the Guiyang City Forest Park, where 
the proposed road will traverse under the park mountain via a 1.8 km tunnel. Based on 
Page  4
ecological survey and consultation with Guizhou Forestry Institute (the park management 
authority), it is concluded that the natural forest in the park has been destroyed several 
times historically, and current vegetation are secondary and tertiary forest. The main 
purpose of the park is for relaxation and recreation of the public, and there is no 
endangered or protected plant or animal in the park area. It is concluded that forest park 
does not fall into the concept of Natural Habitats defined in OP4.04. The surface 
vegetation depends up moisture contained in surface soil and weathered clastic rock of 
depth less than 10m, without hydrological connection with the mountain body where the 
tunnel will be constructed about 80m under the mountain. Meanwhile, the tunnel is 
designed with both ends outside the boundary of the forest park, therefore, environmental 
impact of the road construction to the forest park will be of minimal. Given the above 
assessment, it is concluded that OP4.04 Natural Habitats and OP4.36 Forestry are not 
triggered.  
 
Cultural relics surveys have been conducted by Guizhou cultural property authority as 
part of EIA preparation practice. It is concluded that there is only one city-level cultural 
relics, Tuyunguan stone carving, on top of the forest park mountain. With a depth of ca. 
80m under the mountain, the construction of You-Xiao road will have no impact on this 
cultural relics site. Therefore, it is concluded that OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources is 
not triggered.  
 
The other environmental concerns will be dust, noise, waste water, solid waste 
management, soil erosion, local community disturbance, safety issues during 
construction, and noise and safety during operation.  
 
The main environmental issues for Rural Transport component will be construction-
related impacts, i.e. dust, noise, soil erosion, waste management, land acquisition, 
community disturbance and safety. Baseline information was collected for all these sub 
projects through extensive field survey and consultation with local public and local 
government (including environmental and cultural relics authorities). It is concluded that 
there is no natural habitats or cultural relics within the impact scope of the project that 
trigger the OP4.04 and OP4.11. The indirect impact of increase of tourism was 
specifically addressed for the four scenic tourism areas close to four rural roads. Through 
field survey and consultation with relevant management authorities, it is concluded that 
all of them are under good management with generally competent management 
authorities and good infrastructure. The induced tourism increase will promote local 
economic development, however, its indirect environmental impacts is not well 
recognized by those management authorities.  
 
Social:  
 
Involuntary Resettlement: As this project will acquire land from collectives and will 
require housing demolition and household relocation, OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) 
is triggered. Based on current project design, a total of 289 hectares (4342 mu) of land 
will be acquired, including 214 hectares (3207 mu) of agricultural land. Structural 
demolition will total 63,842 m2, including 17,163 m2 of private residential houses 
Page  5
(affecting 210 households), 3,625 m2 of private shop space (66 owners/renters), 6,971 
m2 of space owned or occupied by 4 collective or private enterprises. In all, an estimated 
20,850 persons would be affected by land acquisition or structural demolition.  
 
The borrower has contracted with Wuhan University to assist in preparation of a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Wuhan University conducted a resettlement inventory 
survey in the field, with results confirmed in consultations with the displaced persons and 
collectives. All of the displaced farmers affected by land-taking are entitled to join in a 
social insurance scheme, with the municipality providing additional fund support. Poor or 
vulnerable households were identified and special measures have been included to 
improve their livelihood.  
 
Most of the resettlement-related impacts are not expected to be inordinately complex or 
challenging. Technical and institutional challenges exist, however. As a technical issue, 
the RAP calls for 92 hectares (1,374 mu) of land to be reclaimed by use of waste material 
from project civil works, equal to 30% of the acquired farming land. It may prove 
difficult to reclaim land effectively in mountainous terrain. Implementation will require 
careful coordination among technical agencies and the displaced communities, and the 
reclamation process will require careful monitoring. As an institutional issue, the 
borrower lacks experience with Bank resettlement practices. The Bank may need to 
provide intensive project supervision to ensure that full and timely compensation 
payments are made to displaced persons, and that other RAP requirements are met.  
 
Ethnic Minorities: Based on results of a social assessment conducted by Zhongshan 
University, the project would affect Miao and Buyi minority communities that meet the 
definition of "indigenous peoples", thus triggering OP4.20 (Indigenous Peoples).  
 
Zhongshan University conducted consultations with a sample of affected Miao, Buyi 
and Han Chinese communities. In general, the local populations voiced strong support for 
the project, identifying poor road access as one of the most significant constraints to 
improved livelihoods and living standards. Based on the social assessment findings, an 
Ethnic Minorities Development Plan (EMDP) has been drafted. As adverse impacts 
primarily are associated with land acquisition, with mitigation measures already provided 
in a separate RAP, the EMDP primarily focuses on ensuring that minority communities 
enjoy sufficient opportunities to benefit from the project, and that the project is designed 
in a culturally appropriate manner.  
 
The draft EMDP does not include specific planning measures that are expected to be 
controversial or challenging in implementation. Indeed, the primary issues at this point 
are to ensure that the revised and final EMDP includes sufficient specificity in its 
implementation measures, and that the borrower (which is not familiar with Bank policies 
and procedures) is prepared to meet its obligations in the final EMDP.  
 
Consultation and Disclosure: Public consultations were conducted during both the RAP 
and EMDP preparation. Local government agencies arranged consultations, coordinated 
survey-related activities, organized village and community meetings and disseminated 
Page  6
project information to local citizens The social assessment report, draft EMDP and draft 
RAP were placed in local municipal libraries on December 23, 2006, and their public 
availability was announced in advertisements placed in local newspapers.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the long-term, the You-xiao project will significantly improve the connection between 
urban core and new development area of Longdongbao, which will require sound urban 
development planning and environmental management. The rural transport component 
will greatly improve the access of local villages to the market and better 
education/medical services, and promote economic development of Guiyang 
municipality. Indirect impact of induced tourism increase is foreseen for four scenic 
tourism areas, for which a special training program will be provided to relevant 
management authorities to promote awareness and approaches for sustainable tourism 
development.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative analysis has been carefully conducted at preliminary screening stage and 
detailed comparison stage, through which 9 options in the first stage were narrowed down 
to 3 options. These three options then were thoroughly assessed against a series of 
engineering, environmental, social and financial criteria. The final alignment was chosen 
based on integral consideration of technical, environmental and social aspects, i.e. 
avoidance of environmentally sensitive areas, less social interference and resettlement, 
shorter length, less land occupation, and compatibility with local master planning.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
You-Xiao Road  
 
The environmental safeguards issues are thoroughly address in EIA reports, and a stand 
alone EMP has been developed, which specifies the appropriate environmental 
management and supervision setup, mitigation measures, environmental monitoring 
plans, training plans and budget allocation necessary to implement the mitigation 
measures and strengthen the borrower's capacity. A set of mitigation measures have been 
included in the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate or otherwise compensate the negative 
impacts from the project.  The main measures are summarized below.  
 
Design Phase  
 
Land acquisition and social impact. The final alignment was selected to minimize 
impacts on environmental and social sensitive sites. A Resettlement Action Plan has been 
developed in compliance with Bank?s policy to mitigate impact of land acquisition. 
Special consideration will be given to pedestrian demand and disabled people. 5 cross-
street passageways (increased from originally 3) were designed, of which two were 
designed with consideration of agricultural vehicles uses.  
Page  7
Ecological environment. One spoil disposal site was carefully selected to dispose of the 
spoils from tunnel construction. A set of requirement for retaining wall, drainage, 
operation and reclamation was developed. One water intake facility will be relocated to 
upstream to avoid potential water quality impact. Special design for bridge surface run-
off collection before discharged into river is adopted. A noise barrier of 1000m is 
designed for via duct section to minimize noise impact. Noise insulation windows will be 
installed for 60 household along the road. Road surface will adopt noise-reduction 
materials.  
 
Construction Phase  
 
Ecological environment. Contractors will be required to minimize temporary land 
acquisition during construction, especially farmland and wood land. Fertile top soil will 
be reserved for later reclamation purpose. Timely site clean-up and reclamation will be 
carried out. Special measures (prior drilling, curtain grouting etc.) will be adopted for 
tunnel construction to minimize possible groundwater impact, and spoil will be reused for 
embankment as much as possible. The excessive spoil material will be disposed of in the 
pre-defined disposal site which will be reclaimed at a later stage. A special Soil Erosion 
Control Plan has been developed (as required by Chinese regulations) to ensure proper 
mitigation measures be implemented during construction.  
 
a) Water Pollution.  Construction waste water will be treated with settling tank and/or 
oil separation before discharged. Septic tanks are designed for labor camps to treat 
sewage. Solid wastes from construction sites and camps will be collected and recycled or 
disposed of in an appropriate manner. Material storage sites will be arranged far away 
from surface water. Sludge from bridge construction will be diverted to settling pond for 
treatment and will not be discharged directly into water.  
 
b) Noise impact. The employment of lower-noise machinery and strict regulation on the 
schedule of construction works will be implemented. Night-time construction will be 
avoided as much as possible. In case of night-time construction required by engineering 
considerations, prior public notice shall be issued and approval from local EPB shall be 
obtained. Low noise blasting technology (static blasting method) will be adopted for 
tunnel construction to minimize noise impact on surrounding environment.  
 
c) Air Pollution. Water-spraying will be required for construction sites to suppress dust 
pollution. Material transportation vehicles will be properly covered. The road through the 
forest park will not be allowed for construction vehicles use.  
 
d) Social Impact. Proper traffic management will be implemented for urban sections to 
minimize disturbance to local traffic, including temporary access roads for local 
pedestrian, bicycle and bus, installation of safety facilities, e.g. night-time warning light. 
For sections where traffic has to be blocked, contractors will be required to speed up 
construction process to shorten the block time as much as possible. Contractors will 
install disclosure board providing detailed contact person/telephone number for public 
Page  8
complaints receipt. Education on environment, health and safety (including epidemics 
and HIV/AIDS) will be provided to workers.  
 
e) Cultural Relics.  If any cultural relics are found during construction, the work will be 
suspended immediately, and the local cultural authority will be informed of it.  The work 
will not resume until the cultural relics are examined by the authorized institution and 
necessary preservation measures are taken.  
 
Operation Phase  
 
Proper maintenance of road surface, safety signs, noise barriers as well as greening/re-
vegetation will be carried out road maintenance authority. Vehicle emission control will 
be enforced by city government. New construction of sensitive sites (e.g. schools and 
hospitals) shall be located over 40 m from the road to avoid noise impact.  
 
Rural Transport  
 
An EIA/EMP was prepared for all the 44 rural roads and 46 bus stations. The main 
environmental issues will be construction-related impacts, i.e. dust, noise, soil erosion, 
waste management, land acquisition, community disturbance and safety. A set of 
standard mitigation measures was developed in the EMP chapter, which will be used for 
all sub projects. Each sub project has a short annex as a mini-EIA addressing project 
specific information, e.g. sensitive sites, public consultation in local villages, and any 
specific concerns of mitigation measures. As land resources is previous in Guiyang given 
the mountainous topography, waste spoil will be utilized to the extent possible for land 
reclamation which will provide ca. 92 ha farmland to local farmers.  
 
The indirect impact of increase of tourism was specifically addressed for the four scenic 
tourism areas. Through field survey and consultation, it is concluded that all of them are 
under good management with generally competent management authorities and good 
infrastructure. The induced tourism increase is welcomed, however, its indirect 
environmental impacts is not well recognized by those management authorities. To 
address this issue, a special training program for these management authorities will be 
included in EMP to provide training on sustainable tourism development and 
environmental protection.  
 
Environmental training will also be provided to local road maintenance agencies and 
contractors to ensure better understand of EMP and adequate implementation. 
Environmental monitoring will be conducted for a few rural roads where sensitive sites 
(scenic tourism areas, rivers or reservoir are existence).  
 
Since the project is the first Bank project in Guiyang city, the borrower Guiyang 
Communication Bureau is not very familiar with Bank?s safeguards policies, though it is 
experienced with Chinese safeguards policies which are in substance similar to the 
Bank?s. The task team has provided several rounds of training to PMO during project 
preparation, and will closely supervise the project implementation. The EMP also 
Page  9
includes training plan for PMO management staff and local transport agencies, 
contractors and supervision engineers, to strengthen their capacity of implementation of 
safeguards policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultation was carried out according to the World Bank's guideline for You-
Xiao road and all subprojects of Rural Transport component during March - October 
2006, by means of public meeting, group discussion, individual interview and 
questionnaire survey, with total participant of 2100 people. The main concerns from 
public are summarized and responded in EIA reports and incorporated into EMP. The 
EIA and EMP were disclosed locally on December 21, 2006, and will be in Infoshop in 
April 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/08/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/21/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  10
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Carter Scales 
09/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Magdolna Lovei 
 
Comments:   
