                                                                                                  40508


                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDSDATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                     Report No.:

 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:June 26,2007

 I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Proiect Data
 Country: China                              I Project ID: PI05575
 Project Name: Luojing COREX Project
 Task Team Leader: Hiroshi Ono
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 12/07/07            EstimatedBoard Date: NIA
 Managing Unit: EASRE                          Lending Instrument: CarbonFinance
 Sector: Iron and steel industrv
                              4

 Theme: Climate Change
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
 GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
 PCF Amount (US$m.):          TBD
IOther financing amountsby source:                                                        I
        BORROWER



 B. Project Objectives

 The development objective of the project is to reduce C02emissions from a large iron and steel
 company compared with the baseline scenario by introducing energy efficient technology with
 the leverage of a carbon finance transaction. This carbon finance project will contribute to
 enhancing sustainable development opportunities by mitigating global climate change through
 the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions such as C02,as well as decreasing local air pollution
 associated with the current blast furnace (BF) operation. The key indicator for this objective is
 the annual delivery of greenhouse gas emissionreductions (ERs).

 C. Project Description
 The project will finance the purchase of about 800,000 tC02e annually of ERs through an
 Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) under the World Bank-managed Spanish
 Carbon Fund. The exact amount of ERs eligible for purchase will be subject to further study and
 Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) validation and verification processes. The project
 proponent is the Bao Steel Group Pudong Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. (Pusteel), one of the
 subsidiaries of the Baosteel Group Corporation (Baosteel), China's largest iron and steel
 conglomerate established after a series of mergers in November 1998.

 Pusteel is one of 22 wholly-owned subsidiaries of Baosteel. Baosteel has registered capital of
 US$ 5,730 million and it became the fifth largest steel production company in the world in 2005
 with annual steel production of 23 million tons. In 2003, Baosteel was ranked 372 on the list of
 the Global 500 by Fortune Magazine and became the first of its kind in the competitive industry
 and the manufacturingsector in China to enter the world's top 500 enterprises. At the peak of its
 operations, Pusteel produced 2.2 million tons of steel and had about 20,000 employees.
 Efficiency gains made over the past two decades have allowed Pusteel to gradually reduce its
 total number of employees and increase profits. In 2006, Pusteel had approximately 4,400 full-
 time staff, produced 2.1 million tons of annual rolled strip, US$ 1,392 million in total capital,
 and US$ 11million annual net profit.

 With the objective towards worldwide first-class iron and steel company as set out by Baosteel
 Group, Pusteel has been putting great attention on environmental safeguards and has good record
 of environmental compliance. The relocation of entire plant to Luojing provides Pusteel with a
 good opportunity to upgrade its technical performance with cleaner and more environmental-
 friendlytechnologies, and improve its environmentalperformance.

 As part of Due Diligence Review for Pusteel, the task team will conduct fwher detailed
 assessment of Pusteel's environmental performance and institutionalcapacity.

 P. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
     Mr Peishen Wang (EASRE)
     Mr Jun Zeng (EASSO)

 11. SAFEGUARDPOLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
[SafeguardPolicies Triggered                                          Yes        No       I  TBD
 Environmental Assessment (OPIBP4.01)                                 X
 An Environmental Impact Assessment report has been prepared for the entire relocation of
 Pusteel (both Phase I and 11) and alreadyapprovedby SEPA in March 2005. The report has been
 submitted to the World Bank for review. The COREX plant is part of the entire project, and
1provides an environmental-friendly alternative replacing the conventional blast furnace           1
 technology (avoiding sintering and coking units, two processes that are major sources of
 pollution). The boundary of the project is the COREX plant itself and the ancillary activities
  such as the coal and iron ore feeding, coal treatment and electricitygeneration facilities.

 In addition, a due diligence review of the environmental performance of the entire operation of
 Pusteel including the implementation of the EMP for the overall plant relocation will be
Iconducted by an independent local consultant who has expertise in the Chinese iron and steel      I
I sector.                                                                                          I

 Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                    X
     There are no protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical
 natural habitats as definedunder the policy in the project area.
 Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                             X
     The project will not impact the health and quality of forests.

        urban/agricultural area and there are no natural habitats and other ecologically or
        culturally sensitivespots near the project site.

111. SAFEGUARDPREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality EnhancementReview (QER), at which time the PAD-stageISDS
    would be prepared: N/A

B. For simpleprojects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: O d r b t ~31, 2007

C. Time frame for launching and completingthe safeguard-relatedstudies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing2shouldbe specifiedin the PAD-stage ISDS.

        A draft EIA report in Englishwill be submitted to the World Bank by July 31,2007.
        A draft PER (both in Chinese and English)will be submittedto the World Bank by July
         31,2007.

IV. APPROVALS




2Reminder:The Bank's DisclosurePolicy requires that safeguard-related documentsbe disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessiblelocationsand in a form and languagethat are accessibleto potentiallyaffected
persons.

