Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2790 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P101988 
Project Name: Jiangxi Shihutang Navigation and Hydropower Complex Project 
Task Team Leader: Wenlai Zhang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 23, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (60%);Power (40%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other rural 
development (P);Water resource management (S);Administrative and civil service reform 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
64.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
122.00
186.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to increase utilization of the Gan River for 
freight transport and for energy production. The PDO is to be achieved through  
 
----improving inland waterway transport capacity and service levels for primary and secondary 
industries in the Nanchang-Ganzhou corridor of the Gan River, and  
 
----generating clean renewable electricity to help meet rapidly growing demand for energy in 
the region.  
 
In addition, it is planned to build a road across the top of the dam whereby providing a 
secondary transport benefit for rural communities living either side of the Gan River who must 
currently use a very small ferry or drive some 50km round via the nearest bridge crossing.  Also, 
vulnerable population in the vicinity of the reservoir will benefit from the upgrading of flood 
protection.   
Page  2
The achievement of the project development objective will be assessed through the 
measurement of indicators, such as improved transport capacity and utilization along the Gan 
River, and amount of electricity generated annually. The indicators will be further developed 
during project preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The physical component of the Project consists of the construction of the following elements:  
 
----Shihutang Complex : The Shihutang Complex is a single integral infrastructure unit that is 
comprised of several elements including a dam, sluice gates, hydropower plant, shiplock, and 
dam crest access road.  The complex will form a reservoir with a design normal pool water 
elevation of 56.5m and normal pool storage of 149 million cubic meters.  24 sets of sluice gates 
within the dam with a total length of 559m will regulate flows. The single ship lock through the 
dam of 180 (length) x 23 (width) x 3.5 (depth) meters will meet a 2020 design minimum annual 
downstream transport capacity of 4,660,000 tons.  The hydropower plant built within the dam 
with an installed capacity of 117 MW will generate 480 GWh of electricity per year.  The 1.6-km 
road across the top of the facility will allow rural communities on either side of the river ease of 
access.  
 
----Flood Protection Works: Flood protection works are to be constructed consisting of 
approximately 38kms of dikes, 61kms of diversion canals, six sets of pumping stations with an 
installed total capacity of approximately 5,500 kw and two sets of regulating sluices.  
 
----Transmission Line - An 18-km long transmission line will connect the power plant to the 
existing power grid of Taihe County.  
 
The construction of the Shihutang Complex, the flood protection works, and the transmission 
line will require the preparation of environmental impact assessments and management plans and 
a
resettlement action plan.  The area is not expected to include any minority nationalities but this 
will be confirmed when the social assessment is undertaken.  
 
In addition to the physical component, a technical assistance component will be part of the 
Project. The following potential technical assistance activities have been tentatively identified 
and will be further defined as the project preparation progresses.   
 
----Development of a Commercial Operation Plan: A commercial operation plan will be 
considered, which will be prepared in consultation with freight shippers, barging companies and 
JANA, with an aim at maximizing the commercial uses of the Gan River waterway corridor in an 
environmentally sustainable manner, including identification of management, port infrastructure 
and inter-modal transfer needs.  
 
----Optimization of Reservoir Operation: In order to maximize the multi-benefits of navigation, 
power generation and flood protection, a comprehensive study may be carried out to develop 
optimum solutions in operating the reservoir and coordinating operation with the neighboring 
dams at upper and down streams.  
Page  3
----Capacity Building - In order to enhance the sustainable management of the investments, the 
Project may include technical assistance and trainings to strengthen JANA?s capacities for 
waterway management and maintenance, plant operation, and other areas to be identified during 
project preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed Project is to be located at Shihutang village on middle reach of the Gan River, 
which is approximately 30km upstream of Ji'an City of Jiangxi Province.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project client is Jiangxi Provincial Communication Department (JPCD). JPCD has 
satisfactorily executed two Bank funded highway projects, and has recently started a third. Its 
experience of implementing Bank's projects and its good knowledge of safeguards policies will 
be helpful for the implementation agency of this Project, which is the Jiangxi Administration of 
Navigation Affairs (JANA) that is under supervision of JPCD.  
 
JANA has retained Zhongjiao No.2 Navigation Engineering Survey & Design Institute (who 
has experience of previous Bank's inland waterway projects) for EIA preparation. An EIA TORs 
has been prepared and commented by the Task Team during the identification mission. On the 
resettlement, JANA has mobilized a very experienced team for the resettlement planning from 
several design institutes. A dedicated JANA staff has been engaged to coordinate resettlement 
planning and design. The resettlement management setup is proposed and described in the RAP, 
and will be further detailed in its next version, including independent monitoring and 
resettlement supervision. In order to strengthen the capacity of JANA, a domestic panel of 
experts including one resettlement expert will be constituted to support the project 
implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSO) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASSO) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The task team proposes a classification of category A for the project due to its scale of civil 
construction and its potential long-term environmental and social impact during operation. A full 
EIA and EMP will be developed.  
 
Currently, an EIA TORs has been developed by EA consultant and reviewed/commented by 
task team. The detailed comments are recorded in the Aide Memoire of the Identification 
Mission (January 2007). Initial field survey has been conducted during TORs preparation, and a 
list of environmental/social sensitive sites are identified, among which one small-scale nature 
reserve (about 260 old camphor trees) and three fish spawning areas are
the most sensitive sites. 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
In addition, a cultural relics survey has been conducted by Jiangxi Cultural Relics Institute and a 
report was submitted to the task team. Three cultural relics have been identified in the project 
area, however, none of them is located within the project impact scope.  
 
Appropriate approach of EIA preparation has been identified in TORs. The EIA report will 
address potential environmental and social impact of the project, with focus on alternative 
analysis, ecological environmental impact (nature reserve, fish spawning areas, migratory fish 
channel, hydrobiology, river hydrology, eutrophication etc.), construction related impacts, social 
impact, power transmission line, and cumulative impact of cascade development of Gan River. A 
stand-alone EMP will be developed with EIA preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Based on initial survey, this policy should be triggered given the existence of one small 
nature reserve and three fish spawning areas. More detailed technical survey will be conducted 
during EIA preparation and proper mitigation measures will be developed in EMP.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Resettlement planning work started in September 2006 and a draft Resettlement Action Plan 
was completed in January 2007 based on detailed impact inventory, socioeconomic survey and 
extensive consultations with local governments and villagers.  
 
The inundation impacts can be greatly reduced by provision of flood protection works in the 
vicinity of the proposed reservoir. The project will affect 44 villages and one state farm in Taihe 
County. Permanent land acquisition is estimated to at 3429 mu and temporary 4878 mu.  The 
project will require the relocation of 711 people in 197 households.  
 
In consultation with the affected people, a resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation strategy 
and action plan was proposed.  With the greatly reduced impact, all relocations will be within the 
existing village.  Livelihood development will include mainly land redistribution and intensified 
farming activities.  
 
The RAP will be revised following necessary field work and resubmitted to the World Bank 
by April 30, 2007. Resettlement planning would need further work: i) impact identification; ii) 
consultations with the affected people; iii) planning on monitoring and supervision iv) design 
and approval of flood protection works. The RAP would be revised incorporating additional 
output in these aspects.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
This policy will be triggered, and the following will be implemented by JANA:  
 
1.
Establishment of independent dam safety panel with three or more experts acceptable to 
the Bank.  
 
2.
Preparation of four detailed plans:  
 
-
Plan for Construction Supervision and Quality Assurance  
 
-
Instrumentation Plan  
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
-
Operation and Maintenance Plan  
 
-
Emergency Preparedness Plan   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/18/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Safeguards  
 
TORs of the EIA: reviewed and commented by the Bank in January 2007;  
 
Draft EIA & EMP and EA Executive Summary: to be submitted by JANA by April 30, 
2007.  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
Draft RAP: reviewed and commented by the Bank in January 2007; Draft RAP with 
revision: to be submitted by JANA by April 30, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wenlai Zhang 
04/30/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
05/14/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
