Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2084 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/28/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P093963 
Project Name: Guiyang Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: John Carter Scales 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 6, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (10%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
100.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to promote balanced and sustainable growth through the 
implementation of transportation infrastructure improvements that increase the access and 
mobility of Guiyang Municipality’s transport users.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to achieve the stated development objective the project includes four components:three 
transport infrastructure components and a fourth capacity building component: 1) Youxiao Road 
–
Youzhajie to Xiaobi; 2) Rural Transport; 3) Transport Terminals; and 4) Institutional 
Development.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Guiyang Municipality, Capital of Guizhou Province.   
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency, Guiyang Municipal Communications Bureau, as a first-time 
borrow
er, is new to the Bank’s safeguards policies. The EA consultant, Guizhou Provincial 
Environmental Science Institute, is also new to the Bank.  Safeguards training to Guiyang PMO 
has been provided. Additional training to the PMO/EA consultant will be provided during the 
preparation stage, and the Task Team will closely work with the PMO/EA consultant to provide 
technical guidance and to strengthen their capacity in document preparation as well as 
implementation management. The PMO has assigned a staff member to be in charge of social 
safeguards. Institutes with experience in social assessment, ethnic minorities and resettlement 
were recommended.  Field work will be started as soon as the institutes are selected and the 
project concept is confirmed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Youlan Zou (EASSD) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will include construction of new roads, which will fall into Category A 
classification according to OP4.01. A full EA document will be prepared to address relevant 
environmental issues.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Based on the current available information, there is no indication of the presence of areas 
with nature habitat value. Further investigation will be conducted during EA preparation stage.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
A
cultural property survey will be conducted during EA preparation. Details to be determined 
later.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
There are minority nationalities in Guizhou Province and Guiyang City.  A social assessment 
will be undertaken to identify the ethnic minorities in the project areas and determine whether or 
not they are indigenous peoples as defined by the Bank's OP.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Based on the project proposal, limited land acquisition and some relocation of residential 
households are involved.  An experienced institute has been selected to support the local clients 
in preparation of a Resettlement Plan.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/26/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The first draft EAs (one EA for each of the three components) will be available by mid-May 
2006, and the final EA package (three EAs, one overall EMP and one EA Summary) will be 
completed by late July - early August 2006. 
 
The first draft Social Assessment Report will be available by mid of April 2006, the final 
Social Assessment Report will be completed by end of June 2006.  The first draft of 
Resettlement Action Plan will be available by mid of May 2006, and the final Resettlement 
Action Plan will be completed by early August 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Carter Scales 
03/15/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/22/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
03/16/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
