Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/15/2007 
Report No.:  AC2884
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P092631 
Project Name:  Xi'an Sustainable Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Rakhi Basu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (96%);Sub-national government administration 
(4%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
2.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
249.00
249.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve accessibility and mobility in Xi'an while 
protecting its cultural heritage and reducing the environmental impact of the urban 
transport system.  The priority area for achieving this objective is the Ming Walled City 
(MWC).  
 
The key performance indicators to be used are:  (i) The overall modal split - (the 
percentage of journeys made by people using all travel modes - including walking) for 
travel in the MWC; (ii) Modal split of visitors at cultural heritage sites within MWC; and 
(iii) Average per vehicle emissions.   
 
3. Project Description 
To achieve the above-mentioned objective and results, the project comprises an inter-
related package of six components designed to protect the MWC by reducing vehicular 
traffic and increasing the accessibility by bus and other modes through investments in 
Page  2
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT), bus priority, non motor vehicle (NMV) and pedestrian 
facilities, while improving mobility and accessibility by bus to some of the newly 
developed and high growth areas in the city.  Cultural heritage is protected directly by 
providing quality bicycle and pedestrian routes between sites.  Investments in local 
pollution monitoring and a Motor Vehicle Emission Control Plan (MVECP) will reduce 
local environmental impacts.  A brief description of the components follows.  
 
The Road Network Component (RN) [US$215.5 million including resettlement costs of 
US$16.5 million] will comprise: (i) in Xi'an city improvements to junctions on the 1st 
and 2nd Ring Roads and Taibai Nan Road to increase their functionality as major traffic 
routes; and (ii) upgrading of the road network in Huxian.  
 
The Public Transport Component (PT) [US$77.3 million including resettlement costs of 
US$10.2 million] will comprise: (i) A Pilot BRT line; (ii) Integrated public transport 
priority/traffic management measures on ten of Xi'an's most heavily used bus corridors; 
and (iii) Xinzhu bus depot.  
 
The Traffic Management and Road Safety Component (TM) [US$35.7 million] will 
comprise: (i) An Area Traffic Control (ATC) system, with associated junction 
channelization; (ii) a Road safety program to investigate and analyze accidents, and 
implement remedial measures; (iii) Enforcement and Road User Education measures; (iv) 
Parking measures and equipment; and (v) traffic facilities for cyclists and pedestrians, 
and road marking equipment.  All these investments complement investments in the 
ongoing Asian Development Bank (ADB) funded project.  
 
The Air Quality Management Component (AQM) [US$16.7 million including 
resettlement costs of US$2.0 million] will support the Xi'an Environmental Protection 
Bureau (XEPB) in developing and implementing comprehensive plans for air quality 
improvement and reduction of vehicle emissions.  It will comprise: (i) A building to 
house the newly established Xi'an Ambient Air Supervising and Monitoring Center; (ii) 
Equipment for motor vehicle emission inspection compatible with inspection methods 
issued by the State Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA) in July 2005; (iii) Civil 
works and equipment for two ambient air quality monitoring sub-stations and two traffic 
air pollution monitoring sub-stations for improvement of air quality monitoring network; 
(iv) Equipment for improvement of air quality assessment and publication; and (v) 
Development of a Motor Vehicle Emission Control Plan (MVECP).  
 
The Cultural Heritage Component (CH) [US$50.5 million including resettlement costs 
of US$9.4 million] will comprise: (i) Han Chang'an Site - recreation of the old Han 
Dynasty road network in the area of Weiyang Palace; and (ii) MWC - construction of a 
network of bicycle routes linking the main tourist sites.  
 
The Institutional Development Component (ID) [US$6.1 million, including GEF Grant 
of US$2 million] will support Xi'an in developing a capacity in the city for transport 
planning and policy making.  It will comprise:  (i) Urban Transport (UT) Policy & 
Comprehensive Planning; (ii) PT planning (Global Environment Facility co-financed); 
(iii) Support for Implementation of Project Investments; and (iv) Domestic and 
International Training and Workshops.  
 
These activities will assist the Xi'an Municipal Government in tackling the traffic 
pressures in Xi'an now and in the medium term. They also establish the foundations for 
Page  3
other Travel Demand Management (TDM) measures, and for complementary measures to 
reduce CO2 emissions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Xi'an, the capital of Shaanxi Province, is located in the central part of China.  Historically 
the starting point of the famous "silk road", Xi'an today is a world-renowned historical 
city, and one of the most popular tourist destinations in China.  But Xi'an has another side 
-
it is a vibrant and growing modern city, home to five million people, high-tech industry 
and world class universities - as well as a transport and logistics hub for western China.  
 
Climate.  The city of Xi'an is located in the middle of the Guanzhong Plain, about 400 m 
above the sea.  The project area is in the warm temperate zone where a monsoon climate 
prevails. The annual precipitation averages 580.2 mm, with 45% to 60% in the month 
from July through September.  The temperature over a year averages 13.3OC.  The 
prevailing wind is northeast in the winter and southwest in the summer with annual 
average of 1.7 m/s.  The frost free period over a year is 210 days.  
 
Water Quality.  There are a number of rivers within Xi'an, which are mostly part of the 
Wei River System within the Yellow River Basin.  However, the proposed project will 
not have any direct impact on these rivers.  
 
Cultural Heritage.  Due to more than three thousands years of history, there are rich 
cultural heritage resources in Xi'an Municipality, including 34 national level, 72 
provincial level and 176 city/county relics as well as 2944 other relics and archaeological 
finds.  The major cultural heritage sites related to the project include the Ming City Wall 
and the Weiyang Palace cultural relics site in the Han Chang’an City.  The Ming City 
Wall is a rectangular wall enclosing the central part of Xi'an city, with a perimeter of 11.9 
km.  Since it was built in 14th century, it has been renovated three times, the last time 
being in 1983.  The Weiyang Palace relic site is within the Han City protection area.  The 
Han City protection area is about 36 km2.  Han City was the capital of the Han Dynasty 
(ca. 200 B.C.), and the Weiyang Palace is one of the major palaces in the city.  
Abandoned in the 6th century, the existing relics are mainly compacted soil foundations, 
ruins of earth walls, and underground roads and water canals.  As development in the 
protection area is restricted, the current use is largely farmland.  However, in the area 
there are 55 villages with a total population of some 53, 200 people.  
 
Sensitive Receptors.  The baseline survey also identified other sensitive receptors to be 
potentially impacted by the project. These are mainly residential building, schools, and 
hospitals.  The impacts would be due to traffic noise, air quality and airborne dust.  
 
Air Quality.  Baseline environmental quality is assessed through monitoring and 
collection of available data.  In summary, the air quality is in compliance with relevant 
standard in Xi'an, except for PM10 (29% over standard).  This is because Xi'an is on the 
loess plateau and influenced by the continental monsoon.  A PM10 source appointment 
study indicates that vehicular emissions represented 25% (including 12% of secondary 
Page  4
PM10) of local emission sources in July 1998.  With the rapid increase of the vehicle 
fleet in Xi'an, it is foreseeable that vehicle contribution to air pollution in Xi'an will 
continue to increase.  
 
Noise.  The analysis of traffic noise monitoring results indicates that there is overall 
compliance with Urban Ambient Noise Standards.  
 
Baseline conditions in Huxian.  Baseline environmental information for Huxian is also 
monitored and assessed, which indicates generally good air quality (except PM10 for the 
same reason as in Xi'an city), good water quality for the Lao River, and a good acoustic 
environment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
It is expected that the project will have substantial positive environmental benefits 
through physical investment in improving traffic efficiency, increasing pedestrian and 
bicycle facilities and promoting public transport in Xi'an city , strengthening motor 
vehicle emission inspection control and protecting cultural heritage, as well as technical 
assistance program of institutional capacity strengthening of city government agencies 
with particular emphasis on traffic management, environmental protection and cultural 
heritage preservation.  Given the strong focus of environmental improvement and cultural 
heritage protection of the project design, it is expected that the negative environmental 
impact of the project will be insignificant, non-precedent, site specific, and could be 
properly mitigated with adequate project design and good construction management 
practice.  
 
Planning Stage.  Careful attention has been paid in the selection of alternative 
investments to minimize land acquisition, and permanent loss of farmland.  The project 
Page  5
will require the acquisition of 1,385 mu of land: 1,275 mu of village land and 110 mu of 
state land.  Most of the village lands are cultivated lands.  The project would affect a total 
of 2310 people in 512 households, including 1,463 people through loss of land, 667 
people in 154 households through loss of houses.  Nine small factories and 114 small 
shops will be affected.  Project impacts are detailed in the Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs).  Such losses are relatively small and scattered, and have a marginal impact on 
the affected households since income from agricultural is not a significant portion of total 
income.  With the current level of project design, the Xi’an Public Transport Component 
cannot determine all its project activity sites and therefore cannot identify the related 
resettlement impacts.  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed to 
guide future resettlement planning when the project activities are identified during project 
implementation.  
 
Construction.  The negative impacts during construction include dust, noise, land 
acquisition and resettlement, damage of surface vegetation, soil erosion and waste 
material disposal, construction wastewater, traffic impact, social disturbance and safety, 
impact on utilities, potential impact on underground cultural relics, visual impact, etc.  
The negative impacts during operation include noise and vibration, air pollution, road 
safety, wastewater from bus depot/terminal and monitoring center.  These impacts were 
properly addressed and necessary mitigation measures were developed in the separate 
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) and Environmental Management Plans (EMP) 
prepared for each project component.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Overall, the project will have long-term positive environmental benefits. One indirect 
impact foreseen is the potential increase in the numbers of tourists in the future. Since 
Xi'an is a world-famous tourist destination with cultural heritage preservation as a central 
pillar for the economy of the city, it has a strong capacity for planning and 
implementation of cultural heritage protection while handling the increase in the number 
of tourists.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives analysis was conducted at various levels, including a "without project" 
scenario, project planning and project design.   
 
Without Project Scenario.  Without the project many of the current transport issues in 
Xi'an would be expected to become more acute.  Without improvement of the Ring Road 
intersections and with rapid motorization, traffic congestion will become more and more 
serious at these intersections, and eventually become the bottleneck to sound road 
network development in Xi'an.  If current issues of public transport in Xi'an are not well 
addressed, the effectiveness and the service level of public transport will further decline, 
which will inevitably lead to substantial increase of private vehicles causing more traffic 
congestion and air pollution.  Continuation of current traffic management practice will 
obviously not be sustainable for Xi'an.   It is clearly recognized by the need for a more 
Page  6
comprehensive approach to traffic management to broaden practices from police 
operations to include traffic management planning, design and implementation of on-
street physical measures, use of traffic management and Intelligent Transport System 
(ITS) tools to help establish the foundations for future TDM, better provision for 
pedestrians and cyclists, parking management and a comprehensive parking strategy, and 
better road safety.  
 
The Weiyang Palace site is a world-class relic and has strong potential to become a new 
tourist attraction in Xi'an.  Without proper protection and exhibition, such an important 
archeological, education and tourism value will not materialize, and the Han City area 
will very likely be encroached gradually by rapid economic development.  Motor 
vehicles are the main transportation mode for tourists into the city every year, 
contributing to the already severe traffic congestion and air pollution, particularly in the 
tourism season.  Without development of alternative solutions, such a situation will 
continue and surely deteriorate with increase of tourists in the future.  Based on the 
current increase of motor vehicles in Xi'an, it is foreseen that pollution from vehicle 
emissions will increase rapidly (confirmed by model estimates of the Xi'an 
Environmental Protection Bureau) unless adequate measures are taken.  
 
Alternatives Considered during Project Planning.  During project preparation, various 
options have been considered including different levels of investment in roads, the focus 
of the road investment program, a focus on different types of pedestrian facility 
improvements, the focus of improvements in NMV facilities, whether to include the BRT 
pilot line or not, and whether to interlink investments in PT, TM, and AQM.  
 
Alternatives Analysis during Project Design.  At project design level, in all project 
components, various alternative designs, alignments and sites have been identified where 
applicable during the project feasibility study and environmental assessment stage. The 
EIA team worked closely with the engineers and planners, and communicated the results 
of environmental analysis of the alternatives to the engineers and planners which where 
appropriate have been incorporated into the decision making process.  The objective of 
the analysis of alternatives during the EIA was to identify and select the project design 
and planning alternatives with the least adverse impact so that the adverse impacts of the 
project on the natural environment and local communities can be avoided or minimized. 
The alternatives evaluated for various components are summarized as follows:  
 
Xi'an Road Network (RNC).  This component consists of six separate road schemes.  In 
accordance with good engineering design practice, for each scheme a number of design 
options were considered, and evaluated on the basic of operational performance, land 
acquisition and resettlement, environmental impacts during construction and operations 
and cost.  In five of the schemes, the alternative with the lowest environmental impacts 
which met the operational requirements was chosen.   For RNC 31 Taibai/Zhangba Road, 
a
partial interchange and a full four level interchange were considered.  Although the full 
interchange has higher impacts overall, it best meets the transportation objective at the 
location so it was selected but with increased mitigation measures to address the higher 
impacts.  
Page  7
Huxian Road Network (RNH).  A bridge and an underpass were examined for RN3 
Lvgong Rail Crossing.  Even though Huxian has heavy rains in the summer months 
causing flooding the underpass has been adopted for the project, but with sufficient water 
pumps to prevent flooding.  This alternative produces less impact from emissions and 
noise and no visual intrusion.  
 
Public transport (PT).  PT 1 BRT includes a dedicated central BRT lane.  Two detailed 
design options for were considered: one with the door open to the left and a single 
median station and the other with the door open to the right and two island stations. In all 
five streets/roads, door opening to the left option would better utilize the existing road 
conditions, safe passenger access and has thus been selected as the design.  At the time 
the EA was prepared, site selection for the PT 3 Bus Depot was still in process. No 
specific site conditions were available for analysis of alternatives but a set of 
environmental and community impact considerations have been established which will be 
applied during the site selection process.  
 
Air Quality Management (AQM).  Two alternative sites were considered for the air 
quality inspection center - at Lintong and Changan.  The Changan site selected as it 
provides expansion potential - with necessary mitigation to address the environmental 
concerns.  
 
Cultural Heritage (CH)  
 
CH 1 Han Chang'an Weiyang Palace Roads  
 
(i) 
Two alternatives for the scope of road network were developed.   The alternative 
with better cultural property protection, cultural relic conservation, tourist and tourism 
development and access to the site, although higher in construction cost, was selected.  
 
(ii) 
Three road surface pavements are compared and evaluated.  The alternative with 
better resemblance of the ancient architect and road style, while suitable for electrical 
vehicle operation and the problems of dust and drainage has been selected.  
 
CH 2 Ming Walled City Bicycle Route.  Three alternative routes were considered.  
 
The selected route has the smoothest alignment, shortest distance, and reasonable 
coverage of Xi'an city.  It is also compatible with urban planning by including use of 
primary/secondary roads in the route to promote bicycle trips.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower retained Xi'an Environmental Science Institute for EIA preparation.  With 
the Bank task team's guidance, individual EIA were prepared for each component based 
on which a Consolidated EIA and EMP were developed.  The EMP details the 
environmental management organization and responsibilities, mitigation measures, 
capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP implementation.  
 
Striving to be a National Environmental Protection Model City, Xi'an city has a strong 
awareness and capacity for planning and implementation of environmental protection 
measures.  In this project, the Project Implementing Agency (PIE) and component line 
Page  8
agencies will assign dedicated environmental specialists who will manage the day to day 
environmental performance of the contractors, maintain liaison with regulatory agencies 
and communicate with the affected public including receiving public complaints.  
Dedicated staff will also be required for contractors and supervision engineers. 
Mandatory environmental training will be provided to PIE staff, contractors and 
supervision engineers prior to commencement of construction.  
 
Cultural heritage protection is under the responsibility of Xi'an Cultural Heritage Bureau 
(XCHB), which is the municipal governmental agency in Xi'an responsible for 
implementation of cultural heritage protection policies and regulations; development of 
cultural heritage protection planning; overall archeological investigation, excavation, data 
collection and research; preservation and rehabilitation of cultural heritage; approval of 
construction projects within heritage protection scope.  It is one of the most competent 
Cultural Heritage Bureau in China, and has strong knowledge and techniques for cultural 
heritage protection.  This is clearly demonstrated by the successful cultural heritage 
protection which makes Xi'an the most famous tourist city in China. In Han Chang'an 
City where the Weiyang Palace is located, XCHB has successfully excavated, preserved 
and exhibited a number of underground relics, and in addition exhibited one road 
(simulating an ancient underground road) and the Bacheng Gate relic site.  This 
demonstrates XCHB's strong capacity to manage the road restoration/presentation project 
while preventing adverse impacts on the surrounding underground relics and ensuring the 
authentic value of exhibited relics.  
 
The EMP will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts for civil works in 
order to ensure effective implementation.  
 
The RAPs describe in detail the overall legal framework, project impacts, entitlements, 
strategy and action plans for relocation and livelihood rehabilitation, consultations, 
grievance redress, implementation schedules, cost and budget as well as institutional and 
monitoring arrangements.  For economic rehabilitation, the project will follow a 
rehabilitation strategy combining land-for-land measures and a cash payment option.  
Redistribution of the remaining village land is the primary measure.  Villagers loosing 
houses will be paid in cash at replacement cost and allocated replacement house plots 
within the same village.  They wish to take charge of their own house construction.  In 
urban areas, households losing residences will be provided the option of self-resettlement 
with cash payment or replacement houses.  Compensation will be paid to the relevant 
government departments for the rehabilitation of affected infrastructure.  The PIE will 
assume the overall responsibility for the implementation of the resettlement program.  A 
multi-level organization will be established for this purpose.  An independent monitor 
will be engaged for the implementation of the resettlement program.  For the Public 
Transport Component, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) describes the two-step 
approach for resettlement planning.  It describes the policy principles, planning 
procedures and responsibilities for planning, reviewing and implementation.   
 
Page  9
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include various government agencies (especially the cultural 
heritage protection agencies) and local project-affected members of the public.  
Following the requirements of the Bank's policy on public consultation, two rounds of 
public consultation were conducted by the EIA team for all project components around 
Xi'an and in Huxian.  The first round was conducted in March 2007 during the EIA 
preparation stage, through public meetings and distribution of 700 questionnaires.  The 
concerns raised related to compensation for resettlement; noise, dust and disruption to 
traffic during construction; rehabilitation of sites after construction, implementation of 
mitigation measures and the extent of continued public consultation. All these concerns 
were dealt with in the RAP and EMP.  
 
The second round of public consultation was conducted in May 2007 after the draft EIA 
reports had been prepared, to explain the result of impacts assessment, mitigation 
measures and environmental management plan.  Different methods were used for public 
consultation, including a public opinion questionnaire survey (556 responses were 
received from 600 questionnaires), public meetings and interviews with special groups, 
individuals and other stakeholders with a focus on the people directly affected by the 
project.  
 
Noise and dust were the primary concerns during construction while noise and cultural 
relics protection are the main concerns of the surveyed public for operation phase.  The 
public was generally satisfied with the mitigation measures proposed by the EIA team. 
As part of the project involves national level cultural properties, specific interviews were 
made with cultural property administrative authorities to solicit their concerns and 
opinions on project itself as well as mitigation during construction and operation phases.  
Their concerns were mainly about minimizing vibration during construction (which has 
been dealt with in the EMP) and the overall effect of the project on cultural heritage sites 
-
which was assuaged when details of the project were explained.  
 
The six component EIA reports were disclosed in Xi'an Public Library, Huxian 
Government Offices, and meeting houses of affected-villages in May, 2007 with an 
announcement made in Xi'an Daily on May 21, 2007.   The RAPs were placed at Xi'an 
Public Library, www.xa.gov.cn (Xi'an Municipal Government Website), 
www.xadrc.gov.cn (Xi'an Government Development and Reform Commission website).  
Their availability was advertised on May 21, 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/19/2007 
 
Page  10
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/19/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  11
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rakhi Basu 
11/15/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Peishen Wang 
11/15/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
11/15/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/15/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
11/15/2007 
Comments:   
