Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2925 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P091950 
Project Name: CN-Guizhou Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection and Development 
Task Team Leader: Shenhua Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Other social 
development (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Project development objectives are to achieve: (a) a higher level of livelihood productivity 
among residents of participating historical and cultural villages/districts in Guizhou Province; 
and (b) a high level of satisfaction among cultural and eco-tourists visiting participating sites 
while protecting the cultural and natural assets effectively. These objectives would be achieved 
by undertaking prioritized and sustainable investments in infrastructure, initiatives to enhance 
incomes of the ethnic minority population, and a set of tourism industry interventions paying 
special attention to the natural and cultural heritage of Guizhou, as well as by capacity building 
in the tourism and protection sectors.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Heritage Protection, Income Generation and Infrastructure in Ethnic Minority 
Villages and Towns  
 
(a) Income Generation and Infrastructure Services.  The community-driven development 
(CDD) approach will be used to provide a range of interventions in targeted ethnic minority 
Page  2
villages comprising: (i) expansion of craft production including training for younger generations, 
training and exhibit facilities, and promotion and marketing mechanisms; (ii) flow of project 
funds to villagers to implement all proposed investments in the village; alternatively, ensure that 
majority of the labor from the particular village is employed for implementing the works; (iii) 
community managed loan program for individual home improvements; (iv) training in small 
business development, service standards and hygiene practices; (v) expansion of the variety of 
tourism activities available at each site, to increase tourist interest, length of stay, and spending; 
(vi) provision of "appropriate" community infrastructure (e.g., roads, footpaths, water supply, 
sanitation, solid waste management).  
 
(b) Protection of Physical, Natural and Intangible Cultural Heritage. A range of activities will 
involve (i) participatory community identification of important physical, natural and intangible 
heritage to be conserved; (ii) development of locally enforceable heritage protection 
measures/regulations for maintaining land use patterns and cultural landscapes, traditional 
architectural integrity and consistency, and guidelines and acceptable limits of change for basic 
infrastructure installation, residential upgrading, and necessary new construction; (iii) renovation 
and restoration of traditional buildings, including improvement of interior facilities (e.g., 
sanitation); and (iv) development of village-level interpretation (displays, signage, guide 
programs and other materials) to raise awareness of community members, and educate visitors 
on the meaning, value and significance of the local heritage. These two components will focus 
primarily on villages/towns in 12 counties in Qiandongnan Prefecture, Anshun Municipality and 
Qiannan Prefecture.  
 
Component 2: Natural and Scenic Area Facilities Improvement. Provision of improved facilities 
at six tourist locations, comprising: (i) master planning for park zoning and land use, cultural and 
natural resource protection, infrastructure and facilities development, architectural and landscape 
design standards, interpretation and information development, commercial services management 
policies, and marketing and promotion; (ii) cultural and natural resource inventory, monitoring 
and documentation systems to establish base lines and provide ongoing information for strategy 
development and change management; (iii) provision of infrastructure including access roads 
and parking, pathways, power supply, rest rooms (water supply and sanitation), solid waste 
collection and disposal, administration and tourist services structures, first-aid and safety 
arrangements, and docks (where applicable). The infrastructure will cover the project sites and 
communities living within or on the borders of the site. The tourist locations include:  
 
-
Qiannan Prefecture: Duyun/Doupeng Mountain National Scenic Area; and Libo/Zhang 
Jiang National Scenic Area;  
 
-
Qianxinan Prefecture: Xingyi/Malinghe Gorge - Wangfeng Lin National Scenic Area; 
Dingxiao/Dingxiao Guizhou Dragon Geo-Park; and Zhenfeng/Buyi Cultural and Natural 
Heritage Protection;  
 
-
Anshun City: Guanlin/Guanlin National Geo-Park.  
 
Component 3: Gateway Town Facilities. The component comprises: (i) development of an 
ethnic minority cultural and historical museum in Kaili (Qiandongnan); and (ii) development of 
two tourist information centers in Liping and Jianhe, and (iii) a tourist information center in 
Guiyang for tourist services, promotion, exhibition and marketing of ethnic minority products.  
 
Page  3
Gateway towns (i.e, towns located close to natural and cultural heritage assets) are the entry 
points for most tourist visitors. They play an important role as the locations for accommodation, 
information, marketing and promotion, tour operators, etc. Some gateway towns lack good 
infrastructure, adequate numbers of quality hotels, and generally, in need of urban renewal. Yet 
they have not attracted investments from the private sector. It is necessary to develop a strategy 
to improve tourist facilities, infrastructure and urban renewal in gateway towns, using incentives 
or other measures to leverage investments from the private sector, to complement public 
investments. It is possible that technical assistance would be available from GTZ to develop such 
a
strategy. Identified gateway towns are: Guiyang, where a facility would include tourist 
services, craft exhibition, promotion, sales and marketing; and Kaili, Liping and Jianhe, where 
project funded facilities would be limited to tourist service centers.  
 
Component 4: Technical Assistant (TA) for Sustainable Cultural and Eco-Tourism 
Development.  
 
Provision of consultant services, equipment and facilities to support capacity building for 
sustainable cultural and eco-tourism development, comprising:  
 
(a) Provincial Tourism Development.  
 
(i) Capacity building support to the Tourism Bureau (through Guizhou Normal University) for: 
tourism development strategy, policy and planning; technical guidelines; marketing and 
promotion; and supervision/enforcement; cultural and natural heritage protection research; 
monitoring; technical and advisory services; training and education; tourist service and 
information center; exhibitions; and international cooperation. [Marketing would include: 
mobilization of tour operators, creation of websites, incentives to international organizations to 
promote Guizhou attractions through events, seminars, complimentary facilities, and other 
initiativess (e.g., to National Geographic Adventure Magazine articles, etc.; tour operator 
familiarization tours, etc.)]  
 
(ii) Tourism Marketing Information System. Development of an information system for  
 
use in a Guizhou tourism website and brochures, including pictures, maps and high quality 
written description of ethnic culture, scenic, natural and cultural sites of Guizhou.  
 
(iii) Consultant services to develop strategies for sustainable tourism development, and a 
cultural and natural heritage master interpretation plan for the 3 project Prefectures and Anshun.  
 
(b) Project Implementation Support.  
 
(i) Capacity building support to the PMO for project management and coordination; (ii) 
International specialist services for detailed physical planning and design of historic, natural 
heritage sites; (iii) International specialist services in identification, support and preservation for 
intangible cultural heritage (iv) International specialist services in interpretation master planning, 
design and implementation; (v) Construction supervision services to project implementing 
agencies, with specific focus on cultural and architectural sensitivities; (vi) Facilitators for 
community driven participatory planning and implementation, with expertise in physical, 
intangible and natural heritage protection; and (vii) Compliance audit of culturally sensitive 
designs, appropriate technical solutions; completion of agreed works; and use of project funds 
for eligible expenditures.   
 
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
Three Prefectures of Qiandongnan, Qiannan and Qianxinan, Anshun Municipality in the 
southern part of Guizhou Province and Guiyang Municipality, Capital of Guizhou Province.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Guiyang Hydropower Investigation Design & Research Institute (GHIDRI) has been selected 
through bidding process to prepare the EA document for this project. GHIDRI is a Class A EA 
Certificate holding institute and it has been involved in EA preparation for a couple of projects 
funded by ADB. However, since it has not been involved in World Bank financed project, its 
capacity and experiences need to be checked along with preparation of EA documents. The Bank 
team has recently provided safeguard training to the counterparts in Guizhou, including staff 
from GHIDRI.  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
The borrowers, including PMOs at provincial, prefecture and county levels, have limited 
experience with Bank Safeguard policies since this is first time for them to prepare the Bank 
financed project.  
 
One consultant firm was selected for preparation of both RAP and SA. The firm has organized 
a
team of consultants who are competent in terms of their knowledge in social science and 
minority knowledge in project areas. But the team did not include experienced consultant in 
preparation of RAP and IPP for Bank financed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASRE) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP4.01 is triggered, since the project will finance infrastructure development and operations 
at the proposed sites. Potential impacts could result from temporary construction activities to 
long term impacts associated with site visitor management.  These investments will have 
important impacts on the scale and pace of development at each site and if not properly planned 
and managed could lead to irrereversible degradation of the physical and cultural resources of 
each site.  Therefore, EA/EMP will be prepared. The TOR is under preparation and local 
counterpart safeguards training has been conducted with the implementing authorities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Some proposed project components are located in national parks and nature reserves. Detail 
survey will be conducted to provide information about the location and potential impacts, though 
there is strict regulation from national government which indicates no construction activities 
allowed in the core areas of the national parks and nature reserves.  Some of the proposed sites 
may also present locally or regionally significant habitat which will require special attention in 
the management planning and operational phases of the project.  Where appropriate EA and 
EMP will define specific mitigation and protection measures to
ensure that significant habitat 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
resources are protected and if possible enhanced as a result of the project.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
OP4.11 is triggered, as some proposed components are associated with cultural resources. 
The training has been conducted with the implementing authorities and EA consultant. The 
relevant assessment will be presented in the EA report.  In the EA preparation, site management 
plan will be developed and managed in accordance with principles of good practice in the 
cultural heritage field. The task team includes specialists knowledgeable in all aspects of site 
management.  Every site will be managed in accordance with an agreed management plan which 
is based on local consultation and stakeholder inputs.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The TT has carried out a screening of ethnic minority nationalities in the subprojects areas. 
The screening confirmed that the project areas are highly populated with three minority 
nationalities, i.e. Miao, Dong and Shui. There are also small populations of other 8 ethnic 
minority nationalities scatted in the subproject areas, including Maonan, Buyi, Yi, Yao, Tujia, 
Hui, Gelao and Tongpu People (Ancient Han, this group of people is officially identified as Han 
by the government but their living traditions are kept as Han people in Ming Dynasty and are 
quite different from modern Han people).  All these ethnic minority groups possess to some 
extent the characteristics as described in the Bank Policy on Indigenous People OP 4.10.  
 
The social assessment will be conducted in accordance with the requirement of the Bank 
policy to assess the project's potential both positive and adverse impacts on these minority 
communities, where adverse impacts may be significant, to examine project alternatives, then to 
inform the IP instruments required for project preparation in compliance with the Bank policy on 
the basis of findings of the social assessment.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition will not be avoidable in all project prefectures and municipalities. Based on 
the magnitude preliminary identified during at this stage, it was recommended that each 
prefecture prepares one separate RAP, two municipalities prepare one combined RAP, and 
Provincial PMO prepare one Resettlement Policy Framework and a summary RAP on the basis 
of four RAPs.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/22/2007 
 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Based on tentative preparation schedule, the final EA and RAP should be ready by October 
2007.  The tentative schedule is as follows:  
 
-
Institutions for preparing RAP and social assessment selected: March, 2007  
 
-
Draft social assessment reports ready for submission for Bank review: July, 2007  
 
-
First draft RAPs and IPP ready for submission for Bank review: August, 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shenhua Wang 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
