Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2650 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P101258 
Project Name: Hubei Yiba Highway Project 
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
850.00
850.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve east-west passenger and 
freight flows in the Yichang-Badong corridor by investing in the construction of an expressway 
and strengthening highway and environmental management.  
 
The PDO is in line with the Bank's FY06-10 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for China, in 
particular in its recommendations to: (i) reduce internal and external barriers to trade and 
investment; (ii) reduce poverty, inequality and social exclusion through expanding affordable 
access to basic social and infrastructure services; and (iii) manage resource scarcity and 
environmental challenges.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve the above mentioned objectives, the project will include:  
 
(i) Expressway Component: The construction of a 172 km expressway connecting Yichang City 
and Badong County at the border of Hubei and Chongqing Municipality including the  relevant 
electrical and mechanical (E&M) facilities, annex areas, toll plazas and buildings, six 
Page  2
interchanges, and some interconnecting roads. The expressway will be built with four lanes, 80 
km/hour design vehicle speeds and 24m integral subgrade width.  
 
With an estimated total cost of US$1.6 billion, averaging over US$9 million/km, this is one of 
the most demanding expressway sections in China - approximately 30% of the length will be 
tunnels; 35% bridges and viaducts. Whilst on previous projects it was possible to avoid many of 
the most difficult areas, it is not possible here since the entire area is mountainous. The 
environmental sensitivity of the area makes it important to ensure that the expressway is 
constructed in the most environmentally benign manner possible; this further increases the costs 
and technical challenges.  
 
In spite of the high cost, the project is economically viable. The Economic Analysis (October, 
2006) estimated the EIRR at 16.0%, with an increase in costs by 10% accompanied by a decrease 
in benefits by 10% reducing the EIRR to 13.9%.  
 
(ii) Institutional Strengthening Component: It is currently envisaged that there will be two 
principal institutional strengthening activities:  
 
.
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA): During project preparation it is planned to 
undertake an SEA of Hubei's road transport sector, with grant financing. The TOR has been 
agreed upon with the HPCD. This SEA will identify significant environmental and social 
impacts from transport investments beyond the project level focus on our projects to date. The 
SEA will also identify and recommend the mitigation policies and institutional adjustments 
required in Hubei to address the key environmental and social impacts.  The institutional 
strengthening component will focus on the implementation of the SEA's recommendations in 
Hubei through new and improved policies and business practices.  
 
.
Hubei Comprehensive Transport Centre Study: The Central Government has recently released 
a
document "Comments on Promoting Central area Grow-up." With its geographically central 
position, and rapidly expanding expressway network, Hubei is seen as having opportunities to 
become a centre for transport in China. The HPCD has requested the Bank's assistance in 
identifying policies, infrastructure and institutional constraints which need to be addressed in 
order for Hubei to fill its role as the "Comprehensive Transport Complex".   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Yiba is one section of the 1,970 km Shanghai to Chengdu expressway (SCE), which, by 
connecting Shanghai, Nanjing, Hefei, Wuhan, Chongqing and Chengdu, will facilitate the 
integration of the east, central and western regions. Almost all of the other sections are either 
complete (47%) or under construction (40%). The 173 km Yiba is one of the two missing links 
(274 km - all in Hubei) required for the development benefits of the SCE to be fully attained.  
 
The Yiba expressway crosses very difficult topography with high and steep terrain. It is located 
South-East of the Qingling mountains and ranges in altitude from 130 m to 1,800 m. The 
topography will greatly influence the alignment selection. As a result, the Yiba expressway will 
include a large number of long bridges (53 km) and tunnels (62 km). The expressway will also 
pass through the Yangtze River Three Gorges Geological Park.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Yiba Project will be the fifth expressway project to be implemented by the Hubei Provincial 
Communication Department (HPCD). Currently, HPCD is implementing a similar challenging 
Bank financed Shiman Project in the mountainous terrain in west Hubei. Over the past 10 years, 
the HPCD has developed a better understanding of environmental issues and challenges in 
implementing the EMPs. As part of the project construction, the HPCD will hire Supervision 
Consultants to oversee the implementation of the Yiba EMP. Since the Project is passing through 
a
very challenging mountainous terrain and most of the alignment passes through the Yangtze 
River Three Gorges Geological Park, the Bank is considering asking HPCD to hire full time 
independent environmental supervision and monitoring consultants to oversee the 
implementation of the EMP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (AFMMG) 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The expressway alignment will traverse mountainous areas and cross the Yangtze River 
Three Gorges Geological Park. Since the start and end points of the expressway are fixed, the 
final alignment cannot be shifted away from the Park. Therefore, all effort will have to focus in 
making the alignment and sub alignments as environmentally benign as possible. The selection 
of the alternatives will therefore take into consideration the challenging terrain, the presence of 
the Park, construction techniques to minimize waste generation and transport, location and 
construction of access roads, location and management of excess waste disposal areas, scenic 
area constraints, etc. To the extent possible, the alignments will try to avoid areas of karst 
geology.  
 
Because of the mountainous terrain with precipitous hills and steep side slopes, the 
expressway will include large number of bridges, viaducts and tunnels, etc. construction of 
which will present a significant challenge. The EA report will address, in detail, the 
environmental issues related to the selection of the location of the spoil materials, minimization 
of soil erosion, avoidance of unstable and landslide prone areas, impact of surface drainage, etc.  
The EA will also review the adequacy of the design, construction supervision and rehabilitation 
of the disturbed areas.  
 
The major environmental challenge will lie in ensuring that the proposed mitigation 
measures are specific and integrated in the design, technical specifications and contract 
documents and that they are properly implemented, supervised and monitored. To ensure that the 
EMP is specific to the Project, the Bank will retain an Environmental Consulting firm to review 
the preparation of the EA reports and the design of the YIBA Expressway from an environmental 
perspective and prepare check lists to ensure their implementation. To supervise the 
implementation of the EMP, there will be a need for a full time, independent, environmental 
monitoring consultant/institute to undertake the above functions during the construction.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The HPCD has retained the Shanghai Ship and Shipping Research Institute to prepare the 
TOR and the EA reports for the Yiba project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The proposed Expressway passes through the Yangtze River Three Gorges Geological Park, 
but avoids the core area of the Park. It does not involve loss or degredation of critical natural 
habitats. The Park area is also inhabited by a large population and is under active development 
because of the resettlement from the Three Gorges. HPCD has already undertaken specialized 
studies on soil erosion and water resources, the impact of the expressway on the Geological Park, 
seismic safety assessment, and accident risk assessment. The outcomes of the studies will be 
incorporated in the EA report, the design of the Expressway and will be reflected in the EMP.  
 
To ensure that the Park and the natural areas are not significantly impacted, the EA will 
ensure that the proposed Expressway is consistent with the existing management plan of the area, 
that there is management capacity and resources to implement the plan and that if no plan exists 
then the Project will seek to assist the Park Authority to address the deficiency.  
 
If the presence of karst geology is confirmed along the alignment, the EA Consultant will 
address the issue of impacts in the EA report and recommend appropriate construction 
techniques for karst terrain. The Project Team will also consult the Bank's Senior Biodiversity 
Specialist on the karst issue.  
 
Forests  
 
While the project is not expected to impact the health and quality of the forests, or impact 
the livelihood of people dependent on the forests, or impact the management, protection or 
utilization of the forests, any potential impacts on the forest habitats will be addressed through 
the EIA. If necessary, appropriate mitigation measures will be developed to address the impacts.  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
HPCD has retained the Hubei Province Archeological Research Institute for Cultural Relics 
to identify cultural relics along the alignment including connecting roads, interchanges, waste 
disposal sites, service areas, toll plazas, proposed construction camp sites, casting yards, and 
access roads. The first draft report, submitted to the Bank, was based on an outdated alignment 
and did not cover the other ancillary facilities.  
 
The Park is known to be an area of cultural significance and while the earlier report did not 
identify any known sites of cultural importance, a much more detailed analysis is expected given 
the history of the area. HPCD will ask the Institute to revise and update the Cultural Relics report 
based on the more recent alignment and locations of the secondary facilities.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
It is not anticipated that Indigenous Peoples will be located in the project area. This will be 
confirmed through socioeconomic and inventory surveys.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Given that this is the sixth Bank project done by the HPCD and their recent excellent 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
performance with involuntary resettlement on the Shiman project, HPCD are expected to handle 
the involuntary resettlement well. The expressway will require land acquisition and house 
demolition, although the rugged terrain means that there will likely be less than on previous 
similar projects in China.  A socioeconomic and inventory survey will be conducted. A 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for the project. The compensation rates will be 
determined through consultation with the affected people and be consistent with previous Bank 
and locally financed projects. Emphasis will be given to the rehabilitation strategy, including 
income restoration and issues such as construction of new residential areas in the same villages 
and recreating arable land.  
 
Although no linkages have been identified, the Task team will review the possible linked 
projects and conduct due diligence to evaluate the project risks, if appropriate.  
 
Appropriate consultation and disclosure of the documents will be carried out for both EA 
reports and RAP.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/27/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The following reports are expected over the next three months:  
 
April 15, 2007 - First draft EIA and EMP reports in English.  
 
April 15, 2007 - Revised draft Cultural Relics report.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
06/19/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
06/21/2007 
Comments:  It is noted that the Task team will identify the potential linked projects and conduct 
environmental and social due diligence to evaluate the project risks.   
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
