Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2389 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/26/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P099062 
Project Name: China: Shi-Zheng Railway 
Task Team Leader: John Carter Scales 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
3,600.00
3,600.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Project is to meet growing freight and passenger market 
demand in the railway corridor between Shijiazhuang and Handan, while substantially improving 
the level of service offered to customers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will finance a 200-km section of the planned 2,100-km high-speed railway line from 
Beijing to Guangzhou. The construction of this railway has already started at the southern end, 
and the entire project is expected to be completed by 2010. Construction on the Bank-financed 
section is expected to begin in October 2006.  
 
The new line will consist of two tracks running generally parallel, but not within the same right-
of-way, as an existing railway line. In order to enable a higher operating speed the alignment is 
generally straighter. As the terrain is generally flat, no tunnels will be constructed. As much as 
possible, the preferred alignment avoids densely populated areas, coal mines, and sites of cultural 
and historic importance. Some new railway stations will be constructed where none currently 
exist.   
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
The railway alignment is from Shijiazhuang, Hebei province to Handan in Hebei province just 
north of the border with Henan border.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Previous experience indicates strong commitment from MOR on the Bank's safeguards policies 
and a good record on implementation. It has developed in-house capacity to implement, 
supervise and monitor both the environmental management plan and the resettlement action plan.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
River Crossings.  The EA will specify the rivers to be crossed by the railway line, identify 
whether there will be any perforations of river beds, and assess potential environmental impacts.  
 
Tunnel Construction.  The task team stated that the project design will not involve any 
tunnel construction or mountain cuts. Therefore, there are no issues on soil disposal.  
 
Railway Stations.  The EA will address sewage treatment and solid waste management at 
stations.  The project design will address sustainable operation and maintenance of these systems 
during implementation.  
 
Maintenance Depots.  Each of the four maintenance depots identified in the project will be 
subject to an environmental audit to cover, among others, the following environmental issues:  (i) 
wastewater management from maintenance operations,  (ii) sewage management,  (iii) 
stormwater management,  (iv) storage of fuels or hazardous chemicals,  (v) management of other 
hazardous materials,  (vi) air emissions and wastewater discharges from boilers.  
 
Noise.  The EA will identify the areas sensitive to increased noise (e.g., schools, hospitals, 
and residences near the railway) and assess the impacts of noise during construction and 
operation of the nearby railway line.  
 
Implementing the EMP.  As the project design consists of only an investment component, 
the safeguards team emphasized the importance of having experienced institutions implement the 
EMP and to oversee its implementation.  The task team agreed that:  (i) the EA will identify and 
assess the capacities of the institutions to implement the EMP and oversee implementation of the 
EMP and, (ii) if necessary, the project design will be revised to include strengthening of these 
institutions.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The screening mechanism incorporated into the EA will be used to identify protected areas, 
known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical natural habitats and to ensure that 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
project impacts mitigated.  The need for further action under this policy remains to be 
determined.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Since the final alignment has not been identified, it is not known at this time whether project 
activities will adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or 
unique natural values.  The screening mechanism incorporated into the EA will identify 
culturally significant sites.  The need for further action under this policy remains to be 
determined.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
It is unclear at this time if project activities will affect Indigenous Peoples.  The team 
involved in preparation of the RAP is conducting a preliminary social survey to determine 
whether a full Social Assessment is required which will then determine if Indigenous Peoples are 
present in the project area and will be affected by project activities.  The need for further action 
under this policy remains to be determined.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land Acquisition.  The task team confirmed land acquisition and relocation will be required 
under the project.  Preliminary estimates based on pre-feasibility study have estimated that a total 
of 747 hectares of land and about 2,740 households will be affected by this project.  The RAP is 
being prepared by two experienced consultants who have worked on Bank projects in the past.  
 
Compensation.  The RAP will prepare a detailed remuneration package as an annex.  Based 
on past experience with similar projects, the safeguards team recommends that the RAP include 
specific compensation rates for all categories of affected assets. Alternatively, clear criteria for 
determining compensation rates to be paid in any particular case if the RAP is to be based on 
compensation ranges for affected assets.  It is too early in project preparation to determine if 
there will be issues with income restoration.  This will be included as part of the further RAP 
preparation.  
 
Implementation.  The implementing arrangements are yet to be fully determined, but will be 
covered in the RAP.  Both RAP implementing organizations, supervisory agencies, and 
independent M&E institutions will be identified.  If capacity of any of these appears inadequate, 
a
capacity development program will be built into the project.  
 
Linkage.  It was agreed that this project can be seen as a self-standing operation that does 
not necessarily rely on the other sections of railway to achieve its objectives.  The point was 
made that, while the project may not be linked in the strict sense of para 4 of OP 4.12, it is 
nevertheless connected to the rest of the line.  Therefore, as part of a reputational risk 
management measure, it was agreed that the project would conduct a due diligence exercise for 
both sections connected to the project.  The due diligence exercise would be comprised of a 
review of the implemented, and/or to be implemented, resettlement provisions of the agencies in 
charge of financing and construction of the two adjacent sections.  The review would determine 
whether these provisions would pose a significant reputational risk to the Bank.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/02/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/12/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
RAP and EA :  draft version will be release by the end of Nov.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Carter Scales 
08/09/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
09/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
09/18/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
