                                                                                        42507


                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

 I. Basic Information
 Date preparedlupdated: 1110112007                                           Report No.

 1. Basic Proiect Data
 Country: China                              1Project ID: PI02567
 Project Name: Shandong Minhe Poultry Manure Biogas Project
 Task Team Leader: Neerai Prasad
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 12/03/2007        0
 Managing Unit: EASRE                         Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
 Sector: A~ro-Industrv.Renewable Energv
/Theme: Climate Change
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
 GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
 PCF Amount (US$m.):             20.00
 Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWERIRECIPIENT

 Enviro~lmentalCategory: B   - Partial Assessment
 Simplified Processing                        Simple [I           Repeater [I
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)       Yes [ ]    No [XI

 2. Project Objectives
 The objective of this Carbon Finance project is to reduce greenhouse gases (GHGs) by
 replacing the use of open lagoons to treat chicken waste at Shandong Minhe Livestock
 Co. Ltd. (Minhe) with improved Animal Manure Management Systems (AMMS) that
 will capture and combust methane and generate electricity.       This objective will be
 facilitated through the leverage of a Carbon Finance transaction under the rules of the
 Kyoto Protocol's Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).             This project will also
 contribute to enhancing sustainable development opportunities by providing a
 demonstration of improved AMMS practices and a Community Benefits Plan (CBP) to
 assist nearby villages.

 3. Project Description

 Component A. Construction ofAnaerobic Digesters and Electricitv Generation Units

 As the Project Developer, Minhe will replace existing practice open lagoons with
 centralized mesophilic-temperature     anaerobic digesters and biogas-based power
 generation. The generated electricity will be sold to the commercial grid, which will
 displace electricity that would otherwise be produced from coal-fired power plants.
 Fresh chicken manure from Minhe's 29 fanns will be transported by pipes or tank trucks
 to the centralized anaerobic digesters. The digesters will be located in Minhe's largest
 compound, Compound C, where manure from that site will be transported by

underground pipes to the digesters. Manure from Compounds A and B (5.6 km and 18.5
km away from Compound C, respectively) will be transferred by tank trucks to the
digesters. The total capacity of the anaerobic digesters will be 27,200 m3, with an
expected annual biogas output of 10.95 million m3. Annually, it will produce 26.28
million kwh of electricity. Digested manure will be separated into liquid and solid
residues and used for irrigation and organic fertilizer.


Component B: Comrnunitv Benefits Plan. To meet all of the requirements of the
Community Development Carbon Fund (CDCF), the project will support activities to
improve the quality of life of poor communities living around the project site. The CBP
will focus on infrastructure improvements including rehabilitation of rural roads and
development of drinking water facilities. The CBP will also provide information and
technical training services to farmers on the proper application of the digested liquid
manure from the project. These information and training services will help improve
agricultural production while also preventing adverse environmental impacts from the use
of fertilizer.


Component C: Carbon Finance Transaction The World Bank-managed CDCF will
purchase the CER credits resulting from the combustion of methane and power
generation. The terms and conditions of this transaction will be agreed upon between the
World Bank (as trustee of the CDCF) and the Project Developer, Minhe in an Emissions
Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA). The purchase will be a performance-based
contract under which payments are triggered by successful verification of the CERs by an
independent Designated Operating Entity (DOE) accredited by the CDM Executive
Board established under the Kyoto Protocol. CER payments will be made periodically
subject to this verification. The CDCF will coordinate both the verification and
certification of CERs generated by the Project Developer.


4. Project Location and Salient Physical Characteristics Relevant to the Safeguards
Analysis

The project site will be located on 2 hectares of land owned by Minhe in Penglai City,
Shandong Province, People's Republic of China.          Minhe is currently operating 29
chicken farms located in Compounds A, B, and C with a total population of 5 million
chickens.

The project site at Compound C is surrounded by farmland that produces grapes, apples,
corn, wheat, and peanuts. The land belongs to 5 villages: Hanwang Village with a
population of 745, Wujia Village with a population of 310, Shangweijia Village with a
population of 410, Qujiagou Village with a population of 220, and Houhan Village m~itha
population of 270 population. The closest village to the project site is Hanwang Village
which is about 800m away.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Mr. Hiroshi Ono (EASRE)

      Mr. Peishen Wang (EASRE)
      Mr. Jun Zeng (EASSO)


 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
F

 Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                           X
 Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                              X
 Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                       X
  Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
1 Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                              L          I
1                                                                           x
  Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                           X
I Involuntarv Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12 )                    1           1    x     1
I Safetv of Dams (OPIBP 4.37'1                              1           1    x     1
                                                                         -   --
  Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                          X
  Proiects in Dis~utedAreas (OPIBP 7.60)                                     X

  11. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

  1.Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
 Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

  This project is a Category B project since the potential adverse environmental impacts are
  site-specific and manageable with readily available mitigation measures. The project
 boundary for safeguards compliance includes: (i) manure collection and handling at
  Minhe's three compounds; (ii) manure conveyance from the chicken farms in each
 compound to the biogas digesters; (iii) biogas generation and storage; (iv) generation of
  electricity from biogas and its transmission to the grid; (v) processing and storage of
 digested manure; and (vi) application of digested manure on nearby agricultural lands.

 Overall, this project contributes to reducing environmental impacts associated with
 current chicken farm operations such as methane and odor generation from the open
  lagoons, while the amount of ground water consulnption and digested manure application
 on farmland will not substantially change from the current operations. Notwithstanding,
 this project may affect sensitive environmental areas including the five nearby villages
  and four water wells unless appropriate mitigation measures are put in place. Key
 potential environmental impacts may include:
    (i) dust, noise, and solid waste generated from the construction activities during the
        construction phase; and,
    (ii) spills or leakage of fresh manure from collection and transportation processes, odor
         from the treatment process, air pollution from the power generation process, and
        surface and ground water pollution from digested manure storage and land
        application processes all during the operation phase.

  Construction of project facilities will take place on land acquired in 2002 and owned by
  Minhe; therefore the project will not require any additional land and does not trigger OP
  4.12. However, the task team was apprised of a newspaper article featuring complaints

from villagers about a previous land acquisition by Minhe. The task team conducted an
extensive due diligence review which determined that the land acquisition in question
does not pose any significant potential reputational risks to the World Bank.

2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

None identified.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

A three-stage alternative analysis was conducted including (i) with and without project
comparison, (ii) selection of plant site location, and (iii) selection of manure treatment
technology.

Regarding the location of the biogas plant, three available sites namely Compounds A, B,
and C were compared. Compound A was finally selected because the site: (i) required
the least transportation of chicken manure; (ii) had the most favorable geographical
conditions for the treatment processes; (iii) was the farthest from residential areas and
unlikely to cause environmental impacts on the villagers; and (iv) complied with the land
use plan of Penglai City.

Four anaerobic manure treatment technologies were compared including Continuous
Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR), Anaerobic Contact Reactor, Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge
Bed (UASB), and Up-flow Solid Reactor (USR).              The covered lagoon option was
rejected at an earlier stage of technology analysis since cold winter weather in Penglai
City would not result in sufficient methane production for a CDM project. CSTR was
finally selected since this technology is most suitable for the treatment of wastewater
with high solid content, as is the case with this project. In addition, CSTR has additional
advantages such as low investment costs, easy operational management, high gas yield,
and longer hydraulic residence time that ensures stable biogas output and pathogen
elimination.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was prepared and approved by the
Shandong Provincial Environmental Protection Bureau in November 2006. However,
since this EIA only addressed the environmental impacts of digesters and the power
generator, Minhe commissioned the Shandong Academy of Environmental Science to
prepare a revised EIA that covered the entire project boundary. The task team reviewed
the revised EIA and found it to be in compliance with the World Bank's Safeguards
requirements.

An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has also been developed for this project.
The EMP defines institutional structures with specific description of relevant
departmentlstaff responsibilities, staff training plan, environmental monitoring plan,
reporting mechanism, and occupational safety plan. The EMP will be attached to the
E W A and its implementation will be monitored by the World Bank. The task team has
noted that Minhe has a very well developed Emergency Response Plan to Avian
Influenza.

Although Minhe has not worked previously with the World Bank, it has an established
mechanism for environmental management. Currently, the head of each farm assumes
full responsibility and appoints staff for environmental management.            The Quality
Inspection Department at the company's headquarters regularly inspects the handling of
manure and wastewater at each farm and supervises and examines its environmental
management status. Minhe plans to enhance its environmental management capacity by
increasing   environmental management          staff, further  defining their    roles and
responsibilities, and providing staff training in conjunction with this project.

In order to address potential reputational risks to the World Bank related to the past land
acquisition, an independent resettlement consultant was hired to thoroughly review the
land acquisition process undertaken by Minhe. Based on the consultant's report and the
task team's own investigation, it was concluded that: (i) the land acquisition was legally
authorized by the Shandong Provincial Government; (ii) the affected villages received
adequate compensation and there were no pending legal cases related to the land
acquisition; and (iii) there was no evidence of adverse impacts on the living standards of
families affected by the acquisition of land.       Therefore, there will be no significant
reputational risks to the World Bank regarding the land legacy issue.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Public consultation was carried out for the EIA through a public meeting followed by a
questionnaire survey in September 2006. A total of 50 people from nearby villages and
relevant institutions participated in the consultation process. The main concerns were
noise, waste, and wastewater issues during construction as well as land acquisition.
Minhe has committed to address these concerns in both the project design and operation.

The EIA report was disclosed locally on August 28, 2007 and in Washington, DC on
September 17, 2007.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Planlother:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      0911712007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  08/28/2007
  Date of submission to IllfoShop                                  0911712007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive           NA

  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Contplia~zceMonitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to befilled in when the
ISDS isfinalized by theproject decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 Environment Assessment
                  -
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
mourn and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals

Signed and submiliedby:                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:
EnvironmentalSpecialist:                                               11-01-2007
Social Development Specialist                                          11-01-2007
Additional Environmentalandlor
Social DevelopmentSpecialist(s):

                                                    2>v
Approved by:
Regional SafeguardsCoordinator:  N/A as this as a transferredprojet
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                  h4r.IZahulRaturi
 Comments:                                                    /

                                                         /

