Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/24/2007 
Report No.:  AC2623
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P084437 
Project Name:  CN-Rural Health 
Task Team Leader:  L. Richard Meyers 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Social safety nets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main project objective is increased and more equitable access to quality health 
services, improved financial protection, and better management of public health threats in 
pilot provinces and counties, with lessons to support reforms in non-project areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The primary activity of the project is to support innovations that can contribute to 
furthering the government’s on-going health reform agenda.  In selected provinces and 
counties, the project will pilot and then evaluate innovations in health reform that can 
contribute to the project’s overall goals.  Towards this end, project counties will test 
innovations under the following three components.  
 
COMPONENT ONE:  Improving Rural Health Financing  
 
This component will pilot ways to strengthen and make more effective on-going 
government programs to provide financial protection for rural households against the 
escalating costs of health care.  
 
Page  2
COMPONENT TWO:  Improving Quality, Efficiency and Cost Control in Service 
Delivery  
 
The component will support innovations that can:  (i) lead to effective control of health 
care costs; (ii) improve  the technical quality of care; (iii) increase internal efficiency in 
service delivery; and (iv) result in an increased focus on prevention and health promotion.  
 
COMPONENT THREE:  Strengthening the Financing and Organization of Core Public 
Health Functions  
 
Through piloting different approaches to the strengthening of public health system 
financing and organization, this component aims to improve the quality, efficiency and 
equity of core public health services as well as preparedness for new public health 
challenges in rural China.  
 
COMPONENT FOUR:  Project Coordination, Policy Development and Lesson 
Learning  
 
This fourth component will aim to guide project implementation and identify replicable 
models for rural health reform   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
NA   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
4.  Social  
 
Some counties may contain ethnic minority populations and efforts will be made by the 
project to ensure their full involvement in project activities (see point 4 below).  
 
Page  3
The project is rated as Category C in terms of environmental effects.  The project is not 
a
standard health project.  Its focus is on testing the viability of certain institutional 
innovations
—cost control measures, improved insurance mechanisms, new ways of 
organizing public health services, etc.  Unlike most health projects, it will not fund the 
delivery of a broad spectrum of clinical health services although it is, of course, hoped 
that such services may be indirectly affected for the better by the innovations tested.  The 
project negative list will indicate that disposables will not be funded.  Nor will new 
construction be supported. Rather any civil works will be confined to renovation of 
offices for the NCMS to enhance the monitoring and evaluation systems of local NCMS 
programs. Thus issues on involuntary resettlement should not arise.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address the matter of ethnic minority issues in potential counties in the project, a 
social assessment framework has been developed that counties will use to examine how 
people or groups will be affected directly (whether positively or negatively) by the 
project and whether people who should benefit are at risk of being excluded.  One 
dimension of the assessment is to ask whether ethnic minority populations are found in 
the county who are culturally and in other ways differentiated from other populations in 
the county.  In the event that is the case, and depending on the nature of this 
differentiation, an ethnic minorities framework will be employed in which counties will 
be asked to indicate the measures they will take to address ethnic minority concerns as 
part of the county proposals they will submit to be included in the project (use of 
indigenous language in outreach activities, etc.).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The social assessment exercise has included a detailed stakeholder analysis and 
consultation process that will be undertaken in each county joining the project and will 
form part of the county's proposal to be included in the project. Details on the various 
stakeholders and consultation process to be followed are provided in Annex 10 of the 
PAD.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/26/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr L. Richard Meyers 
06/22/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
06/22/2007 
Comments:   
