Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2255 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/10/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P099224 
Project Name: Liaoning Third Medium Cities Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader: Gailius J. Draugelis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (95%);Oil and gas (5%) 
Theme: Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
200.00
200.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objective is to improve the effectiveness of heating supply and gas supply 
in selected medium cities of Liaoning Province, with a particular emphasis on cost recovery and 
system efficiency.  The LMC3 components are planned to include: (i) investment in 
rehabilitation and expansion of urban heating supply utilizing demand driven heating supply 
designs; (ii) investment in urban gas distribution and storage systems; and (iii) consulting 
services for technical implementation, for special topics relating to the implementation of urban 
heating sector reform, following the Government's heat reform guidelines (issued July 2003), 
and project management support, including incremental operating costs.  
 
The project should have a positive environmental impact on local air quality with the 
replacement of numerous inefficient, small boilers located in city centers and use of improved 
technology for new capacity. It will encourage construction of boiler houses further removed 
from urban concentrations, where practicable, taking advantage of advanced piping insulation 
technologies used widely in similar system worldwide. The quality of gas services will be 
improved through the rehabilitation of severely deterioriating gas networks and access will be 
increased through the increased sustainable use of indigenous gas resources.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Currently, there are 9 municipalities presenting about 16 heating proposals and 2 gas proposals, 
which are under review by the Liaoning Provincial Government. Total estimated costs in the 
current pipeline are about US$454 million, of which heating comprises about 95 percent of total.  
 
The proposed Project components currently are:  
 
1.  Renewal of Heat Supply Services   Most of the proposals include a combination of the 
following elements (a) replacement of small boiler houses (currently about 679) with modern 
centralized heating services, including construction of new boilers (about 50 boilers in about 16 
new or existing boiler plants), primary and secondary networks (currently totaling about 693 km) 
and substations (currently, totaling about 414); (b) expansion of modern centralized heating 
services to new residential housing; and (c) rehabilitation of existing hot water and steam boilers 
(currently, about 60 MWt) and network facilities (currently, about 88 km).  The currently 
estimated total heating area covered by the project is about 70 million m2, of which about 40 
percent (by current estimates) is to be built in the next five years and representing about 14 
percent of the total heated area in the province.  In addition, currently one industrial waste heat 
recovery rehabilitation project (Benxi) is under consideration.  
 
An important element of this investment program is the introduction of the key technical 
innovations that will enable the downstream implementation of heat reform. These are: (i) use of 
variable speed pumps on the primary side and if feasible on the secondary side of the network; 
(ii) substations with automatic temperature controls; and (iii) installation of heat meters at 
substation and possibly at building level.  
 
2. Gas Supply Improvements  Currently, the pipeline includes: (a) Tieling City Gas Supply 
Improvement and Expansion, including rehabilitation of entire city gas network and repairing 
and upgrading transmission pipeline from Tiefa Coal Mine (Coal Mining Gas); (b) Yingkou Gas 
Distribution Facility Rehabilitation and Expansion, including construction of new natural gas 
transmission pipeline from the Liaohe Oil Field (associated natural gas), construction of storage 
tank and replacing household meters.  
 
3. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building in Utility Management and Regulation to 
support technical implementation of investments, if needed, improvements in financial 
management of utilities, including billing systems, environmental management, and for special 
topics relating to the implementation of urban heating sector reform, including development of 
provincial level price and service regulatory oversight system and capabilities, following the 
Government's heat reform guidelines (issued July 2003). The activities will target the LMC cities 
in partnership with provincial government.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The currently proposed LMC3 project cities' populations average about 472,000 (ranging 
between 1.2 million and 30,000).  The project service areas for heating project proposals and the 
gas proposals are generally known, but siting is not yet fully determined.   
 
Page  3
E
.
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Social/Resettlement  
 
It is not likely that large-scale resettlement will be needed in the proposed Project. Most new 
plants should be sited in the outer parts of urban areas.  It is likely that land parcels will need to 
be acquired for the construction of new heating plants and heating and gas pipelines.  Siting of 
the substations is not fully determined.  Many will be sited existing small boiler facilities, which 
will be dismantled and replaced with new capacity financed from this project. Smaller 
substations, which are generally more efficient than large group substations, are being discussed.  
If used, some land may need to be acquired, or rights to use basement space may be needed in 
case individual building-level substations are used.  
 
Environmental Issues  
 
Overall, the proposed Project when completed should have positive environmental benefits 
primarily in the more efficient consumption of coal and associated reductions of dust, sulfur 
dioxide and nitrogen oxides from the replacement of small boilers with more efficient units.  
This will likely result in an improvement of local air quality in winter months at areas of high 
population densities, when the increased emissions and adverse meteorological conditions (high 
incidence of inversions) result in the most serious air pollution conditions.  
 
New heating and gas pipeline routes will be either above ground or below ground, depending 
on conditions and cost (not yet determined).  It is likely pipeline routes will follow public rights 
of way (streets).  During construction activities, the environmental issues are site specific, 
relating to construction activities, generally including dust, noise, minor traffic disruptions, 
potential handling of waste (inert and hazardous, e.g. asbestos) and handling/disposal of slag (by 
product of burned coal).  Generally, these issues can be minimized with standard procedures for 
good engineering and construction.  About 60 percent of the proposed boilers are located in 
Yingkou (800 MWt in 6 plants) and Benxi (551 MWt in 4 plants) cities. The likelihood of 
cumulative impacts from the interaction of these 10 sources is small as the two cities are about 
150 km from each other.  Enforcement of environmental pollution controls and compliance with 
local EPB standards will be supervised by World Bank review of technical specifications in bid 
documents and EMP implementation procedures agreed in advance with each borrower.  
 
Most of the borrowers have limited experience with Bank Safeguard policies. Some borrowers 
have implemented a previous ADB heating project so they may be familiar with basic principles 
of safeguard requirements in project design and implementation. However, a more 
comprehensive review of safeguard implementation capacity needs will be made during 
preparation, and if necessary an institutional capacity strengthening component will be 
incorporated into the project design.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASEG) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSD) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is a Category B rated project and an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) for each subproject will be required. An English language Executive Summary of 
Chinese EA documentation will be prepared and disclosed following the Bank's standard 
practices in China and the infoShop (English language version).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
It is not expected project activities will affect any above-ground artifacts with archeological,  
historical, religious, or unique natural values as defined under OPN 11.03, but this will be 
confirmed through environmental and resettlement inventory stock taking.  However, most of the 
construction activity will involve excavation work and thus all contracts will include standard 
clauses which follow Chinese law and regulations regarding chance finds during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The census and social economic survey carried out for previous projects financed by the 
Bank in the province indicated there are some government defined minority groups in some 
cities. But these minority groups would not affected by previous Bank financed projects. A 
similar screening will be conducted to determine if the policy will be triggered or not.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There will be resettlement associated with some heating, and moderate amounts of temporary 
and permanent land acquisition would not be avoidable to the proposed project.  Resettlement 
Action Plans and/or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans as per Bank policy will be prepared 
for subprojects based on their significance of resettlement impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Tentative schedule for abbreviated RAP preparation is as follows:  
 
1.
Training provided to Provincial PMO and cities in July 2006.  
 
2.
Mobilize RAP consultant September 2006.  
 
3.
First draft RAPs prepared before end of October 2006.  
 
4.
Final draft RAPs to be submitted to Bank for review and to be disclosed both 
domestically and at InfoShop by end of January 2007.    
 
Tentative schedule for EMP preparation is as follows:  
 
1.
Training provided to Provincial PMO and cities in May 2006.  
 
2.
EMP consultant, if necessary, mobilized in May 2006.  
 
3.
Draft EMPs completed by October 2006.  
 
4.
Consultations held by November 2006.  
 
5.
Final draft EMPs to be submitted to Bank for review and to be disclosed both 
domestically and at InfoShop by end of January 2007.    
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gailius J. Draugelis 
07/20/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
08/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mohinder P. Gulati 
08/10/2006 
Comments:  Clearance on safeguards for this project will not be transferred to the Sector Unit. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
