Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/08/2007 
Report No.:  AC3137
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P096925 
Project Name:  China Bengbu Integrated Environment Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shenhua Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 17, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);Roads and highways 
(10%);Water supply (5%);Sub-national government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Water resource 
management (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
128.00
128.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the effectiveness of selected urban 
environmental services delivered by agencies of BM.  
 
Key outcome indicators are: (i) reduction of the area of submergence, and losses from 
floods in Bengbu City; (ii) improvement or maintenance of Huai River water quality 
without deterioration, in the stretch in Municipality; (iii) reduction of pollution discharges 
from BM to the Huai River; (iv) relocation of specified polluting industries from the 
urban core of Bengbu City; (v) increase in the number of new industries setting up in 
BM; (vi) improvement in the reliability of water supply for Bengbu City; and (vii) 
improvement of financial viability of wastewater companies.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project covers activates which aim to: (a) address water environment issues 
through integrated investments in flood control, water resource management, catchment 
protection, storm drainage, wastewater collection, joint inter-district infrastructure 
Page  2
development, and environmental management; (b) introduce professional management 
services and load-based charges for industrial wastewater management; (c) encourage 
PPP in infrastructure service provision; (c) enhance cooperation between administrative 
units (municipality, District and Counties) of Bengbu Municipality in information 
sharing, inter-municipal cooperation in infrastructure optimization, interfacing water 
quality databases, flood monitoring and control systems, and water resource 
management, (d) improve development-related information dissemination to the public; 
and (e) support regulatory reforms, and create a better investment climate in the 
Municipality.  
 
BIEIP consists of four components and they cover Bengbu City and three satellite 
Counties of Huaiyuan, Wuhe and Guzhen as follows:  
 
Component 1: Water Resources Management: (a) increased reliability and protection of 
the catchment of one of the Bengbu?s long-term drinking water source ? Tianhe Lake; 
and (b) protection and ecological restoration of the Longzi Lake in Bengbu City.  
 
Component 2: Urban Environmental Infrastructure Improvement: storm drainage 
networks and flood control including ancillary structures; sewer networks; and roads in 
Bengbu City and Huaishang District, including Huaishang and Huaiyuan sharing 
wastewater treatment facilities.  
 
Component 3: Sub-urban Environmental Infrastructure Improvement: storm drainage 
network and flood control including ancillary structures; water supply treatment and 
distribution network, wastewater treatment and collection networks, including load-based 
tariffs in the Mohekou Fine Chemical Park (MFCP); and roads in Guzhen, Huaiyuan and 
Wuhe.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Development and Capacity Building:  
 
Implementation Support (Package A): (a) project management support to the BPMO; 
(b) independent design review services; and (c) independent monitoring of safeguards 
implementation.  
 
Capacity Building (Package B): institutional and financial strengthening of utility 
companies; (b) technical assistance support for preparing the regulatory framework, and 
procuring a private service provider for the Mohekou Township and MFCP; (c) 
preparation of a water resources management and catchment protection plan for Tianhe 
catchment; (d) flood monitoring and control system for project towns; (e) capacity 
improvement for water quality monitoring management for Bengbu EPB and the three 
EPBs, including data sharing with the public; (f) investment climate institutional reform; 
and (g) training.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Bengbu Municipality is one of the municipalities in Anhui Province located in the 
central eastern part of China, occupied by plains (86% of the whole municipality) with 
relatively centralized hills and many interlaced inland rivers, canals and lakes (water 
surface accounts for 8%). Bengbu is at the northern edge of North Subtropical Zone and 
in the humid region of subtropical monsoon climate. The annual average precipitation is 
905.4mm, and the dominant wind direction in Bengbu throughout the year is east.  
 
In Bengbu Municipality, there lie many rivers and lakes which belong to Huai River 
system and Huaihongxin River system. Bengbu section is in the lower section of the 
middle reaches of Huai River, which has resulted in the frequent floods due to large 
amounts of flood discharge from upstream during the flooding season every year.  
 
As known, Huai River is one of the most polluted rivers in China despite considerable 
efforts by government (including participation of the World Bank on the Huai River 
Pollution Control Project); it has proven to be one of the most difficult rivers to clean up. 
According to the historical monitoring results, although the government has made 
significant investments on the pollution control of Huai River, the water quality of Huai 
River for Bengbu section does not meet the Class III water quality target in the last seven 
years. This situation frequently occurs during the dry season from January to March when 
the flow rate of Huai River is too low to dilute the incoming pollution.  
 
Ethnic Minority: Benbu municipality has 36 minority groups (mainly including Hui, 
Menggu, Man, Yi, Zhuang, Miao, Hani and Korean nationality) based on information 
obtained from social assessment but their total population is relatively small in 
comparison with total population of the municipality (minority population is about 1% of 
total population.). Social assessment confirmed that no minority group will be affected by 
the project.  Therefore, the Bank's Policy on Indigenous Peoples OP 4.10 is not applied.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Issues: The proposed project will bring following positive benefits: (1) 
construction of storm drainage pumping stations will effectively upgrade the flood 
management standard of defined service area to prevent frequent floods, guarantee the 
safety of people?s lives and properties, and promote the industrial and agricultural 
development of the project areas; (2) completion of the urban (south of the Huai River) 
drainage system under proposed project could increase almost 50,000m3/d wastewater 
for the No.1 WWTP, which could increase the loading rate of the WWTP from the 
current 68% up to about 93%, so as to significantly reduce the total pollutant discharge 
into the Huai River. By calculation, the actual reduction of pollutants due to the increase 
of collected wastewater is projected as follows: CODcr 3650t/y and NH3-N 730t/y; (3) 
dredging of the lake, rivers, canals and storm drainage ditches will improve flood 
management and drainage capacity, surface water quality, ecological environment and 
local landscape.  
 
However, in the construction and operation phases, there would be some adverse 
impacts.  During the construction stage, airborne dust, noise, traffic disruption and 
disposal of spoiled materials can be generated.  In operation stage, because effluents from 
wastewater treatment plants will still have relatively high concentrations of pollutants 
(higher than surface water quality standards allowed), effluent flows with higher 
concentration pollutants can be discharged into single locations, and receiving water 
could still be impacted adversely. And the operation of wastewater treatment plants may 
generate odor and noise, impacting the surrounding residential areas. Furthermore, 
wastewater treatment will also produce sludge, with a risk to release contaminants if the 
sludge is not appropriately collected and safely disposed. In addition, if dredged sediment 
is not properly handled and disposed, environmental impacts at the sites may be found.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement  
 
Efforts have been made to minimize the resettlement impacts during project planning 
and design. The resettlement impacts have been significantly reduced through optimizing 
the project design and implementation arrangements. But involuntary resettlement is still 
unavoidable. Six of 8 subprojects involve land acquisition and resettlement. The 
resettlement impacts scattered in 35 villages of 8 townships.  The project will affect 8598 
people in total, in which, (i) 7276 people (1844 households) are affected by permanent 
acquisition of the collective land; (ii) 267 people (77 households) are affected by 
demolition of urban residential houses; (iii) 1041 people (260 households) are affected by 
demolition of rural residential houses; and (iv) 24 people are affected by demolishing 4 
small grocery stores. Among the PAPs, 27 persons from 13 households are identified as  
vulnerable according the criteria as described in the RAP.  
 
Individual RAPs for each of these subprojects were prepared in Chinese by the 
respective design institutes, assisted by the respective PMO, house demolition offices, 
Page  5
land resources bureaus, affected villages and communities, and potential displaced 
persons.  The RAPs were prepared in compliance with OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement 
and describe in detail the impacts, affected populations, consultation process, 
rehabilitation measures, budget, and implementation and monitoring arrangements. There 
are no resettlement impacts identified for the remaining two subprojects (including 
Longzi lake subproject and Tianhe lake subproject) based on their current design, and a 
brief note was prepared for them to explain why there are no resettlement impacts. On the 
basis of individual RAPs, RAP Summery was drawn up in both Chinese and English.  
 
In the process of project design, the project owners and design institutes assessed 
possible linkages by ongoing or previous activities and found the linkage issue exists in 
Mohekou Industrial Park. To address the linkage issue, a resettlement retroactive review 
(RRR) and a resettlement policy framework (RPF) were prepared.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
For environmental safeguards, as noted in the Section 1 above, there are potential 
negative impacts in the operation of wastewater treatments if the operation is not 
appropriately designed and managed, including effluents from WWTP with relatively 
high concentrations of pollutants, odor and noise, and production of sludge.  Furthermore, 
wastewater treatment will also produce sludge, with a risk to release contaminants if the 
sludge is not appropriately and safely disposed. In addition, if dredged sediment is not 
properly handled and disposed, environmental impacts at the sites may be found.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Several technical alternatives were considered for each component during the preparation 
of the feasibility studies, such as methods for dredging, process technology of wastewater 
treatment, with the objective of minimizing the environmental impacts and the costs.  
 
In terms of minimizing the impacts associated with involuntary resettlement, efforts 
have been made during project planning and design. The resettlement impacts have been 
significantly reduced through optimizing the project design and implementation 
arrangements. These are described in details in Section 1.4 of RAP Summary and each 
subproject RAP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Issues:  In the EMP, during construction stage, contractors have been 
asked to use spray water at construction sites during dry and windy seasons, develop 
careful plans to mitigate noisy construction activities, avoid night time construction, 
maintain equipment in good operating conditions, develop temporary traffic plans to 
detour traffic around construction sites, and dispose of contaminated soil only at pre-
approved sites.  
 
During operation stage, the following measures will be taken to mitigate the issues 
mentioned in Section 1:  
Page  6
-For WWTP, sanitary buffer zone is set up strictly in accordance with national 
requirements and regulations, and at the same time, green isolation belt will be set up as 
well. Strict management will be made on storage, transportation and disposal process for 
the sludge.  In addition, Accidents Emergency Response System will be established to 
prevent risk accidents.  
 
-Monitoring system and program will be set up to monitor the quality of the effluents, 
sludge generated, noise level, and other parameters mentioned in the EMP, regularly.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement: Some implementation agencies have implemented Bank 
projects and have resettlement specialists in the past. But some IAs, particularly at county 
level, including Wuhe, Huaiyuan and Guzhen, has no Bank project experience. Training 
on Bank?s social safeguards policy has been provided and additional training on 
safeguard issues will be necessary. An independent resettlement monitoring will be 
contracted under the project, and semi-annual resettlement monitoring reports will be 
submitted for the Bank supervision teams.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental Safeguards:  Two rounds of public consultation and the information 
disclosure have been conducted during preparation of the environmental assessment.  
 
The first round public consultation was carried out in all the project areas in January 
2007 and the second round in July 2007. The primary objective of the first round was to 
share the project information, learn of their initial concerns, and gather information on 
public concerns about the project, while that for the second round was to communicate 
the EIA findings and proposed mitigation measures and confirm public acceptance and 
satisfaction. Both rounds of public consultation focused on the project-affected people 
and beneficiaries of different age groups, genders, educational backgrounds and 
occupations as well as other stakeholders. The consultation exercise covered following 
forms: bulletins in the press, public opinion questionnaires, public meetings, and so on.  
 
In addition, there have been many rounds of consultation with government agencies, 
local governments, non-government organizations and other stakeholders of the project to 
discuss Project locations, scope, environmental and socio-economic concerns and 
environmental management and mitigation plans.  
 
Information was disclosed through announcements published in the local newspaper and 
the Internet about the major information relative to the project: EA reports prepared and 
display locations, etc., for interested group to access.  
 
Social Safeguards: Public consultation and participation was a key element in 
resettlement planning. The affected residents, business people and district governments 
participated in the census, inventory and formulation of the livelihood rehabilitation 
strategy, measures and relocation sites.  Their feedback has been reflected in determining 
the compensation rates and livelihood rehabilitation measures.  The RAP contains a list 
of major consultation sessions. The participation and consultation process will continue 
Page  7
in resettlement implementation. To facilitate active public participation, following 
complains handling mechanism has been established:  
 
Step 1: Displaced persons can appeal by verbal or paper way to village committee or 
project demolition implementation institution if they are not satisfied with resettlement 
plan. For verbal appeal, village committee and demolition institution should record in 
written form and solve the problems within two weeks;  
 
Step 2: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of Phase 1, they can 
appeal to municipal PMOs/ administration institutions after receiving decision notice and 
the latter should resolve it within two weeks;  
 
Step 3: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of municipal PMOs/ 
administration institutions, they can appeal to subproject leading team or local municipal 
construction commission after receiving decision notice. The latter should handle the case 
within two weeks;  
 
Step 4: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of subproject leading 
team or local municipal construction commission, they can bring a lawsuit to a civil law 
court in case of objection to any aspect of the resettlement plan after receiving decision 
notice.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/14/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/14/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/14/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/14/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shenhua Wang 
09/04/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
09/04/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
09/04/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
09/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
09/27/2007 
Comments:   
Page  9
