Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC2988
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P087224 
Project Name:  Han River Urban Environment Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Hiroaki Suzuki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (50%);Solid waste management (48%);Sub-national government 
administration (2%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
97.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
104.55
104.55 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to reduce the urban pollution generated from 
wastewater and solid waste through their proper collection, treatment and disposal in the 
selected second-tier cities, mainly located in the Han River areas of Hubei Province. This 
will be achieved by undertaking high priority investments in selected project cities in 
wastewater collection and treatment systems and solid waste management systems, as 
well as institutional reforms and capacity development in the areas of municipal utilities 
reforms and water pollution control.  As its secondary objective, the project is intended to 
develop well-managed and sustainable municipal utilities which could be referred to as 
models/best practice for other similar projects or programs to be implemented under the 
Provincial 11th Five-year Plan.   
 
3. Project Description 
Wastewater Treatment Investment Component (US$103.84 million):  This component 
will cover seven cities/counties and include the construction of seven new wastewater 
collection systems in all seven cities/counties and the construction of five new 
Page  2
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in Hanchuan, Shayang, Tianmen, Xiaochang and 
Yunmeng. The details of each subproject are described as follows.  
 
Hanchuan Sewage Collection and Waste Water Treatment: The subproject will upgrade 
Supply and Installation of 25.20  km of Sewer Pipes of DN400 ~ DN2000, a 1.39m3/s, H 
=
15m
Pumping Station and a 50,000 3/d Improved Oxidation Ditch Secondary WWTP.  
 
Honghu Sewage Collection: Supply and Installation of 32.62 km of RC Sewer Pipes of 
DN300 ~ DN1000.  
 
Shayang Sewage Collection and Waste Water Treatment: Supply and Installation of 
44.63 km of Sewer Pipes of DN300 ~ DN1200 and a 30,000 3/d Improved Oxidation 
Ditch Secondary WWTP.  
 
Tianmen Sewage Collection and Waste Water Treatment: Supply and Installation of 
55.68 km of Sewer Pipes of DN300~ DN1800, a 0.508 m3/s, H = 4.50m Pumping Station 
(Upgrading), and a 50,000 3/d Improved Oxidation Ditch Secondary WWTP.  
 
Xiangfan Sewage Collection: Supply and Installation of 5.26 km of Sewer Pipes of 
DN600 ~ DN1500 in Automobile Development Zone and 6.96 Km of Sewer Pipes of 
DN600 ~ DN1500.  
 
Xiaochang Sewage Collection and Waste Water Treatment:  Supply and Installation of 
34.64 km of Sewer Pipes of DN300 ~ DN1200, and a 25,000 m3/d Improved Oxidation 
Ditch Secondary WWTP.  
 
Yunmeng Sewage Collection and Waste Water Treatment: Supply and Installation of 
50.90 km of Sewer Pipes of DN300 ~ DN1500, and a 50,000 m3/d Improved Oxidation 
Ditch Secondary WWTP.  
 
Solid Waste Management (US$63.22 million):  This component will cover seven 
cities/counties and include the construction of new sanitary landfills and solid waste 
collection and transfer stations and equipment in all seven cities/counties, and closures of 
existing dumps in all seven cities. The details of each subcomponent are listed as follows.  
 
Danjiangkou Solid Waste: Construction of Two Solid Waste Transfer Stations 
(Secondary Drop-Off Points) and Wangjiakou Sanitary Landfill of 2.57 million m3 and 
18 years life span, closure of the existing dump site, and upgrading of garbage collection 
fleet.  
 
Dawu Solid Waste: Construction of Shanghengchon Sanitary Landfill of 1.09 million 
m3and 12 years life span, closure of the existing dump site, and upgrading of garbage 
collection fleet.  
 
Hanchuan Solid Waste: Construction of Fuxincun Sanitary Landfill of 2. million m3 and 
14 years life span, Three Solid Waste Transfer Stations (Secondary Drop-Off Points), 
Page  3
upgrading of five existing transfer stations, closure of the existing dump site, and 
upgrading of garbage collection fleet.  
 
Honghu Solid Waste: Construction Xinliancun 
–
Xioangjiayao Sanitary Landfill of 1.46 
million m3 and 13 years life span, closure of the existing dump site, and upgrading of 
garbage collection fleet.  
 
Shayang Solid Waste: Construction of Yangjicun Sanitary Landfill of 2.19 million m3 
and 27 years life span, closure of the existing dump site, and upgrading of garbage 
collection fleet.  
 
Xiaochang Solid Waste: Construction of One Solid Waste Transfer Station (Secondary 
Drop-Off Point) and Yankoucun Sanitary Landfill of 1.56 million m3 and 17 years life 
span., closure of the existing dump site, and upgrading of garbage collection fleet.  
 
Yunmeng Solid Waste: Construction of One Solid Waste Transfer Station (Secondary 
Drop-Off Point) and Fengpucun Sanitary Landfill of 1.24 million m3 and 14 years life 
span, closure of the existing dump site, and upgrading of garbage collection fleet.  
 
Industrial Pollution Control (US$10.63 million):  Under this component, the Hubei 
Province and the project cities will implement the industrial waste water pollution control 
programs with their own funds. The activities are carried out at both provincial and city 
levels, including (a) provincial level program for installation of on line monitoring 
(OLM) at major pollution sources; and (b) the implementation of specific industrial 
wastewater pollution control action plans for major polluting enterprises.  
 
Institutional Development and Capacity Building Component (US$6.47 million): This 
component will include the following activities:  
 
a. 
Project Management and Implementation Assistance (US$3.55 million):  
Technical Assistance (TA) for design review advisory services and construction 
supervision  
 
b.
Institutional Development (ID) and Capacity Building of Wastewater Utilities 
(US$1.02 million):  TA for ID in financial, technical, operational and human resource 
management  
 
c. 
Institutional Development (ID) and Capacity Building of Solid Waste 
Management Organizations (US$0.81 million):  TA for developing their optimal 
institutional framework and ID in financial, technical, operational and human resource 
management.  
 
d.
Studies and TA (US$1.09 million):  (i) TA for improving the Han River Water 
Modeling System developed during project preparation (US$0.88 million); and (ii) a 
study on non-point source pollution (US$0.20 million).   
 
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Hubei Province is located in the center of China and is abundant in water resources, with 
thousands of lakes and numerous streams which constitute the water system of the Mid-
Yangtze Valley.  The Han River is the largest and the most important tributary of the 
Yangtze River, among others. From its source in the neighboring Shannxi Province in the 
northwest, the Han River flows southeast across Hubei Province and finally into the 
Yangtze at Wuhan spanning a length of about 858 km within the Province. The Han 
River Basin stretches over the middle and downstream areas along the Han River, and 
merges into the Mid-Yangtze valley in Hubei forming the Jianghan Plain.  The Jianghan 
Plain is famous for grain, cotton and vegetable oil production in China. Most of the 
project cities are located in the Han River area.  
 
In 2003, only 2.5 million populations had access to a Wastewater Treatment Plant 
(WWTP) in Hubei.  The total capacity of wastewater treatment plant in Hubei is 880,000 
t/d.  Most of the existing wastewater treatment plants, including some funded by the 
World Bank, are located in larger cities (Wuhan, Yichang, Huangshi, and Xiangfan) 
mainly in the Yangtze River area.  The wastewater treatment rate in the urban areas in the 
Province is 15%.  This rate is much lower in the Han River area in Hubei, as there is no 
waste treatment plant, except for few cities.  Untreated wastewater contaminates 
groundwater and river sys
tem and imposes a major threat to the citizen’s health and the 
ecological environment.  In addition, it is expected that the water quality of the Han River 
would deteriorate further after the start of the South-North Water Diversion in the upper 
stream of the Han River in 2010.  
 
The current domestic solid waste generation in Hubei Province is about 13 million tons 
per annum and the 62 existing landfills are used to dispose about 6 million tons of 
domestic solid waste annually or 45% of the total solid waste generated.  In 2005, Hubei 
province had only 8 sanitary landfills which handle about 1.05 million tons of domestic 
solid waste annually, accounting for 8% of the total solid waste.  There is no sanitary 
landfill in the Han River area.  Thus, most of municipal solid wastes go to dumps without 
protection from leachate contamination for underlying aquifers or local surface waters, 
nor any collection of flaring of landfill gas.  The migration of polluted surface waters 
share blame for the high levels of urban aquifer contamination. Malodorous dump sites 
and some of collection points as well as potential sources of diseases are a major source 
of citizen’s complaints associated with environmental issues.  
 
Hubei is a major industrial province ranking 10th in China in terms of industrial gross 
regional product.  Important sectors are the traditional sectors of chemicals (including 
fertilizers), pharmaceuticals, food processing, paper, ferrous metals; and the newer sector 
of light engineering based around automobile manufacturing.  Industrial pollution is 
significant in Hubei with around 65% generated in the Han River area.  Although 
industrial pollution ranks below domestic pollution in terms of quantity, industrial 
pollution is considerably taxing urban environment and economy through discharge of 
various pollutants.  Its effective control and reduction are indispensable not only for 
environmental sustainability but also for cities’ economic competitiveness.  
Page  5
Industrial pollution is significant in Hubei with around 65% generated in the Han Basin. 
In terms of quantity, however, industrial pollution ranks below domestic pollution. 
Industrial pollution in two of the most important pollutants (COD and ammonia) are 
around one third of the levels for domestic pollution, even in the heavily industrialized 
city of Xiangfan.  It is apparent that effective industrial pollution control is important in 
meeting project objectives; such control is not presently established; significant 
improvements in regulatory activities are required; and, important gains can be made 
through process restructuring and promotion of clean technology. The industrial pollution 
control activities in the project cities are an integral part of the 11th Five Year Plan of 
Hubei Provincial EPB. This plan includes other cities in the Han River basin.  
 
The overall water quality of Han River is currently relatively good, with 80% at Class II 
among all the 25 monitoring stations, and the remaining 20% at Class III.  However, the 
branches of the Han River are seriously polluted. Of the 16 monitoring stations, only 6 of 
them are within Class I-III, while the rest are classified at Class IV or worse. In China, 
there are separate standard systems for surface water quality and discharge from various 
sources.  For surface water quality standard , it is categorized according to six classes 
described in GB3838-2002 <Quality Standrad for Surface Water Environment> as 
follows: Class I 
–
Mainly applicable to the source of water bodies and national nature 
preserves, Class II – Mainly applicable to source protection area for centralized drinking 
water supply, sanctuaries for rare species of fish, and spawning grounds for fish and 
shrimps, Class III – Mainly applicable to water source protection area for centralized 
drinking water supply, sanctuaries for common species of fish, and swimming zones, 
Class IV – Mainly applicable to water bodies for general industrial water supply and 
recreational waters in which there is not direct human contact with the water,  Class V – 
Mainly applicable to water bodies for agricultural water supply and for general landscape 
requirements, and Class V+ - Not to be used. And for wastewater discharge, there are 
standards for wastewater discharges from industries and domestic sources.  
 
The water quality of the Han River has deteriorated over the past decades due to a rapid 
urbanization, industrialization and intensified agricultural activities, all in association 
with rapid population growth in the Han River Basin. Moreover, the hydraulic condition 
of the Han River Basin is likely to deteriorate further due to the South-North Diversion in 
2010 (on average, diverting one-third of annual water flows from the Han River at 
Danjiangkou to the Beijing area).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Issues: The proposed project will bring about positive impacts and 
benefits to the environment and communities in the project cities, including reduced raw 
wastewater discharges, improved and increased wastewater collection and treatment, and 
improved solid waste collection and disposal at the sanitary landfills. The project will 
benefit a sizable number of the population within the project cities. The WWTPs 
constructed under the project would reduce annual pollution loads of about 8,852 tons of 
BOD, 11,678 tons of suspended solids, 1,574 tons of NH3-N and 50 tons of phosphorus. 
After project implementation, there will be a decline in environmental deterioration in the 
specific urban sections along the Han River with a target to meet the required surface 
water quality standards: Class II or III. The project will help reduce the existing water 
pollution in the tributaries of the Han River, and other water bodies connecting with the 
Han River such as the Tianmen River, Xijing River, as well as Fuhe and some other 
lakes. The sanitary landfills to be constructed under the project would treat about  
 
508,
000 tons of solid waste annually.  
 
The proposed wastewater components will have many positive effects, most notably: (1) 
improve water quality of the related river sections of the Han River System and 
eventually of the aquatic ecological environment; (2) enhance urban environment and 
improve urban landscape; and (3) improve urban sanitary conditions and enhance public 
health. However, effluent flows from WWTPs will still have a relatively high 
concentration of pollutants (higher than surface water quality standards allow), and since 
effluent flows can be very high and discharged in single locations, the receiving waters 
could still be impacted adversely. The operation of WWTPs could also generate odor and 
noise, impacting the surrounding residential areas. Furthermore, WWTPs will also 
produce sludge, with a risk to concentrate and release contaminants if the sludge 
produced is not appropriately collected and safely disposed.  
 
Page  7
For the solid waste management component, waste transport to landfills will represent 
increased truck traffic, with noise, dust, and traffic accident risks in villages along the 
way. In addition, leachate and gas will be generated with the operation of the landfill.  
 
The adverse impacts during the construction of the wastewater collection system, 
wastewater treatment plants, and landfills include airborne dust, noise, traffic disruption 
and disposal of spoiled materials.  
 
Social Issues: The project will bring about positive impacts and benefits to the 
environment and communities in the nine project cities, as noted above. The construction 
of most subprojects will have a social impact on the people and communities in the sub-
project areas, because of inevitable resettlement and land acquisition. Impact surveys and 
repeated rounds of public consultations conducted for all the subprojects in the nine 
cities/counties identified the people and assets to be affected by
 the project’s resettlement 
requirements. A total of more than 2,025 mu of land will be requisitioned from 13 rural 
villages and another 1,700 mu will be temporarily occupied by construction of the 
subprojects. 206 rural households will be relocated and a total of more than 5,600 people 
will be affected by land acquisition and relocation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As noted in the Section 1 above, there are potential negative impacts in the operation of 
wastewater treatments if the operation is not appropriately designed and managed, 
including effluent from WWTPs with relatively high concentrations of pollutants, odor 
and noise, and production of sludge.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Several technical alternatives were considered for each component during the preparation 
of the feasibility studies, such as selection of wastewater treatment technology, plant 
location, solid waste collection and transfer facilities as well as landfill sites, and sludge 
and leachate treatment technologies with the objective of minimizing the environmental 
and resettlement impacts and costs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Issues:  In order to mitigate adverse impacts during the construction of the 
wastewater collection system, WWTPs, and landfills noted above, contractors will water 
construction sites during dry and windy seasons, develop careful plans to mitigate noisy 
construction activities and avoid night time construction, maintain equipment in good 
operating conditions, develop temporary traffic plans to detour traffic around 
construction sites, and dispose of contaminated soil only at pre-approved sites.  
 
The proposed wastewater components will have many positive effects. However, there 
are potential unintended outcomes such as effluent from wastewater treatment plants with 
Page  8
relatively high concentrations of pollutants, odor and noise from the operation of the 
wastewater treatment plants, and production of sludge as noted above.  
 
The following measures have been/ will be taken to mitigate the above mentioned 
issues:  
 
•
According to national environmental quality standards, a sanitary protection 
distance (buffer zone) of 200m from WWTP should be set up;  
 
•
A
biological odor removal system will be built with the sludge shed having a 
closed structure to ensure cost-effective operation of the odor collection system;  
 
•
A
green isolation belt will be set around the WWTP, especially the sludge area. A 
shelter belt with trees and flowers will be set up in the space of the plant;  
 
•
Management should be strengthened in the operation of WWTPs. The sludge will 
be condensed to control fermentation and cleared after dewatering. The accumulated 
sludge should be purged in repairing various tanks to avoid the impact of malodor;  
 
•
After stabilization and thickening, sludge will be transported to and disposed of in 
local municipal solid waste landfills. All sludge trucks will be watertight to prevent 
leaking and nuisance odor emissions along the transportation routes. The trucking time 
and routes will be pre-determined and strictly followed to avoid heavy traffic roads, 
commercial and residential and other sensitive areas to minimize the impacts to the 
environment and communities;  
 
•
Each city has developed a sludge handling, treatment, and final disposal plan.  
 
For the solid waste management component, waste transport to landfills will represent 
increased truck traffic, with noise, dust, and traffic accident risks in villages along the 
way.  In addition leachate and gas will be generated in operation of the landfills.  
 
Mitigation measures include:  
 
•
Selection and design of access;  
 
•
Implementation of traffic safety rules and training of drivers;  
 
•
According to national environmental quality regulation and standards, sanitary 
protection distance (buffer zone) of 500m will have to be set up from the landfill to any 
nearby residential areas, or any environmentally sensitive receptors;  
 
•
Each city has developed a leachate control, transportation, and treatment plan;  
 
•
Leachate will be collected and treated either at the site of the landfill or be 
transported to nearby municipal WWTP for treatment (detailed in FSR);  
 
•
The landfill gas will be collected and disposed centrally at the sites of the landfill.  
 
Social Issues:  A Project Social Assessment (SA) was conducted in each of the affected 
villages and the surrounding townships, and household surveys covered all the relocated 
households.  Each household was visited for detailed impact inventory and feedback 
solicitation.  More than 20 percent of the population to be affected by land acquisition 
was intensively interviewed in the project information and resettlement communication 
campaign. Project adverse impacts and the related social risks were assessed including 
involuntary taking of land, demolition of houses and attached assets, as well as the 
potential pollution risks surrounding wastewater treatment and landfill sites. There were 
Page  9
no ethnic minority communities among the affected villages and the subproject areas, 
with no further resettlement issues pertaining to any of the subprojects.  
 
Measures for avoiding or/and mitigating the adverse impacts and opportunities for 
livelihood rehabilitation and economic development were discussed and set forth as 
social objectives for the subproject designs. As a result, a Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) was prepared for each of the subprojects with resettlement components in 
consultation with the project affected people (PAP). These RAPs and their preparation 
processes were reviewed and ensured to be in compliance with the Bank social safeguard 
policies, and the Municipal Project Management Offices (MPMOs) of all the nine project 
cities/counties assumed full ownership and responsibility for the implementation of the 
RAPs.  
 
The main measures taken to address the resettlement issues include the following:  
 
•
Farmland compensation is assessed on the basis of synthetic annual output values 
per mu as mandated by Hubei Province and approved by the state in 2007, which are 
30% higher than the previous rates assessed at 16 times the average annual output value 
(as set in the land law).   According to the national land law and the provincial land 
policy, this compensation rate for farmland mandated by Hubei provincial government is 
assessed as equivalent to the replacement cost in agriculture;  
 
•
Housing and other fixed assets including attachments to the land are compensated 
at the replacement prices, as agreed by the owners;  
 
•
Temporary occupation of farmland is compensated at the costs of green crops for 
two cultivation seasons per year, with the reclamation responsibility of the users after the 
occupation;  
 
•
Resettlement sites and new housing plots are discussed, agreed upon, and 
prepared prior to physical relocation, for which resettled households are assisted by the 
subprojects affecting them as needed;  
 
•
Productive/economic rehabilitation of affected farm households is planned on the 
basis of either land-to-land compensation or other non-agricultural activities supported 
with land compensation, depending on both the availability of arable land within the 
village communities and the affected farmers’ willingness;  
 
•
Employment opportunities are planned for the affected farmers in local solid 
waste and wastewater services by the subproject entities with appropriate job training;  
 
•
Impact on non-residential units is expected to be temporary and relatively minor 
for most PAPs; no one is expected to lose employment because of the project activities;  
 
•
For vulnerable households, all the relevant subprojects design particular 
allowances for their livelihood rehabilitation under local cities/counties’ allowance 
policies; and their housing problems are to be solved by the village communities they 
belong to under project assistance; and  
 
•
All the resettlement costs are charged to the related subprojects’ budgets as a 
whole.   
 
Page  10
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental Safeguards:  Two rounds of public consultations for each subcomponent 
have been carried out during EA preparation. The first round was carried out after the 
announcement of the sub-project, and the second round right after the preparation of the 
draft EA report. The primary objective of the first round was to gather information from 
the public about the project, while the priority for the second round was to communicate 
the EIA findings and proposed mitigation measures and confirm public acceptance and 
satisfaction.  
 
In addition, there have been many rounds of consultations with government agencies, 
local governments and other stakeholders of the project to discuss project locations, 
scope, environmental and socio-economic concerns, and environmental management and 
mitigation plans.  EA Report and Environment Management Plan of each project city 
have been disclosed locally at the respective cities/counties, as well as at the Provincial 
PMO.  
 
Social Safeguards:  The project social assessment (SA) was carried out by a consulting 
team from Hohai University, composed of sociologists and economists with rich 
experience in involuntary resettlement, in particular with the resettlement potentials of 
the project. As required, the SA exercise in this project context helped incorporate social 
analysis and participation into project preparation, with a focus on adverse impacts. The 
SA team conducted sample questionnaire surveys and group meetings in both urban and 
rural areas of all the nine cities/counties, collecting and assessing views from different 
stakeholders on project benefits and impacts. Based on the understanding and needs from 
most of the local residents, the SA was able to help the subproject design be more 
socially sound in contribution to ecological and environmental improvement. In a number 
of cases, the SA exercise helped steer subproject design to change locations of sewerage 
services or landfills in order to reduce resettlement impacts and minimize potential social 
risks (such as SW and WWT in Tianmen city, and WWTs in Shayang and Yunmeng 
counties); and to improve deployment of some transfer stations for local residents’ 
convenience.  Through statistical surveys and public consultations on the solid waste and 
wastewater operations, the SA helped increase landfills and sewerage services in 
underserved areas in a sustainable way by empirically analyzing the affordability of the 
waste disposition tariff among different social strata and groups, including lower income 
households.  
 
In view of resettlement as the key negative impact caused by construction of landfills 
and sewer and drainage facilities in the nine project cities/counties, the project cities 
conducted extensive public consultations among rural/urban residents who might be 
affected by the 12 subprojects in these cities/counties. During the preparation stage, this 
consultation process was conducted by the SA exercise in 13 affected villages and their 
surrounding townships, as well as with the affected enterprise/shop units. Fieldwork was 
conducted in all the affected villages for socio-economic surveys and a census, and all the 
households to be relocated were visited and consulted while their assets were measured, 
valued, and agreed upon.  Their new housing was discussed and confirmed through 
Page  11
several rounds of visits during the resettlement preparation procedures. More than 20 
percent of farmers who would lose some land were interviewed in detail to assess their 
situation under project and their perspectives for livelihood rehabilitation. Based on all 
these surveys and consultations, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was developed for 
each of the nine cities/counties that contain subprojects involving resettlement. The RAPs 
addressed all the adverse impacts related to resettlement, and presented direct and 
detailed safeguard methods that the project is responsible for in minimizing and 
managing these impacts on local communities for their livelihood compensation and 
rehabilitation.  The RAP for each project city has been disclosed locally at the respective 
cities and counties as well as at the Provincial PMO. The location of the local disclosure 
included: the provincial PMO, municipal PMOs and offices of the subproject 
implementing agencies, the relevant county libraries and the townships/villages.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/26/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/02/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/06/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/03/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/02/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  12
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hiroaki Suzuki 
07/25/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
07/25/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
07/25/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
07/25/2007 
Comments:  Please ensure that combined EA and RAP executive sumamary is sent to SECBO 
before commencing appraisal. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
 
Comments:   
