Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/08/2007 
Report No.:  AC2873
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P099112 
Project Name:  Anhui Highway Rehabilitation and Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Aurelio Menendez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(S);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
268.00
268.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to increase the effective use of the road infrastructure in the Anhui 
Province to support its social and economic development, as evidenced by the increase in 
the flows of passenger and freight traffic along key corridors across the province at lower 
costs and with improved safety.  The objective would be achieved through priority 
interventions to improve the condition of the roads across the province, pilot more 
efficient initiatives for road maintenance, and enhancements to the programming and 
management capacity of APCD, towards optimizing the use of resources for the upkeep 
of road assets.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes the following components:  
 
Component A. Road Rehabilitation  
 
[estimated cost US$217.61 million 
–
46.5%
of
the total project cost – of which 
US$95.81 million will be financed by the Bank Loan]  
 
Page  2
This component will support the provincial rehabilitation and maintenance program 
from 2007-2010 under the EFYP.  The Bank contribution will help finance eligible 
investments under the rehabilitation component of the program.  A list of 18 segments to 
be rehabilitated, for about 890 km, has been evaluated and found acceptable in the 
context of the province-wide program of the road network rehabilitation.  Activities 
under this component consist of improving pavement conditions of the roads by 
resurfacing, specific structural strengthening, and limited adjustments to the alignment 
when required to improve safety.  This component includes the pertinent supervision 
activities of the rehabilitation works to be undertaken by local supervision firms.  
 
In the event that any resettlement might be required under this component, a 
resettlement action framework has been prepared. Similarly, simplified environmental 
impact assessments and standardized environmental specifications have been prepared 
for their application in the rehabilitation works (as part of the environmental 
documentation for the project).  
 
Component B. Road Improvement  
 
[estimated cost US$244.43 million 
–
52.2%
of
the total project cost – of which 
US$102.34 million will be financed by the Bank Loan]   
 
Improvement or upgrading of about 320 km of key provincial and national roads located 
on the Central-Eastern and Southeastern areas of the Province.  These improvements or 
upgrades would include in some cases the duplication of existing roads following the 
same alignment with specific bypasses in built-up areas (in order to minimize 
resettlement actions) or with short segments of new alignments if necessary to avoid 
difficult topographical conditions.  In two cases (roads S311 and S322), this component 
will include the construction of a limited number of kilometers to increase the transport 
capacity of the existing corridor or complete missing segments.  In addition, for road 
S322, this component includes the relevant complementary elements to make the road an 
eco-friendly road.  The supervision of the works under this component will be undertaken 
by local supervision firms and financed with local funds.  
 
This component is the only one that will require resettlement.  It will also include the 
implementation of the relevant environmental management plans.  The cost of the actions 
to take into account the safeguards requirements are included in the estimated cost 
reported above.  
 
Component C. Pilot on Road Maintenance by Contract  
 
[estimated cost US$1.87 million – 0.4% of the total project cost – of which US$0.80 
million will be financed by the Bank Loan]  
 
Under this component, APCD will implement maintenance by contract approach in at 
least two highway segments of the provincial highway network for a cumulative number 
of 120 kilometers by the end of the project.  The maintenance activities will be limited to 
routine or periodic interventions within the existing road pavement width.  The final 
design of this component will be supported by a technical assistance, as further described 
Page  3
below, that will help APCD with additional knowledge and analytical elements for 
exploring the alternative maintenance mechanisms as well as for the preparation and 
implementation of the selected contractual schemes.  The supervision will be carried out 
by local firms supported by the previously mentioned technical assistance.  
 
Component D. Institutional Strengthening Program  
 
[estimated cost US$4.09 million 
–
0.9%
of
the total project cost – of which US$1.05 
million will be financed by the Bank Loan]  
 
This component includes the provision of improved tools for road management 
(technical, environmental, and economic) and a training program, as follows:  
 
•
a
study on technological options for the recycling of pavement materials when a 
pavement needs to be rehabilitated;  
 
•
the technical assistance for the pilot on maintenance by contract to provide the 
knowledge and analytical elements for exploring alternative mechanisms for contracting 
of maintenance activities as well as for the preparation, implementation, supervision, and 
assessment of the preferred contractual scheme under the pilot;  
 
•
the preparation of standardized environmental specifications;  
 
•
support to APCD’s Anhui Highway Administration Bureau (AHAB) in 
implementing the new enhanced version of the Chinese Pavement Management System 
(CPMS), to be financed with local funds;  
 
•
the analysis of socio-economic impacts of key roads to be improved under the 
project, towards establishing an enhanced knowledge base of the impacts of road 
investments on the livelihoods of the population living within the area of influence of the 
roads targeted for improvement, through the incorporation of specific surveys and data 
collection at the time of undertaking the resettlement completion reporting effort; and  
 
•
a
training program building upon those activities previously carried out under the 
Second Anhui Highway Project, for staff not only of APCD but also of city and county 
highway bureaus, and focusing on: (a) overseas training in road management (in 
conjunction with the activity in support to AHAB in implementing the new CPMS); (b) 
overseas training on improved technologies for the use of recycled pavement materials 
(in conjunction with the study on technological options for the recycling of these 
materials); (c) road safety, (d) project management, (e) environmental supervision of road 
construction, (f) environmental design of scenic/ecological routes, (g) right-of-way 
management, (h) highway planning and design, (i) highway information systems 
management; and (j) training to communities along the S322 road to be upgraded under 
the project on road safety and on starting up or developing productive activities to help 
them realize the benefits of improved accessibility across the corridor.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Anhui Province is located in the interior China, with a total area of 139,427 km2 and the 
total population of 65.16 million. Anhui Province has a complex topography, covering a 
wide range of topographical features with mixed hills, plains and low basins. From north 
to south, the province can be classified into five basic topographical categories as Huaibei 
Plain, Jianghuai Hilly region, Dabieshan Mountainous region, Yanjiang Plain and 
Page  4
Wannan Mountainous region. Anhui province is abundant in water resource. There are 
three major river systems passing through this province, i.e. Xinanjiang River, Yangzte 
River and Huai River.  
 
The project investments will take place in a series of pre-identified road segments on the 
national and provincial highway network within the Anhui province.  The selected road 
segments are located to the East, North, and South of the Province.  
 
The road improvement component consists of improvement/upgrading of seven key 
national and provincial roads located in the Central-Eastern and Southeastern areas of the 
Province for a total length of about 320 km. These improvements or upgrades will 
include widening and optimizing the geometric features of the existing road following the 
same alignment, with specific bypasses in built-up areas (in order to minimize 
resettlement actions), or with short segments of new alignments in some cases to avoid 
hard topographical conditions and to complete missing segments.  
 
The rehabilitation component comprises 18 segments with a total length of 890 km. The 
interventions include primarily rehabilitation of damaged road sections and structures, 
together with reconstruction of pavements on the existing roads. The existing bridges, 
which have been deteriorated, will be reinforced or rehabilitated.  Defects in the existing 
sub-grade are to be identified and repaired before overlaying the pavement.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSO) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The road infrastructure to be improved or rehabilitated will be mostly located alongside 
the existing alignments requiring only the expansion of the right of way (ROW) and 
Page  5
acquisition of additional land. Most of the impacts identified will be easily managed 
through sound engineering design and construction practices. The area of the project is 
heavily developed. There are no natural habitats or critical natural habitats along the 
existing or future right of ways. However, there still remain some patches of native 
vegetation, especially along S322 that still harbor some native species albeit without any 
significant biodiversity value. There is no evidence of paleontological or archeological 
resources along the corridor. There are no indigenous peoples in the area of influence of 
the project.  
 
There would be common construction relation impacts under the road improvement 
components (e.g. dust, noise soil erosion, water pollution, ecological protection, safety, 
social disturbance, traffic management etc.), and noise and safety concerns during 
operation.  
 
Potential large scale social impacts of the project are mainly related to the land 
acquisition and structure relocation under the road improvement component. Detailed 
impact inventory and census surveys show that the road improvement component would 
require 6,630 mu of land, including 4,369 mu of cultivated lands, affecting about 11,137 
people in 3,031 households.  The project would also require house relocation with a total 
of 31,011 m2, affecting 709 people in 183 households.  About 31 small-business shops 
will be affected as well. No resettlement impacts are expected under the road 
rehabilitation component.  No ethnic minority communities are found to be impacted 
under the project areas.  
 
For the new construction in S322, additional environmental issues include the expansion 
of the road in an urban area (800 m), crossing a highly unstable area (km 5 - km6) and the  
need for integrated landscape design (scenic area).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
It is highly unlikely that the project will have any indirect or long term adverse impacts 
due to anticipated activities in the project area.  
 
The project roads are either part of the road network connecting the coastal provinces 
(Jiangsu and Zhejiang), located in the poorer mountainous regions, or the local 
bottleneck/missing link segments.  The investments will therefore enhance the 
accessibility of the villages and towns along the areas of influence of the roads.  The 
project is also envisaged to promote the tourism development plan envisioned by the 
Provincial Government for the corridor between Yunling and Huangshan areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For S322, two major alternative options have been evaluated and compared from 
environmental as well as the engineering aspects. These alternatives are:  
Page  6
•
Alternative I, the section from start point to K14+473, K27+301 to end point 
K29+740, will be reconstructed to the Class II road in hilly area, and the other sections 
(from K14+473-K27+301, abut 12.83 km) will be improved on road surface.  
 
•
Alternative II: the road in whole length will be upgraded to Class II road.  
 
Comparison has been studied and Alternative I was recommended due to avoidance of a 
tunnel and related spoiled soil disposal, less number of environmentally sensitive 
receptors and thus less impacts to the environment and ecosystem, less investment and 
still meeting demand of projected traffic forecast.  
 
In the first 3.1 km of the proposed road section, K0+000 to K3+100, and 3.2 km at 
K16+400 to K19+600, there are existing roads of basically gravel pavement and 6-7 m 
wide. Along the existing road there are residential houses. Improvement of the road on 
the existing pavement would result in increased noise, air emission and traffic safety 
concerns. But the area is along Qingyijiang River with valuable cultivated and highly 
productive land. Avoiding the existing road would mean to occupy agriculture land, 
affecting farming and agricultural ecological system. In addition, exiting road 
improvement would bring other benefits for the residents living near road: increased 
property value, income opportunities, and future developments. And yet, there is 
engineering considerations for smooth alignment, good configuration, and minimum 
engineering costs. With all these considerations, for the first section of the road, most part 
will be along the existing road with some exceptions which to be constructed on green 
field. For example, section K2+860 to K3+410 go through the middle of Lianhong 
village. The road at this section will be detoured to the left avoiding going through the 
village which would have substantial disturbance to village life.  
 
Besides S322, alternative alignment analysis has also been conducted for small sections 
(bypass) for S311 Chuzhou-Wuyi, G205 Caijiaqiao-Tanjiaqiao, S105 Chaohu-Wujiang, 
G205 Tangkou-Qiankou, and G205 Tunxi-Provincial Border. The final selection was 
based on integral consideration of technical, environmental and social criteria, i.e. 
avoidance of environmentally sensitive areas, less social interference and resettlement, 
shorter length, less land occupation, and compatibility with local master planning.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
APCD has prepared a comprehensive and detailed draft Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) in accordance with Bank policy. The EMP addresses all potential environmental 
and social issues of concern and proposes adequate mitigation measures for each negative 
impact identified as well as measures for enhancing each identified positive impact. The 
EMP also includes a summary of locations for all road improvements and new 
construction corridors, monitoring and supervision arrangements, as well as an 
institutional strengthening program for APCD.  
 
Some detailed measures taken by the borrower to address environmental issues are as 
follows:  
 
(1) 
Road Rehabilitation  
Page  7
•
Standardized Environmental Specifications for Construction management  
 
(2) Road 
Improvement 
 
 
•
Standardized Environmental Specifications for Construction management  
 
•
Additional specific measures for identified each sub-project.  
 
(3) 
New Construction (S322)  
 
•
Standardized Environmental Specifications for Construction management  
 
•
Additional specific measures for this road, such as landscape design ("green 
road"); urban enhancement in Km0 - Km0+800, special construction techniques, over-
designed drainage (km 18-km24); and special  assistance to communities  
 
(4) 
Environmental supervision  
 
•
Procedures and responsibilities for environmental supervision of each type of sub-
project  
 
(5) 
Institutional strengthening  
 
•
Training of contractors and supervisors  
 
•
Preparation of environmental manual  
 
•
Specific environmental training for APCD  
 
(6) 
Environmental Monitoring  
 
•
environmental monitoring during construction and operation  
 
APCD has maintained a good implementation track record of Bank funded road 
projects. The first Anhui Provincial Highway Project was approved in 1999 and 
completed in 2005; the ICR rated this project satisfactory including safeguard 
compliance. The second Anhui Highway project, which came into effect in 2003 and is 
currently in its final stages of implementation, has also been rated satisfactory thus far in 
terms of its safeguard compliance.  
 
Following the Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.10 on Involuntary 
Resettlement, the borrower has completed the resettlement planning and prepared four 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) to address those impacts.  The overall strategy is a 
combination of land-for-land measures and cash payment option.  Redistribution of the 
remaining village land is the primary measure.  In villages where land loss is marginal 
and farmers prefer cash compensation, cash compensation will be provided as an option.  
These were developed with the affected villagers based on village resources potential 
analysis, their willingness and capabilities for various options.  The 183 households to be 
relocated are planned to move within their current villages.  The households being 
relocated will be responsible for their own house construction with the compensation 
fund and allowances. Affected facilities will be compensated at reconstruction cost and 
will be reconstructed by the owner government departments.  All affected shops will be 
compensated and helped for their reestablishment nearby.  
 
No resettlement impacts are expected under the road rehabilitation component.  To 
address any possible such impacts during construction, a resettlement policy framework 
has also been elaborated in line with relevant Chinese and World Bank policies.  No 
ethnic minority communities are found to be impacted under the project areas.   
 
Page  8
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
According to the World Bank's safeguard policies, two rounds of public consultation 
have been carried out for all subprojects during the EIA preparation. The first round was 
conducted during a site survey, in September, 2006. The second round was after the 
completion of the draft EIA report, in October 2006. The consultation is conducted using 
a
combination of public meeting, individual interview, and information disclosure and 
questionnaire survey. Besides, a hot line has been set up during the project development 
to enhance the communication between the affected people and the EA team. There are 
total about 850 people involved in the public consultation process.  
 
The main concerns from public include land compensation, safety of construction, 
damage of irrigation facilities, community severance, noise etc., for which proper 
mitigation measures are developed in the EMP.  
 
Relevant project information has been disclosed to the public in different stages of the 
EA process. During the first round of public consultation, booklets were distributed 
among the residents along the project road to introduce the project components, necessity 
and alignment, as well as the potential environmental impacts associated with the project. 
The Provincial Communication Bureau (PCB) has also placed the draft EIA report in 
selected townships and counties of the project areas. In addition, public bulletins have 
been distributed along the project roads to promulgate the brief information and the 
project and the location to review the draft EIA report. The draft EIA report and other 
relevant information have also been disclosed through PCB website on October 30, 2006, 
and in county libraries, township government offices and selected local schools on March 
23, 2007.  
 
The resettlement planning also followed a participatory process.  Affected villagers and 
various government agencies participated in the social economic survey, impact survey 
and formulation of the compensatory and livelihood rehabilitation plan.  The affected 
people will continue to participate in the formulation and implementation of detailed 
village livelihood development plans. Arrangements to ensure continued participation are 
planned in the RAP.  Project information, relevant government policies and regulations 
were broadly disseminated through village meetings in the project areas.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/13/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2007 
 
Page  9
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/13/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
06/01/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
06/02/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
06/04/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Peishen Wang 
06/04/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
06/05/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
06/08/2007 
Comments:   
