Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARD DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.: 40131  
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 28 2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: 
CN-P086035-LEN-BBCBF
 
Project Name: 
CN-PCF-Tianjin Landfill Gas Recovery
 
Task Team Leader: Greg Browder 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2006 
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: N/A 
Sector:  Solid Waste Management 
Theme:  Carbon Finance CDM project 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
N/A 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
   4.067 (Revenue from sales of carbon credits) 
Other financing amounts by source: N/A 
 BORROWER 
(US$m.): 
5.15
0.00 
Project Objectives 
 
The development objective of the project is to recover landfill gas from Tianjin 
Shuangkou Municipal Solid Waste Landfill Site and utilize the recovered gas for 
electricity generation for on-site operational needs and/or for export to the municipal 
grid. 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The 
Shuangkou
 landfill is the first modern sanitary landfill site in Tianjin; designed and 
constructed in accordance with national standards, including a layer of impermeable base 
liner and a leachate collection and treatment system. The project was partially financed 
by a World Bank loan through the First Tianjin Urban Development and Environment 
Project (IDA-23870), which closed in 2002. There is also an on-going World Bank-
financed Second Tianjin Urban Development and Environment Project (IBRD No. 4695 
CHA) that was approved in 2003 and is expected to close in 2009. 
 
Construction of the Shuangkou landfill started in 1999 and the site commenced operation 
in January 2001. The site is designed to receive 2,700 metric tons per day (tpd) and is 
currently operating at an average daily input of 1,300 tpd. The current accumulated 
Page  2
quantity of solid waste is approximately 1.46 million tons (March 2006). The projected 
depth of waste, after reaching the final contour, will be approximately 34 meters with 31 
meters above grade and an average of 3 meters below grade. Total design capacity is 8.5 
million cubic meters. At an approximate density of 0.8 kg per cubic meter, it works out to 
be 6.8 million metric tons. The site is equipped with two compactors and several pieces 
of earth moving equipment. 
 
The original site design included a passive landfill gas venting system with 42 vertical 
wells interconnected at the base. Vertical wells are made with 200 mm diameter plastic 
(HDPE) gas collection pipes, within a cage packed with gravel. The wells are located in 
rows with a separation distance of approximately 120 meters between the wells. Rows are 
80 meters apart with 60 meters offset from the well center. 
 
The scope of the project is to construct an advanced landfill gas recovery and utilization 
system for Shuangkou Landfill and to generate electrical energy for landfill operational 
needs and/or for feeding electricity to the Tianjin City grid. Subject to the conclusion of 
the Feasibility Study, at the start of the project, one power generator unit would be 
installed at the Shuangkou site with a capacity of approximately 1.2 MW. Over time, the 
installed capacity is projected to go up to 5.0 MW with four power generation units. The 
estimated Phase 1 investment is approximately US $ 5.15 million from 2007 to 2011. 
 
The project would entail the design and construction of landfill gas recovery and 
treatment systems, including gas extraction wells, gas transport piping systems, blowers, 
condensate and contaminants removal units, gas compression system, a stand-by gas flare 
unit, power generation unit(s), a grid connection system and other process monitoring and 
control equipment and safety measures. 
 
Operation and management at the landfill facility will also be optimised as follows: 
·
Improve current site conditions to adopt and achieve best practices for landfill 
operation and management including designing and constructing cells to 
minimize leachate generation and provide surface water controls.  
·
Coordinate the installation of landfill gas collection and treatment systems with 
current landfill development and operational plans to ensure efficiency of site 
operation. 
·
Integrate existing passive gas collection and venting system into the new gas 
collection system to maximize gas capture, if necessary and appropriate. 
 
As Tianjin Shuangkou Landfill is a relatively new operating landfill, gas extraction, 
treatment and power generation systems would be subject to on-going changes and 
expansion. 
 
D.  Project location:
 Tianjin Shuangkou Municipal Solid Waste Landfill is located in the 
northwestern part of the city in the District of Beichen, approximately 33 km from the 
city core.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
Page  3
Tianjin Municipal Government has established a State-Owned Enterprise, named Tianjin 
Clean Energy and Environmental Engineering Co. Ltd. (TCEEE) to own, develop and 
implement the landfill gas recovery and utilization project at the Tianjin Shuangkou 
Municipal Solid Waste Landfill. The company is jointly owned by Tianjin Construction 
Administration Commission (TCAC), Tianjin City Appearance Commission and 
Shuangkou Landfill Site. Mr. Qi Wenjie, Director of Tianjin Project Management Office 
of the TCAC for World Bank projects is currently serving as Chairman and CEO of 
TCEEE. Board members and key staff have extensive project development and 
implementation experience (over 10 years), particularly for World Bank financed 
projects.  
 
At this time, TCEEE has retained local consultants (Tianjin International Engineering 
Consultant Co, and Nankai University, School of Environmental Assessment) in 
preparing the Feasibility Study, Environmental Impact Assessment Report and 
Environmental Management Plan. All studies and reports are expected to be completed 
by end of June 2006. 
 
TCEEE has conducted extensive visits to other related projects in China. TCEEE is 
currently under negotiation with three international companies with experience in landfill 
gas to energy projects worldwide and in China. TCEEE intends to engage one of these 
private companies as the BOT contractor.  
 
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Senior Environmental Specialist: Chongwu Sun 
Senior Social Development Specialist: Youlan Zou 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): 
Potential environmental impacts are well 
defined and site-specific. These impacts include air emissions from the on-site generator 
set and landfill gas flare unit. These emission levels will be obtained from equipment 
manufacturers. Normally, emission levels from these types of equipment are already in 
compliance with international standards (especially if equipment is to be procured 
overseas). Destruction and Removal Efficiency normally exceeds 98%. In addition, the 
generator set would be housed indoor and noise emission is not expected to be problem at 
the vicinity of the landfill. In summary, standard engineering practices can be used to 
mitigate potential impact. Overall, the landfill gas to energy project at an existing landfill 
facility has positive environmental impacts to the local environment in terms of improved 
regional air quality and better leachate management due to improved site operating 
conditions and the collection and utilization of methane and the destruction of NMOC’s. 
The task team therefore recommends that this project be classified as a Category B 
project.
Environmental Impact Assessment report would be submitted to the local Environmental 
Protection Bureau for final approval. Draft EIA report would be made available on the 
web site of the Tianjin Construction Commission. Additional hard copies of the EIA 
report would be available at local public library for public access. 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
All gas extraction, treatment, power generation 
and flare systems would be constructed within the premise of the existing Shuangkou 
landfill. No land acquisition is required for the main project facilities. There is currently a 
power transmission line approximately 1.5 kms long which brings electricity into the 
Shangkou Landfill. Electricity generated from the landfill gas will be used for internal 
use, with the excess power sold to the Power Bureau. The Power Bureau has two options 
for transmitting the electricity from the landfill to the main transmission lines: i) utilize 
the existing power transmission corridor and towers (1.5 kms), or ii) develop a new 
transmission corridor and towers. Under Option 1, no land acquisition will be necessary. 
Under Option 2 only minor land acquisition would required for the transmission tower 
footprint. Final determination for the potential land acquisition issue cannot be made until 
a
study can be conducted. The TCEEE is prepared to retain the power distribution 
company’s design institute to conduct a focused study on the routing options for grid 
connection. The study is expected to be completed by end of June 2006.   
 
The task team therefore recommends that the existing 2
nd
 Tianjin Urban Environment and 
Development Project’s “Resettlement Policy Framework” be used to cover any minor 
land acquisition needs that might be required for new power transmission works.
An 
independent resettlement monitor is already employed under the 2
nd
 TUDEP, and could 
be used for this carbon finance project as well. Supervision of the resettlement activities, 
if necessary, would be done as part of the TUDEP supervision missions. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-
stage ISDS would be prepared:  Not Applicable 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the 
PAD-stage ISDS: June 2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS. 
 
Timetable for EA preparation: 
·
Draft EA reports for project components 
 
 
April 2006 
·
First draft consolidated EA report 
 
 
 
May 2006 
·
Information disclosure (PID and Draft EIA)   
 
June 2006 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr. Greg Browder 
5/29/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr. Glenn Morgan 
5/31/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr. Keshav Varma 
5/30/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at 
the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to 
potentially affected persons.
 
Page  6
