Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2521 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P099112 
Project Name: Anhui Highway Rehabilitation and Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Aurelio Menendez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(S);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
225.30
225.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to increase the effective use of the road infrastructure in the Anhui Province, 
improving the flows of passenger and freight traffic in an efficient and safe manner, to support 
the social and economic development of Anhui.  This objective seeks to contribute to the higher 
goals of (a) improving living conditions across the province (particularly in the areas where 
poverty rates are higher) by enhancing the transport accessibility to economic opportunities and 
social services, and (b) stimulating higher economic growth in the Anhui Province by reducing 
transport costs within the province and between Anhui and, particularly, the neighboring 
provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, to the East of Anhui.  
 
The focus on the road mode is justified given the heavy predominance of the road mode 
relatively to other modes, which implies that road transport costs constitute most of the transport-
related costs and a key barrier for a more harmonious integration of the cities, counties, and 
towns in Anhui.  As an essential interconnecting infrastructure, the national and provincial 
highway network in Anhui Province has an important implication to establish a multi-level and 
high-efficiency transport system in such a province.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Building upon the tasks accomplished under previous World Bank projects, and within the 
context of strengthening the current overall framework for the management and upkeep of road 
assets in the Anhui Province, the project will include the following components:  
 
*
Improvement or upgrading of about 320 km of seven key provincial and national roads 
located on the Central-Eastern and Southeastern areas of the Province.  These improvements or 
upgrades would include in some cases the duplication of existing road following the same 
alignment with specific bypasses in built-up areas (in order to minimize resettlement actions) or 
with short segments of new alignments if necessary to avoid hard topographical conditions.  In 
two cases (roads S311 and S322), this component would include the construction of a limited 
number of kilometers to increase the transport capacity of the existing corridor or complete 
missing segments.  The final definition of the scope of these two cases is subject to 
complementary analysis to be undertaken during project preparation and taking into account the 
following considerations: in-depth alternative analysis, achievement of positive economic rates 
of return, and, consequently, scope and extent of new construction that reflect adequately 
environmental, social, and economic factors.  The implementation of this component will be 
supervised by experienced firms (either local or foreign) with a technical expertise acceptable to 
the Bank.  
 
*
Support to the provincial rehabilitation and maintenance program from 2007-2010 under the 
Eleventh Five-Year Program.  The Bank contribution will help finance eligible investments 
under the rehabilitation component of the program.  A list of 18 segments to be rehabilitated, for 
about 890 km, has been pre-identified.  The maintenance program will be financed entirely with 
local funds, but the results indicators of the project will include specific target and its overall 
implementation will be reviewed by the Bank. This component includes the pertinent supervision 
activities of the rehabilitation works.  
 
*
A
pilot on maintenance by contract.  Under this component, APCD will implement 
maintenance by contract approaches in two highway sections of the provincial highway network.  
The final design of this component will be supported by a technical assistance, as further 
described below, that will help APCD with additional knowledge and analytical elements for 
exploring the alternative maintenance mechanisms as well as for the preparation and 
implementation of the selected contractual schemes.  
 
*
The institutional strengthening component would include:  
 
-
a
study on technological options for the recycling of pavement materials when a pavement 
needs to be rehabilitated;  
 
-
the technical assistance for the pilot on maintenance by contract to provide the knowledge and 
analytical elements for exploring alternative mechanisms for contracting of maintenance 
activities as well as for the preparation, implementation, supervision, and assessment of the 
preferred contractual scheme under the pilot;  
 
-
preparation of standardized environmental specifications;  
 
-
support to the AHAB in strengthening the current Chinese Pavement Management System 
(CPMS);  
Page  3
-
the analysis of socio-economic impacts of the roads interventions under the project, towards 
establishing a enhanced knowledge base of the impacts of road investments on the livelihoods of 
the population living along the area of influence of those roads, through the incorporation of 
specific surveys and data collection at the time of undertaking the resettlement completion 
reports; and  
 
-
a
training program building upon those activities previously carried out under the Second 
Anhui Highway Project, for staff not only of APCD but also of city and county highway bureaus, 
and focusing chiefly on: road maintenance and asset management, road safety, project 
management, environmental protection and design and construction of scenic/ecological routes, 
highway planning and design, and highway information systems management.  A formal 
evaluation of the training will be carried out with the application of the methodology to be 
agreed upon during project preparation.  
 
Two other technical assistance activities have been identified for possible inclusion under the 
project, namely: (a) actions for enhancing the road condition information base and analytical 
tools; (b) follow-up actions for enhancing road safety institutional capacities, including the 
planning for the allocation of resources and the undertaking of road safety audits; and (c) the 
preparation of provincial environmental guidelines for road design, construction and 
rehabilitation.  The final scope and financing arrangements for these two other activities will 
depend on the analysis to be undertaken during the preparation missions.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project investments will take place in a series of pre-identified road segments on the national 
and provincial highway network within the Anhui project.  The selected road segments are 
located to the East, North, and South of the Province.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project will be the third World Bank financed transport project in the Anhui 
Province and under the responsibility of the Anhui Provincial Communications Department 
(APCD). For the previous two Bank projects, APCD has shown strong commitment on 
implementation of safeguards and maintained good track records. It has developed in-house 
capacity to implement, supervise and monitor Environmental Management Plans and 
Resettlement Action Plans.  For EA preparation, APCD has retained the Shanghai Ship and 
Shipping Design Institute, which is quite familiar with Bank's safeguards policies through EA 
preparation for previous Bank projects including Anhui Highway II, Hubei Xiao-Xiang 
Expressway, and Hubei Shi-man Expressway.  APCD has also engaged East China Survey And 
Design Institute to assist in the resettlement planning.  This institute has a long history of 
engagement with World Bank operations and has accumulated much experience and expertise 
dealing with resettlement issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSO) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASRE) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy is triggered due to the environmental impacts related to road construction 
activities and potential environmental concerns during operation stage. Building upon the 
procedures and policies followed under previous World Bank-financed projects, the APCD has 
agreed to develop i) full EIA for three sub-projects under the improvement component (those on 
the two class I highways, and one the provincial highway S322), and ii) simplified EIAs for the 
other four sections under the road improvement component and for all the road sections under 
the rehabilitation component.  Terms of Reference for EIAs and simplified EIAs were based on 
detailed screening of rights-of-way (ROWs) and the preparation of environmental alignment 
sheets. Standardized environmental specifications for construction management will be prepared 
and included in all bidding documents and contracts.  
 
As for the road rehabilitation component, the interventions under this program will take 
place within the right-of-way of existing roads, the safeguards policies under Chinese laws will 
likely comply with Bank requirements, and will require the preparation of simplified EIAs or 
environmental checklists.  
 
The three subprojects that require full EIA include substantial construction of new roads 
segments. One in particular, the S322, will traverse a mountainous area of high scenic value with 
tourism potential and with important remnants of native vegetation and fauna.  After screening 
by the Bank team together the provincial government it was concluded that this subproject by 
itself would be more appropriately be categorized as A for environmental purposes.  Therefore, 
the entire project is proposed as A Category according to OP 4.01.  For all other sub-projects, 
most impacts will be circumscribed to existing right of ways and no significant, region-wide, or 
precedent-setting impacts are envisioned for any of the components.  Most of the impacts will 
likely be easily managed through sound engineering design and construction practices.  
 
Based on the individual full and simplified EAs, an Integrated Environmental Assessment 
report in English will be prepared for the entire road program under guidelines and table of 
contents agreed with the Bank. All environmental management of construction activities will be 
included in a comprehensive set of technical environmental specifications that will be included 
in all bidding documents and contracts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The S322 subproject involves the construction of a new road segment that cuts across an area 
of high scenic value and remnants of natural vegetation and local fauna.  Detailed investigation 
and screening will be conducted during next step EA preparation to confirm whether this policy 
is triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
This aspect will be included in screening criteria. Chance finding procedures will be included 
in standardized environmental specifications for management of construction.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared for the Highway Improvement 
Component.  For the Highway Rehabilitation Component, no resettlement is expected, but this 
assumption will be further confirmed by reviewing the draft technical designs.  Nonetheless, a 
resettlement policy framework will be developed for the rehabilitation component.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/25/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
APCD has engaged East China Survey And Design Institute to carry out the resettlement 
planning with Anhui Highway Design Institute and local governments.  One resettlement 
action plan has been completed.  The Bank review has found it of high quality.  The other 
RAPs are under preparation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
01/29/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/14/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
03/13/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
