Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2626 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P096925 
Project Name: China Bengbu Integrated Environment Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Shenhua Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (50%);Sewerage (25%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (25%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
110.00
110.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary project development objective is to address Bengbou's key bottleneck (such as 
inadequate flood control or inadequate water resource management) impeding Bengbou's 
economic development though priority urban infrastructure investments. Specific investments 
under the project should also take into account the municipality?s development priorities within 
the context of its overall master plans. The improvement of investment climate other than 
physical infrastructure, including the institutional and regulatory reform and capacity building, 
could be added as complementary project development objective.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project components cover Bengbu City, the city expansion area in Huaishang District (north of 
River Huai) and the satellite Counties of Huaiyuan, Wuhe and Guzhen.  The project design and 
scope are intended to facilitate achieving the project development objective.  Maps of Bengbu 
and the counties are attached.  
 
Page  2
The base cost estimate for the above components is about US$173 million.  Total project costs 
including land, resettlement, engineering costs and contingencies could be about US$210 
million.  
 
Component 1. Urban Drainage and Environment Improvement ($100 million):  improvement of 
open drains,  embankments, capacity improvement of flood retention basins, rehabilitation  and 
new pumping stations, storm drainage networks, and ancillary urban infrastructure in Bengbu 
City, Xijiagou, Longzhihu, Huaishang District, and Counties of Wuhe, Huaiyuan and Guzhen.  
 
Component 2.  Urban Infrastructure Improvement($50 million):  water supply and wastewater 
treatment plant and networks in Wuhe, and sewer network extensions in Bengbu City, 
Huaishang, and Huaiyuan.  
 
Component 3.  Water Resource Management ($17 million):  watershed protection, capacity 
increase in Tianhe River, erosion control and forestation to increase reliability and protect of one 
of the two Bengbu?s long-term drinking water sources.  
 
Component 4.  Capacity Building Technical Assistance ($ 6 million): (a) improvement of the 
investment climate through easing constraints faced by potential investors, institutional reform 
and adoption of new strategies for investment promotion; (b) encourage PSP and introduction of 
a
DBO-type contract; (c) preparation of a water resources management and protection plan 
(Tianhe), and a flood management and operation plan (for Guzhen); (d) improvement of water 
quality monitoring capacity of Bengbu EPB; and (e) feasibility of introducing market based 
interventions in Bengbu City.  
 
The French Government has agreed in principle to a request from Bengbu Municipality for 
grant assistance for project preparation. A decision is expected in January 2007.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Bengbu City is the second largest city in Anhui Province, with a population of about 3.5 million 
(including the three surrounding counties).  It is located in the middle and lower reaches of Huai 
River Basin in the northeastern part of the Province.  Bengbu was traditionally important to 
Anhui, a relatively poor province in Central China.  Up to the early 1990s, Bengbu was the 
second largest economic center of Anhui, featuring a variety of industries such as textiles, 
machinery, chemical, and food processing. The last decade has seen a decline in industries as 
new economic centers grew rapidly along the southern corridor near Jiangsu and Zhejiang, the 
two booming coastal provinces.  Determined efforts by the Municipality to reverse this trend 
have seen GDP growth above the national average over the past two years.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is the second Bank funded urban environmental infrastructure project in Bengbu 
Municipality. Currently as one of the project cities under Huai River Pollution Control Project, 
they are implementing their component ? construction of WWTP and sewer network. EMP 
implementation of ongoing Huai Project is satisfactory.  
 
Page  3
North China Design Institute, a Class A EA Certificate holding institute based in Tianjin, has 
been selected through bidding process for EA preparation of proposed project. As a Class A EA 
institute, the North China Design Institute has been contracted for preparation of EA documents 
for number of WB, ADB and other large scale domestic financed projects, such as WB Hebei 
Urban Environmental Project, ADB Haihe River project, ADB heating supply project in Inner 
Mongolia, WB Chongqing project, etc. Therefore, their understanding of Bank's safeguard 
policies and their experiences seem adequate, especially at field of urban infrastructure.  
 
In terms of RAP preparation, though Bengbu municipality has done some projects financed by 
the Bank, it is the first time for most of subproject sponsors to do Bank project and they lack of 
RAP preparation experiences. Bank has provided training to component sponsors on Bank policy 
on Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous People.  
 
Hefei Municipal Design Institute has been selected as RAP consultant firm by Bengbu 
Municipal PMO through biding. However, the institute seems lack of experience in RAP 
preparation. Benbu Municipal PMO has recognized this and intends to hire an experienced 
individual consultant to provide guidance.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASRE) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy is triggered, because of wide range of proposed components in areas of flood 
control, water resource management, and key urban infrastructure improvement. Each project 
component should have an EA to make assessment of specific analysis. There will be 
eightcomponent EA reports and EMPs, in addition to an English version consolidated EA report 
prepared based on the information from component EA reports. The project team has conducted 
one safeguard training in mid Dec 2006 and the EA consultant agreed to provide the Bank a 
TOR by Jan 15, 2007 for review and comment.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Most project components are located in urban or semi-urban settings. Therefore, this policy 
may not be applied. Detailed investigation and screening will be conducted during next step EA 
preparation to confirm whether this policy is triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
As one of screening criteria, this issue will be included. Chance finding procedures will be 
included in standardized environmental specifications for management of construction, as part of 
the EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Based on the information available to the Bank, one Hui minority township might be affected 
by one proposed component in Wuhe County. The census and social economic survey will be 
carried out to provide more information on ethnic minority to determine if additional planning 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
measures are required prior to appraisal to fulfill the requirements of OP 4.10, Indigenous 
Peoples.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There will be resettlement associated with the proposed components; land acquisition would 
not be avoidable to the proposed project.  Resettlement Action Plans as per Bank policy will be 
prepared for subprojects.  8 component RAPs and one summary RAP will be prepared. 
Resettlement policy framework or due diligence approach may be applied to the industrial parks 
which might be involved in the project depending on their status of land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Based on tentative preparation schedule, the final EA and RAP should be ready by October 
2007.  The tentative schedule is as follows:  
 
Institutions for preparing RAP and social assessment selected:  
 
Draft social assessment reports ready for submission for Bank review:  
 
First draft RAPs ready for submission for Bank review:   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shenhua Wang 
01/08/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
02/01/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
