Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/08/2006 
Report No.:  AC2109
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P088964 
Project Name:  Guangxi Integrated Forestry Development and Conservation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jin Liu 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P087318 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 4, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASRD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Rural non-farm 
income generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.25 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
63.02 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
26.99 
 LOCAL 
FARMER 
ORGANIZATIONS 
9.34
99.35 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective is to significantly improve the effectiveness of 
forest management and institutional arrangements in timber production, watershed 
protection and nature reserves management.   
 
3. Project Description 
In order to achieve the above objectives, the project would finance four components: (a) 
expanding timber plantations for increase wood production; (b) increasing ecological 
forest cover for greater watershed protection; (c) strengthening management of nature 
reserves to protect biodiversity; and (d) enhancing institutional and management 
capacity.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project areas are located in the northern subtropical zone of the Guangxi Zhuang 
Autonomous Region (GZAR).  The zone has a monsoon humid climate with mean annual 
Page  2
rainfall of between 1,250-1,750 mm. The mean annual temperature ranges between 17-
22oC. GZAR is in south China, in the upper and middle reaches of the Pearl River.  It is 
located southeast of Yunnan and the Guizhou Plateau with mountainous and hilly 
topography in the NW, much of it limestone karst, and flatter, low-lying land in the SE. It 
is a biologically-diverse area much of which falls within the Indo-Burma Biodiversity 
Hotspot.  The limestone karst areas cover about 38 per cent of GZAR, mainly in the NW 
part and have many range-restricted and threatened species associated with them.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts have been identified by 
the EIA and SA conducted during project preparation. The project complies with the 
Bank's Forest Policy and no conversion or degradation of critical or other natural habitats 
will occur as a result of the Project.  No involuntary population relocation or land 
acquisition is expected under the project. However, some potentail loss of land or assets 
might occur due to small-scale infrastructure construction that will be identified through 
community -based planning processes during project implementation. As the SA 
indicates, most of the minority groups wish to participate in the project.  They are 
presently  vulnerable to poverty incidence and a difficult environment.  The EMDP 
therefore sets forth the practical steps that will be taken to ensure that they have equitable 
opportunities to take part and benefit from the project.  There are no known archeological 
and historical sites that would be put at risk under the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The GIFCP has been assigned an EA category ‘B’ in the World Bank's classification 
system.  To review the Project's likely positive and negative environmental and social 
impacts, an Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plan (covering 
Page  3
mitigation measures, monitoring, and institutional strengthening), and a separate Social 
Assessment were prepared, building on the work of similar previous projects in China.  
Overall, the Project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits because it 
focuses on high-priority natural resource management issues.  The major potential 
impacts on the environment include: impact to vegetation and potential soil erosion due 
to temporary land occupation at the planting sites and land cultivation for site preparation 
for plantation; short-term impacts on native fauna; pollution/waste management issues at 
the planting site.  If the mitigation measures proposed in the EMP are implemented, the 
negative impacts during implementation/planting phases will be minimized.  
 
The components on Ecological Forest and Nature Reserves are expected to have 
positive environmental impacts, both directly by protecting some of the most important 
remaining natural forests and associated biodiversity in Guangxi, and indirectly through 
protecting key forested watersheds. Any negative environmental issues arising from these 
components are expected to be insignificant and easily mitigated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The team considered, inter alia, proposing that the forest resource development 
(plantations and watershed protection) and nature reserve management be designed as 
two distinct projects each with a separate implementing agency.  The nature reserves 
component was originally linked to the Chinese Academy of Sciences rather than to an 
agency such as GFB that has the necessary management authority.  This option was 
rejected in favor of an integrated project approach that would tackle forestry development 
holistically and enhance the likelihood of overall project objectives being achieved.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower readily endorsed the principle of carrying out all project activities in 
accordance with the Process Framework for Mitigating Potentially Adverse Livelihood 
Impacts, the Policy Framework for Resettlement and Land Acquisition, and the Ethnic 
Minority Development Plan, the Environmental Protection Guidelines and the Pest 
Manageemnt Plan.  To this effect the Borrower has already formulated the above 
documents.  These have been incorporated into the design of the project and into its 
implementation manual in preparation of their execution during project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In order to make maximum use of project opportunities and fully mobilize the target 
people’s participation, a social assessment has been carried out during project preparation 
to analyze stakeholder roles, diagnose potential risks and development opportunities, 
build local capacity and reinforce public consultation and involvement.  In addition, more 
than 25,000 copies of project information leaflets have been widely distributed to the 
communities of the proposed project counties to inform the communities and households 
the project activities, loan terms and condition, opened options to households 
participating in the project and expected benefits, as well as to collect the feedback on 
whether they would like to participate in the project and their preference on production 
Page  4
and contractual arrangements. The feedback from the communities has been incorporated 
into the project design.  The participation exercise will be further followed during project 
preparation and implementation by a participatory planting design for the plantation 
establishment activities, and by the community co-management practice in the Nature 
Reserve management and ecological forest cover rehabilitation. The whole project design 
has therefore been made more efficient by its promotion of local ownership, ensuring 
equitable access to its benefits by poor farmers, vulnerable groups and ethnic minority 
peoples. The following are the key concerns identified by the SA and addressed by the 
project design.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  5
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jin Liu 
04/14/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten 
04/17/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
04/13/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
04/17/2006 
Comments:   
