Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2606 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P081615 
Project Name: Taiyuan Urban Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 29, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
220.00
220.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objective of the project is to improve mobility on selected main 
corridors, and accessibility to selected key activities, for people and freight in a safe, efficient 
and sustainable manner.  
 
To achieve the objective, the project aims to achieve the following for selected main corridors: 
(i) reduce travel times for all road users; (ii) reduce freight transport costs; (iii) improve the 
reliability, quality and quantity  of public transport services, and thereby to increase use of them; 
and (iv) enhance road user safety, especially for NMT. The project will also strengthen capacity 
for project implementation, traffic management and public transport, interagency coordination 
and long term transport planning.  
 
The development objective is in line with the Bank's FY06-10 Country Partnership Strategies 
(CPS), in particular in its recommendations to: (i) reduce internal and external barriers to trade 
and investment; (ii) promote balanced urbanization; and (iii) expand access to basic social and 
infrastructure services.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is currently estimated at $370 million with about $150 million IBRD financing.  The 
project is proposed to include the following components:  
 
A. Road infrastructure ($291 million): the construction of a 12.4 km section of the city's east-
west Northern ring road and a 10.3 km north-south major arterial to: (i) divert freight traffic out 
of the city center; (ii) alleviate the capacity constraints for crossing the Fen river; and (iii) 
improve the accessibility of industrial and commercial areas in the peri-urban eastern and 
northern parts of the city.  
 
B. Public transport improvement ($47 million): measures to promote the increased use of public 
transport in selected main corridors, including: (i) bus priority facilities, with associated traffic 
management measures and an ITS bus operations management system, to reduce travel time and 
improve reliability; (ii) a bus depot, and bus terminals, to increase service quantity and coverage. 
There will also be: (iii) training to assist the city and operators in improving public transport 
planning, operations and management to give "Priority to Public Transport", including possible 
reform measures.  
 
C. Traffic management and road safety ($27 million): investments focused on selected main 
corridors to improve in a comprehensive manner the safety and efficiency of movement for all 
road users, including: (i) Area Traffic Control (ATC) signal systems and other ITS applications; 
(ii) junction channelization; (iii) priority treatments for NMT; and (iv) safety features.   The need 
for specific investments will be evaluated as part of public consultation.  
 
D. Institutional Strengthening ($3.75 million): capacity building to: (i) strengthen the 
implementation and operational sustainability of the infrastructure investments (including a 
review of the road maintenance situation, and dialogue on emissions monitoring and control); 
and, (ii) identify complementary measures to strengthen traffic management and public transport, 
coordination between key sector agencies, and the process for sustainable long term transport 
planning.  
 
It should be noted that, drawing on lessons learned from previous projects, this project is not 
intended to provide a comprehensive fully integrated package of measures. Rather, the project is 
focusing attention on the most pressing issues and more critical geographical areas for economic 
development.  This approach should be feasible for the city to successfully implement.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in Taiyuan, the capital city of the central Shanxi province. It has a 
population of 3.7 million people. The City is physically restrained by the natural terrain. As a 
result, Taiyuan's urban development has been confined to a belt-shape area which extends about 
30 km in the north south direction and 15 km in the east west direction. The Fen River, running 
through Taiyuan from the north, divides the city with residential, commercial, administrative and 
financial land uses concentrated on the east side of the river, and residential, education, 
warehousing, and industrial land uses concentrated on the west side. The north part of the city is 
mainly industrial. Under the current city plan, the future urban development will be guided to the 
south.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is the first Bank financed project to be prepared and executed by the City of Taiyuan. As 
such, the City has limited experience with the Bank's Safeguard Policies. In order to effectively 
address the environmental and social safeguard issues, Taiyuan has retained the Engineering 
Resettlement Research Center (ERRC) of Wuhan University with previous experience in 
preparing social and resettlement components of the Bank funded projects. To address the 
environmental issues, Taiyuan has retained the East China Investigation and Design Institute 
(ECIDI) of Hangzhou to prepare the EA reports. ECIDI has previously worked on Bank funded 
hydro-power projects and is familiar with the Bank's Safeguard Policies. To further assist them, 
the Bank's identification mission provided them with guidance, booklets and CD ROM on the 
World Bank Safeguard Policies. The Bank's social and environmental specialists will work 
closely with the City and its Consultants to provide further guidance and, if necessary, training to 
assist them with successful preparation of the RAP and EA reports. The project also plans to 
provide assistance with institutional strengthening as part of the TA component.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASTE) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSO) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project will be classified as a Category A project. It will include construction of about 
22.7 km of major roadways in the north and east periphery of the city, a number of bus terminals 
and parking areas for buses and one bus depot. The construction of these components is expected 
to alleviate traffic congestion in the middle of the city and to divert heavy truck traffic to the 
outer periphery of the city. Construction related impacts are expected to be mostly noise, dust, 
traffic congestion, safety, removal of trees to construct bus bays, materials transport and 
disposal, and storm water run off during rainy seasons. During operation, major impacts are 
expected from noise and air pollution.  
 
The EA reports will address the above mentioned and other issues with specific efforts to 
enhance compensatory plantation or replacement. The EMP will include measures to 
complement and enhance the Motor Vehicle Emission Control (MVEC) strategy being 
developed by Taiyuan, especially with regard to understand and counter long-term, potentially 
negative trends in air pollution.  
 
The EA and RAP Consultants will carry out public consultations as part of their respective 
preparation. They will also participate in the overall consultation including project design, 
environment and social issues as they are mutually supportive and interactive.  
 
Natural Habitats  
 
The project will not significantly convert or degrade any protected areas or known critical 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
habitats. Any other type of minor impacts will be addressed in the EA and if necessary, 
compensatory measures will be included in the EMP.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Although Shanxi is known for its cultural relics, there are no identifiable cultural relics along 
the proposed road alignments. Most cultural relics in Taiyuan City are located in the southern 
part of the city. However, as part of the EA preparation, the city will undertake an archeological 
and cultural relic assessment to be conducted by a provincially accredited institute. The findings 
will be used to determine the applicability of the OP/BP and the outcomes will be incorporated in 
the EA reports.  Appropriate clauses dealing with the protection and excavation of chance finds 
of culturally significant artifacts or sites will be included in the construction documents.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Taiyuan is mainly a Han populated city and has few ethnic minority communities. The 
project will collect information on the ethnic minorities through socio economic survey for RAP 
preparation and public consultation process to determine if additional planning measures may be 
required to fulfill the requirements of OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Based on the site visit and preliminary alignments, involuntary resettlement is unavoidable 
and the project is expected to impact a large number of people and structures. The Consultant 
will undertake socioeconomic and inventory surveys which are critical to the preparation of the 
RAP and will also include programs for income restoration. In addition, the project will also 
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address the impacts of the many scattered 
civil works components, particularly in the public transport sub projects.  
 
Once the project components are finalized, the Consultant will identify the "linkage" issues 
and take the appropriate measures as per the Bank's Safeguards policy for linked activities.  
 
The project will also address the weak institutional capacity of Taiyuan City to implement 
the RAP. The Project Team will work closely with the PMO to ensure that they have the 
necessary staff and resources to implement the RAP and RPF. The institutional strengthening 
component will be included as part of the TA.  
 
The public consultation will form a major part of the preparation.  Taiyuan city has engaged 
a
consultant to do this work and provide the necessary social information for project design.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The following reports are expected over the next three months:  
 
March 31, 2007 - Revised draft TOR for the preparation of the EA reports  
 
April 15, 2007 - First draft EIA report in English  
 
March 20, 2007 - RAP preparation Working Plan (Chinese)  
 
April 05, 2007 - First draft RAP (Chinese)   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
03/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
03/15/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
03/27/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
