Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1993 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P092631 
Project Name: Xian Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: Rakhi Basu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (96%);Sub-national government administration 
(4%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
253.00
253.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve accessibility and mobility in Xi'an, while 
reducing the environmental impact of urban transport system, and protecting Xi'an's cultural 
heritage, with a particular focus on the Ming walled city.  
 
Key performance indicators being considered are:  
 
1.
Reduction in travel times for key user groups (i.e. cyclists, pedestrians, public transport 
users).  
 
2.
Reductions in car traffic to/from and across the Ming walled city and the Han Chang'an 
site.  
 
3.
Increases in bus operating efficiency - on street speeds, reliability, passenger flows/bus  
 
4.
Reduction in levels of key pollutants to national standards or better.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve the above-mentioned objective and results, the project will include:  
Page  2
Urban road network - Although Xi'an has a clearly defined hierarchy of roads, some further 
improvements to arterial roads and junctions are required to bring them up to consistent 
standards are required so as to ensure the most effective and efficient operation of the network 
within the third ring road.  In addition the city lacks an effective network of secondary roads 
within the existing areas (including the Ming walled city) as well as new secondary roads to 
service the newly developing areas.  The current low density of the secondary road network 
forces traffic on the main roads for even short distance trips and inhibits the efficient 
development of new peripheral areas and land in Huxian County.  Also lacking are adequate 
facilities for pedestrians and cyclists to cross main roads.  
 
This component consists of a package of investments within the 3rd Ring Road to complement 
the investments in new major roads being made by ADB and XMG.  It will include:  
 
(i) 
Junction improvements and additional interchanges on the first ring road (around the 
Ming walled city) to increase the capacity and efficiency of this road, so as too attract traffic that 
would otherwise cross the Ming walled city.  
 
(ii) 
Upgrading to multi-level interchanges of two remaining at grade junctions on the second 
ring road, with the same objective as item (i)  
 
(iii) 
Construction of pedestrian bridges and underpasses to improve pedestrian mobility across 
major roads and PT routes, and  
 
(iv) 
Upgrading of the road maintenance system.  
 
Also included are roads to facilitate the urban expansion of the satellite town of Huxian, 
selected for priority development.  
 
Public Transport.  This component consists of a package of measures to strengthen public 
transport performance:  
 
(i) 
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT).  One pilot demonstration corridor, inclusive of bus costs, 
passenger facilities (interchanges, terminals and stops, information systems) and ancillary 
equipment (ticketing, bus location system), as well as TA for system planning, design, and 
operations support.  
 
(ii) 
Ten bus priority corridors: 100 kms. of bus lanes, and associated facilities, to improve 
operating speeds and reliability.  
 
(iii) 
Interchanges:  Three interchanges hubs to improve facilities for passengers  
 
(iv) 
One bus depot and maintenance yard (including land).  
 
Traffic Management and Road Safety - The objectives of this component are to protect the 
Ming walled city and other cultural heritage sites thorough the upgrading of pedestrian, bicycle 
and traffic facilities and the foundation of an ITS (Intelligent Transport System), which will 
facilitate mobility management and ensure the safe and efficient use of the existing road and 
public transport networks.  The component complements investments in the ADB project, and 
includes:  
 
(i) 
Setting up an Area Traffic Control (ATC) system including CCTV, and associated 
junction channelization  
 
(ii) 
Road safety program, including accident analysis software, accident investigation 
equipment, remedial measures, road user education and enforcement initiatives and equipment  
Page  3
(iii) 
Parking measures and equipment  
 
(iv) 
Pedestrian facilities  
 
(v) Bicycle 
facilities 
 
 
(vi) 
Technical Assistance for ATC, Accident Analysis, Parking Study and Travel Demand 
Management (TDM) Study.  
 
Air Quality Management - Xi'an Environmental Protection Bureau (XEPB) has comprehensive 
and ambitious plans to improve air quality and to reduce vehicular emissions.  For this project, 
they proposed five activities which will allow them to expand air quality management (AQM), 
with a focus on vehicular emissions:  
 
1.
Ambient air quality monitoring which will cover fixed and mobile monitoring,  
 
2.
Vehicle emissions monitoring and control measures for laboratory based and remote 
sensing equipment and activities,  
 
3.
Other priority point source emissions control measures,  
 
4.
Information management and data analysis for air quality management for the city, and  
 
5.
AQM policy, planning, and institutional strengthening.  
 
Cultural Heritage.  This component is designed to provide transport infrastructure to support 
proposals to protect and enhance two of the major historic sites in Xi'an.  Two subcomponents 
are proposed:  
 
(i) 
Han Chang'an Site - Pedestrian and Bicycle Paths for the Weiyang Palace Site.The 
purpose of the subcomponent is to provide better access for people to visit the Weiyang Palace 
site by marking and utilizing the ancient roads.  The proposal includes four pedestrian and 
bicycle paths (6 or 8 m wide, and about 7 km long in total) inside the site, and one access road 
connecting the site and Daxing Rd, a main urban road of the city.  
 
(ii) 
Bicycle Ring inside the Ming City Wall and the 15 Scenic Spots Bicycle Route.  This 
subcomponent would provide support for investments in bicycle facilities within the Ming City.  
50% of tourists who come to Xi'an visit the Ming City Walls.  The objectives of the 
subcomponent extend beyond providing bicycle routes and aim to be a catalyst for more 
fundamental changes in the approach to traffic management in the Ming City.  
 
Capacity Building.  This component is designed to respond to the request from Xi'an for Bank 
assistance to develop a capacity in the city for transport planning and policy making.  To date, 
these topics have been suggested for possible TA support in the project:  
 
(i) 
Strategy Study and Short Term Improvement Program - given the urgent need for this 
capacity building, it is being considered for possible retroactive financing.  
 
(ii) 
BRT planning, design and implementation assistance  
 
(iii) 
PT planning and Reform  
 
(iv) 
Traffic Management - ATC, Parking, Accident Analysis, and TDM  
 
(v) 
AQM Vehicle Emissions  
 
(vi) 
Ming City Management Plan  
 
(vii) 
Financial Planning.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Xi'an City, Shaanxi Province, P.R.China   
 
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will prepare a city-wide EIA which will include consideration of impacts from 
individual components.  Issues related to noise levels from traffic and how these can be mitigated 
will also be included in the EIA.  The task team will look at the EIA prepared for the ADB 
Urban Transport project (currently under implementation) to see if ADB have done similar work 
and potentially build on it.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
A
Cultural Heritage Management Plan for the Ming walled city is to be developed to fit with 
the overall 100-year heritage plan developed by the city.  All investment activities currently 
proposed within the Ming walled city are for traffic management, which will utilize existing road 
space, and will not involve demolition of historic structures or land acquisition.  The EIA will 
include a screening mechanism for activities and resulting impacts in the Ming walled city such 
as that of increased visitors in the site as a result of the improvements financed by the project.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Part of the population of Xian is Muslims who have been resident in the city for centuries.  
The Social Assessment (SA) will include data on this population as stakeholders in the context of 
traffic improvements, cultural heritage activities, and land acquisition.  The SA will inform the 
planning of consultation arrangements for different stakeholders including the Muslim 
population.  The SA will also include the results of a screening on ethnic minorities in the areas 
affected by road construction to greenfield sites or within the satellite town in Huxian County.  
In addition, a special social assessment report will be prepared by Prof. Li Xiaoyun.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There will be land acquisition and some resettlement, although the scale of land acquisition 
and resettlement is not yet known as the activities in the road and public transport components 
are still being identified.  Prior to appraisal all the subcomponents will be identified and two 
RAPs prepared-one for Xian and one for Huxian County.  
 
In Houxian County, there is possible acquisition of rural collective land.  Consultation will 
be key factor in the acquisition process.  The relocation process will be done upfront and in a 
transparent manner.  The task team will consult the Sichuan Urban Development Project team 
for some guidance in this area.  
 
Linkage.  Potential issues related with linkages with the on-going ADB project have been 
flagged.  The task team will review the resettlement procedure adopted in the ADB project as 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
part of a due diligence exercise.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/12/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/12/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
08/07/2006 to 01/15/2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rakhi Basu 
07/17/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
07/19/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
07/19/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
