Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2868 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P105229 
Project Name: Mainstreaming Adaptation to Climate Change into Water Resources 
Management and Rural Development 
Task Team Leader: Qun Li 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 21, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (65%);Agricultural extension and research (15%);General 
public administration sector (11%);Forestry (9%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P);Natural disaster 
management (P);Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The broader development objectives of the proposed GEF project are to: (a) strengthen the 
resilience of agricultural development to climate change in North China; and (b) help 
mainstream climate change adaptation in irrigation and rural water resource management and, 
thus, in the wider context of rural development in China.  
 
The more specific, operational objectives of the project are to select, develop, implement and 
promote adoption of selected climate change adaptation measures and techniques by main 
stakeholders (farmers, water resource bureaus, etc.) at selected demonstration sites under the new 
Bank-financed IAIL3 project in the 3H Basin; and more broadly to promote mainstreaming and 
incorporation of such demonstrated adaptation measures into the national Comprehensive 
Agricultural Development (CAD) program through policy and promotion, knowledge 
dissemination, capacity building and training, technical support, M&E, and other measures.  
Page  2
The main project development impact indicators would be as follows: (a) climate change 
adaptation measures identified and tested in the proposed demonstration sites and integrated into 
IAIL3 implementation; and (b) the process of integrating adaptation into CAD started. These 
indicators would be studied in detail and finalized during project preparation.  
 
As indicated above, although key components of IAIL3 are climate sensitive, adaptation 
measures for climate change were not included in project design because the role of adaptation 
has been widely recognized only recently. Therefore, the proposed project would, among other 
things, identify gaps in the IAIL3 project design with regard to needed adaptation measures and 
help integrate adaptation measures in its main components. The project would be designed to 
partially blend with IAIL3. Of the $463 million total cost of the latter, an estimated $50 million 
would be used as cofinancing for the proposed GEF project.  
 
The proposal seeks a $316,000 GEF Project Preparation Grant (PPG) to help prepare a $5 
million grant project from the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF), managed by the GEF for 
the proposed five-year project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In line with the above objectives, and based on a very preliminary gap analysis of IAIL3 from a 
climate change adaptation perspective, the proposed GEF project would include the following 
components:  
 
Component 1. Identification and prioritization of adaptation options. Adaptation involves 
making adjustments in ecological, social, or economic systems in response to actual or expected 
climatic changes and their effects or impacts. The goal is to reduce the vulnerability of 
communities, regions, or activities to climatic change and variability. Adaptation is important in 
the climate change issue in two ways: (1) relating to the assessment of impacts and 
vulnerabilities, and (2) relating to the development and evaluation of response options. 
Understanding expected adaptations is essential to impact and vulnerability assessment and 
hence is fundamental to estimating the costs or risks of climate change. Specific activities under 
this component would include:  
 
(a) 
Stocktaking of previous studies on assessment of vulnerability to climate change and 
potential adaptation options, including local knowledge and practice. A brief assessment of 
current vulnerability and adaptation efforts would be provided, including assembling and 
synthesizing existing data on land and water use based on the basin-scale hydrology and 
meteorology in a quantitative baseline framework. (This baseline framework would support all 
M&E activities.)  
 
(b) 
Adapt or fine-tune existing hydrology models (such as Variable Infiltration Capacity, or 
VIC; Distributed Hydrology Soil Vegetation, or DHSVM) that are dynamic and responsive to 
changing land cover-land use (including cropping patterns) and climate to assess climate change 
impacts on local hydrology (such as surface and ground water quantity and quality).  
 
Page  3
(c) 
Use the above models to (i) develop potential adaptation options in content, 
implementation, costs, and impacts (this work would be started during preparation under the 
PPG), and (ii) develop climate change scenarios? impacts on surface and ground water fluxes 
and flood/drought predictions and risks. Selection of the most cost-effective adaptation measures 
will be the basis for the design of this demonstration component.  
 
(d) 
Estimate the sensitivity of 3H Basin agriculture to climate and water availability. As 
agriculture in the 3H Basin depends heavily on irrigation, the activity would study and quantify 
the interface between water and agriculture in the Hai Basin (the most water-short basin) as an 
example. The work would address the gap in the technical and economic information in 
agriculture and water resource management. In this regard, it would rely on two interactive 
models involving estimates of climate change impact and adaptation (i) in agriculture (climate 
sensitivity) and (ii) in water resources management (at the river basin level). The use of these 
state of the art modeling techniques to integrate hydrology, spatial and time factors and the 
supply-demand and economic drivers of farmer decision making is an important and essential 
innovation in the approach being adopted by the proposed project. This work should relate to (c-
ii) above and would start also under the PPG.  
 
(e) 
Economic analysis of climate change impacts, risks and costs, and benefits of various 
adaptation measures based on the results achieved at the demonstration sites.  
 
Component 2. Demonstration and implementation of adaptation measures. Demonstration sites 
would be identified mainly within the 3H Basin. As described above, water demand in this 
region is high and growing, and water scarcity and risk of climate variation is one of China's 
biggest challenges. Special demonstration sites under IAIL3 outside the 3H Basin also may be 
selected to illustrate adaptation under other specific conditions for adaptation. Specific activities 
under this component would include:  
 
(a) 
Identification and selection of adaptation demonstration sites. The activity will first 
identify the project demonstration sites, which would be in accordance with selection criteria to 
be developed during preparation under the PPG. Priority will be given to areas in which there is 
both high vulnerability and a high likelihood of making significant impacts in terms of 
strengthening resilience to climate change.  
 
(b) 
Design and implementation of adaptation demonstration measures. These would be 
followed by a prioritization and selection of the adaptation measures at the demonstration sites. 
Initially identified adaptation techniques would include adaptation-oriented farming practices, 
water-saving irrigation techniques, and land rehabilitation and amelioration. Water pollution 
control measures also would be tested in noncontrol points. In the above, selected innovative 
activities already included in IAIL3, which are closely related to climate change adaptation, 
would be supported and expanded where appropriate. These activities would include ET 
management, groundwater management, laser land leveling, and Water User Associations 
(WUAs) development.  
 
Page  4
(c) 
Develop and test comprehensive and integrated adaptation measures and approaches at 
demonstration sites and, where possible, integrate such measures in the implementation of this 
project.  
 
Component 3. Mainstreaming adaptation in the national Comprehensive Agricultural 
Development (CAD) program and institutional strengthening. The component would aim at 
integrating climate change variability adaptation in the national CAD program. Given CAD's 
limited experience and capacity with this new issue, a series of capacity building, technical 
assistance, knowledge sharing, and public awareness activities would be needed. Based in part 
on experience with adaptation sites under IAIL3, a national adaptation plan for CAD would be 
prepared under the leadership of SOCAD, with the close cooperation of NDRC's and MOF's 
national climate change adaptation offices. Activities under this component would include:  
 
(a) 
Identification of adaptation policy and design gaps in the CAD program and of measures 
to address the identified gaps. This activity would utilize the experience with adaptation policy 
and measures to fill design gaps at the demonstration sites carried out under Component 1.  
 
(b) 
Development of a replication plan to integrate climate change adaptation in the CAD 
New Countryside program. The plan would include, for example, institutional measures to 
improve irrigation and rural water resources management, such as development and support of 
WUAs and other farmer participatory organizations. Integration plans also will include activities, 
training, and budgets for the identified adaptation activities as well as testing and monitoring of 
the integration activities and process at demonstration sites. These plans would be designed to 
use CAD as an example and SOCAD as the lead agency for incorporating components of climate 
change adaptation strategies in an ongoing program, with the aim of promoting and assisting 
other agencies to do likewise.  
 
(c) 
Development of a knowledge and information dissemination strategy to generate and 
propagate awareness and knowledge needed to achieve policy change, promote general 
understanding, and implement the adaptation integration process. Information and knowledge 
about climate change adaptation would be disseminated through the print and communications 
media, public awareness campaigns, workshops/training, the internet, and other means.  
 
(d) 
Implementation of a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. M&E of 
adaptation measures should also cover impact analysis of climate change adaptations, building 
on item (i) of Component 1 above on stocktaking and the quantitative baseline framework. 
Adaptation M&E would be linked to and coordinated with (and may be added on to) the 
comprehensive M&E system of IAIL3. An M&E system also will be designed to regularly assess 
the effectiveness of adaptation implementation mechanisms and measures.  
 
(e) 
Feasibility studies on agriculture insurance would be carried out. If possible, experiments 
with pilot insurance schemes would be designed and tested in certain selected demonstration 
areas. This aspect may provide opportunities for the insurance industry to assist due to the 
increased resilience of the adapted agriculture.  
 
Page  5
(f) 
Capacity building including development of institutional coordination, training plans, and 
technical assistance programs. Sources of the strengths and weaknesses of specific and generic 
adaptive capacity would be identified. A national coordination mechanism would be developed.  
 
(g) 
Development of mechanisms to promote and support cooperative work on adaptation 
between MOF, NDRC, and SOCAD. This could take the form of establishing a Special Working 
Group on Climate Change Adaptation, supported by a special policy-level Leading Group on 
Climate Change and Adaptation, both with mutually agreed terms of reference.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:  
 
The Adaptation project will take place in the IAIL3 area - 3H basin which comprises portions 
of the provinces of Hebei, Henan, Shandong, Jiangsu, and Anhui - China's major grain basket.  
The project will be developed on a gap analysis of the IAIL3 project and the selection of 
demonstration sites (5 counties or villages) will be based on a series of studies and analysis.  
 
Groundwater has been falling rapidly in specific areas of the 3H Basin (also known as the North 
China Plain) due to both surface water scarcity and over-extraction of available groundwater 
resources.  A thorough water balance analysis has been carried out for all provinces, which vary 
in their respective situations: Jiangsu and Anhui provinces have overall surplus water resources, 
both surface and groundwater due to more abundant annual rainfall.  Both provinces have large 
reservoirs, major rivers flowing through the provinces, and large lakes.  Henan and Shandong 
Provinces have a minimal surplus of surface and groundwater resources with seasonal shortages 
during dry spells and depending on the area.  Henan and Shandong also have Yellow River 
diversion water allocations (3.5 billion cu. m. in Henan and 7.0 billion cu. m. in Shandong).  
Hebei Province has less surface water, and its shallow aquifer groundwater has been over-
exploited resulting in falling groundwater levels.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under IAIL2 and IAIL3, significant capacity has been developed within SOCAD and its level 
implementing bodies.  Their capacity to address social and environment issues would be further 
strengthened during the process of the preparation and implementation of the Adaptation project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASRE) 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment:  As partially blended with the IAIL3 project, which is focused 
on rehabilitation of existing sites with limited construction and no major civil works, the 
proposed GEF Adaptation project is an environmental project and aims: (a) to help strengthen 
the resilience of agricultural development to climate change in China through implementation of 
selected adaptation measures at demonstration sites; and
(b) to mainstream climate change 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
adaptation into irrigation, water resource management and thus, in the wider context of rural 
development.  
 
The proposed project aims to further strengthen environmental and social impacts by 
bringing new concepts of risk management, new standards in irrigation infrastructure, and the 
use of natural resilience functions (land, water, forests) to moderate extreme weather conditions. 
Environmental and social impacts of project activities are expected to be positive and the project 
has therefore been classified as a category C project.  Based on the screening of proposed 
activities, other environment safeguards policies are not triggered.  In case there are EA related 
issues, the proposed project will follow the Bank safeguards and mitigiation policies applied to 
IAIL3.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous Peoples: The IP policy was not triggered by IAIL3 as appraised, as there are no 
ethnic minority groups in the project areas in the five 3H basin provinces, as confirmed in the 
social impact review carried out during preparation. However, five additional Participating 
Provinces will be added to IAIL3 in accordance with the Loan Agreement for pilot WUA 
development, and three of those  (Ningxia, Inner Mongolia, and Yunnan) have communities of 
ethnic minority groups.Social assessments and free, prior and informed consultations have been 
carried out among the ethnic minority groups in preparation for the adding the WUA pilots in the 
three provinces, and Ethnic Minority Development Plans were prepared for the WUA programs 
in these provinces.  
 
The GEF project may include a county in Ningxia for demonstration purposes but is very 
unlikely to have significant IP issues due to its small, pilot demonstration scale.  If needed, the 
proposed GEF project will follow the IP Bank policies and the IAIL3 Ethnic Minority 
Development Plans for WUAs in Ninxia province, and will ensure equitable opportunity for all 
ethnic groups in gaining access to and benefiting from the program.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  7
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/30/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
April - September 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Qun Li 
04/03/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
04/03/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
04/04/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
