Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/15/2007 
Report No.:  AC2563
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P095315 
Project Name:  Western Provinces Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene 
Promotion Project 
Task Team Leader:  Thomas L. Zearley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (63%);Sanitation (26%);Other social services (6%);Sub-national 
government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
25.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  25.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project would support the two provinces of Shaanxi and Sichuan in carrying out an 
integrated approach to the design and delivery of rural water supply, sanitation and 
hygiene services, while incorporating past innovations and lessons learned, to scale up 
the approach in China. It would support poverty alleviation by targeting poor villages 
which lack safe drinking water and sanitation facilities.  Special attention would be given 
to the needs and concerns of poor and vulnerable groups. The project would also enhance 
government capacities and reforms to better integrate rural water supply, sanitation and 
hygiene programs in line with the current Eleventh Five Plan.  
 
The project development objective is to increase access of poor participating 
communities to sustainable and equitable water supply, sanitation and hygiene services 
by adopting an integrated and participatory approach, which can be replicated in other 
provinces.  Key performance indicators would include: increase in number of 
beneficiaries with access to safe drinking water supply and sanitation; improvements in 
Page  2
hygiene behaviors; financial sustainability; evidence of an integrated approach to service 
delivery; and replication of project approaches in other provinces.   
 
3. Project Description 
(a) Safe Drinking Water Supply US$44.45 million: This component will include multi-
village, single village, cluster of household schemes and individual household solutions.  
Multi-village schemes will involve the construction of piped water supply schemes (both 
gravity and pumping).  Single villages schemes will involve small piped water schemes 
or point water sources (protected springs, bore wells, improved dug wells with pumps or 
rainwater collectors) serving a single village, hamlet and individual households.  
 
(b) Environmental Sanitation - US$ 19.00 million: This component will include 
household, school and public latrines and solid waste drop-off points and disposal sites.  
For schools, handwashing facilities and low cost waste water and garbage collection 
improvements will be supported.  Low cost wastewater and solid waste solutions will be 
supported on a demonstration basis in some households.  
 
(c) Hygiene Promotion ? US$ 3.79 million: A comprehensive program including mass 
media, traditional government hygiene promotion methods and rotating hygiene 
promotion teams.  Mass media programs through print, DVD and television media will 
be used as well as household, community and school campaigns.  
 
(d)   Institutional Strengthening and Development - US$ 3.93 million): Strengthening 
provincial institutional and management capacity, training/capacity building, technical 
assistance and support for monitoring and evaluation at provincial, local government and 
community levels.  
 
A
parallel technical assistance program funded by DFID, managed by UNICEF, and 
working with central government and relevant national line ministries will help ensure 
that the lessons from the implementation of the project in the two provinces are 
disseminated wider and to provide advocacy for the project approaches.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the provinces of Shaanxi and Sichuan.  25 counties (15 in 
Shaanxi and 10 in Sichuan) have been selected on the basis of poverty, water scarcity, 
and water quality and on the basis of demand for services by rural communities.  
 
Sichuan Province has a subtropical humid and monsoonal climate and is surrounded by 
mountain ranges.  It is densely populated and has a diverse ethnicity and biodiversity.  A 
number of parasitic diseases are endemic in Sichuan province, particularly 
schisotomiasis.  Shaanxi Province has a drier continental monsoonal climate with limited 
and seasonal rainfall.  The project counties are located in the central plain areas and 
northern Loess Plateau areas which are characterized by dusty soils and sparse 
vegetation.  The water source development in rural areas relies heavily on groundwater 
sources.  
Page  3
Of the selected 20 percent of schemes in Sichuan Province, 65 percent are expected to 
utilize groundwater, 19 percent surface water and 16 percent spring sources. This is 
expected to be broadly representative of the remaining 80 percent of schemes to be 
implemented in the project.  In Shaanxi province, groundwater represents just under half 
of the water sources for the first 20 percent of selected schemes.  However, it is expected 
that the pattern of water source development will have greater reliance on groundwater 
for the remaining 80 percent of project schemes in the province, with approximately 60 
percent of all schemes expected to utilize groundwater.  
 
The provincial authorities in both Shaanxi and Sichuan have confirmed that 
groundwater in a number of counties is polluted with fluorides, arsenic, salts and 
industrial wastes.  Two of the ten counties in Sichuan have fluoride problems.Of the 
schemes included in the first 20 percent in Sichuan, water quality problems identified 
include fluoride, salinity, schistosomiasis and non-specific pollution.  Of the fifteen 
project counties in Shaanxi Province, eight have recorded fluoride problems.  However, 
there are no fluoride affected counties in the first 20 percent of schemes as these areas are 
supported by emergency funds from the government. There is only one county in the 
Shaanxi Province which has been reported as experiencing arsenic problems but this is 
not one of the project counties.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Songling Yao (EASSO) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSO) 
Mr Mingyuan Fan (EASUR) 
Mr Feng Ji (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Aspects:  The balance of the projects environmental impact is expected to 
be substantially positive.  The water supply schemes will extract water from reservoirs, 
Page  4
rivers or deep bore wells, of which the water quantity and quality have been investigated. 
All the typical water sources are deemed to have sufficient water for the project schemes.  
Due to the small amount of water required for the project schemes, there will be an 
insignificant impact on other water users.  The small-scale construction of water supply 
and sanitation schemes will cause limited dust, noise and wastewater pollution, which 
would be temporary and can be reduced to an acceptable level with the implementation of 
Environmental Management Plan.  
 
Dam safety Aspects: The project will not involve the construction of dams or 
reservoirs but there will be existing dams and reservoirs in the project areas which will 
supply some of the water supply plants built under the project.  There are a total of eight 
dams and reservoirs which will be a source of water in the first 20 percent of schemes in 
Sichuan province and a total of three dams and reservoirs which will be a source of water 
in Shaanxi Province.  In Sichuan Province, seven out of the eight have been inspected 
and the necessary safety measures identified. Four out of seven are category I and have 
no need for remedial work. One out of the seven is category III and has already received 
the necessary remedial work. Two out of six is category II and has a time bound action 
plan.  Of the remaining one that has not yet been reviewed there is a plan for this to be 
reviewed in 2007. In Shaanxi Province, all three dams have undergone dam safety 
reviews and the necessary remedial measures have been identified but not yet carried out.  
There is one dam in each province that is a homogenous earthfill structure, a type of dam 
that needs careful monitoring for internal erosion.  Both these dams require remedial 
work and this work needs to be carefully supervised.  
 
Social Aspect: The project does not have significant social issues. The project does not 
trigger the Indigenous Peoples Policy. For the construction of water supply and sanitation 
facilities only small pieces of land are needed for each scheme.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental Aspect: The building of sanitary latrines is designed to reduce insect 
access and prevent any passage of pathogens directly into the soil. The compost can be 
used by farmers on fields and does not pose a risk of contamination to surface water or 
groundwater.  The use of composted human waste would replace some of the amount of 
chemical fertilizers and reduce the direct use of un-composted human waste on fields, 
which are some of the factors contributing to the pollution of water sources.  Wider 
environmental sanitation interventions, such as solid waste collection and wastewater 
soak-a-way systems will also contribute to improving village environs and reducing 
environmental health risks.  The provision of a conveniently located water supply could, 
as an indirect benefit of the project, encourage new small-scale entrepreneurs to establish 
local businesses that would use the project-financed water supplies.  These businesses 
may have the potential to produce waste water or have pollution generating potential.  
 
Social Aspect: Land acquisition under the project is scattered and will therefore cause 
very limited adverse impacts in participating villages.  Less than five mu of land is 
required for each scheme and there is sufficient flexibility in selecting the location of 
Page  5
water supply plants so that housing or other buildings do not need to be acquired and no-
one needs to be relocated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environmental Aspect: During the design of the water supply subprojects, alternatives for 
each scheme were researched on such aspects as water quantity, water quality, water 
processing and investment.  
 
Social Aspect: Small pieces of land will be acquired for each scheme, so it is possible 
for the project to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts on participating communities from 
land acquisition.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Aspect: Water supply schemes will specifically use water sources like 
reservoirs, deep bore wells or rivers, the water quantity and quality of which were 
carefully assessed.  The relevant agencies have testified that all the sources have enough 
water for the needs of project.  In addition, using data on the water quality of the selected 
water sources from the bureaus of health, epidemic prevention centers and/or 
environmental monitoring stations, the EA indicates that water quality for all the selected 
sources meet national standards. Furthermore, the EA assessed water processing and 
distribution and stated that water quality can be managed to meet the relevant 
requirements, with the proper implementation of the designed EMP.  
 
The EA also screened potential environmental impacts from the engineering works of 
latrines and local solutions for wastewater and solid waste disposal, and concluded that 
the overall impact would be positive.  For adverse environmental impacts, the EA 
indicated that construction of small-scale schemes would result in very limited pollution 
from noise, dust and wastewater, which could be reduced to acceptable levels with the 
implementation of the EMP.  Furthermore, the EA has forecasted environmental risks 
relating to occasional pollution, stoppage of water supply, as well as dam safety, and 
suggested measures to avoid and/or resolve these issues where they emerge.  
 
Dam safety: Dam safety issues have been carefully reviewed in the project EA process 
and a specific report has been prepared by dam safety experts hired by both provinces.  
These reports have been reviewed, for due diligence, by the Bank task team engineer and 
the Bank Dam Safety Advisor.  
 
a) 
Dam safety assessments are extended to all dams in the first 20 percent of the 
project schemes in both provinces and the borrower has committed to implement the 
necessary remedial measures.  The borrower has provided a time bound action plan, 
including a financial plan, to that effect.  
 
b)
The borrower will be asked to retain the dam safety experts for the purpose of 
reviewing dams in the 80 percent of schemes and for the purpose of reviewing progress 
of the remedial works, particularly of any homogenous earth dams.  Progress should be 
reviewed during supervision missions.  
Page  6
c) 
Dam safety measures should include updating of the existing operation and 
maintenance manuals, including provisions for monitoring.  Provision should be made to 
monitor the presence of turbidity in seepage flows (e.g. by conductivity measurements), 
which is very important to identify progressive erosion processes.  
 
d)
The dam safety experts will review the provisions of domestic regulations in 
terms of Emergency Preparedness Plans. Depending on distance of communities 
downstream and level of hazard, some of the dams might need the establishment of EPPs.  
 
Further steps to ensure the dam safety policy is adhered to have been discussed with 
both provinces.  
 
An EMP has been developed to cover environment-related actions required during the 
construction and operation stages of the project.  The EMP includes details of the 
measures required for monitoring water quantity and quality, dam safety, public health, 
environmental impacts from construction.  At the same time, the EMP has set out a 
proposed institutional structure for environmental management under the project.  In 
addition, the EMP includes cost estimates for the required environmental management.  
 
Social Aspect: Measures to compensate those who will lose land will mainly depend 
on land redistribution, cash compensation, or cash compensation plus land redistribution. 
The affected infrastructure will be compensated by the project and be restored by relevant 
local authorities. In addition, land can be used only after full disbursement of land 
compensation to the affected land owners.  
 
Framework for Reviewing and Approving the 80 percent of schemes  
 
A
framework for environmental assessment and resettlement for the remaining 80 
percent of schemes has been developed.  The process carried out for complying with the 
Banks Dam Safety Policy for dams/reservoirs in the first 20 percent of schemes will be 
followed for reviewing and approving any dams/reservoirs used as a source of water in 
the remaining 80 percent of schemes.  The principles for adhering to the frameworks and 
safeguard compliance will be set out in the legal documents and the process for reviewing 
and approving the 80 percent of schemes will be detailed in the safeguard reports and the 
Implementation Framework/Project Operation Manual.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental Aspect: The project has been designed using participatory approaches. 
During the EA process, two rounds of public consultation and information disclosure 
were conducted around the project areas, in which stakeholders, including villagers, local 
doctors, teachers, engineers, government officials etc took part.  The topics of the 
consultation related to schemes location, land acquisition, water prices, scheme operation 
and management, collection and treatment of solid waste and types of latrines. The EMP 
has set out a plan for consultation and information disclosure to be followed during 
project implementation.  
 
Page  7
Social Aspect: County government officials, local engineers, teachers, village leaders, 
and villager representatives were consulted on issues around the land census, project 
locations, compensation measures, etc.  The Resettlement Plan also contains procedures 
for grievance redress.  
 
The EA documentation was originally received by the Bank on November 15, 2006.In 
country disclosure was on November 14, 2006 and disclosure on Infoshop on November 
17, 2006.  These documents were re-submitted and re-disclosed following appraisal (see 
dates below).  The EA documentation will be re-disclosed locally prior to Chinese 
domestic approval and in advance of negotiations. 
 
The draft RP was submitted to the Bank in January 2006 and a final Chinese Draft RP 
with corresponding English Summary was re-submitted to the Bank on November 15, 
2006 and disclosed locally and on the Bank?s Infoshop on November 17, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/14/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/25/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  8
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thomas L. Zearley 
02/05/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Feng Ji 
01/21/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Songling Yao 
01/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Mingyuan Fan 
01/19/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
02/16/2007 
Comments:   
