Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/14/2007 
Report No.:  AC3091
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P084742 
Project Name:  Irrigated Agriculture Intensification Loan III 
Task Team Leader:  Qun Li 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P105229 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 5, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 11, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (68%);Agricultural extension and research (12%);General 
public administration sector (11%);Forestry (5%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (4%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies 
and institutions (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
31.72 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
18.28
50.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to enhance the resilience of agricultural and water 
development to climate change in the 3H Basin through: (a) selecting, developing, 
implementing and promoting adoption of selected climate change adaptation measures 
and techniques by main stakeholders at selected demonstration areas in the 3H Basin; and 
(b) mainstreaming and incorporating such demonstrated adaptation measures into the 
national CAD program.  
 
The main project development impact indicators would be: (i) increased water and 
agricultural productivity (kg/m3); (ii) improved irrigation efficiency (%); (iii) relevant 
climate change adaptation measures/techniques implemented in selected demonstrated 
areas (ha) through broad stakeholders participation (number of farm households) at 
selected sites; and (iv) policies, mechanisms and instruments for adaptation to climate 
change formulated and integrated into the national CAD operation system.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Based on a gap analysis of IAIL3 from a climate change adaptation perspective, the 
proposed GEF project would include the following components:  
 
Component 1: Identification and Prioritization of Adaptation Options. Specific activities 
under this component would include:  
 
(a) 
Impact assessment of climate change in 3-H Basin and project area, including: (i) 
stocktaking of previous studies; (ii) testing and adapting existing hydrology and 
agricultural production models to be dynamic and responsive to climate and resulting 
changing land cover-land use (including cropping patterns); (iii) assessing the sensitivity 
of 3-H Basin agriculture to climate and water availability; and (iv) conducting farm 
households analyses in the project area and elsewhere in the 3H Basin to determine 
climate sensitivity, water demand, adaptation response and the effectiveness of 
household- and community-level adaptation options in the face of projected climate 
change.  The work would integrate all the relevant climatological, hydrological, and 
economic aspects and capture climate change impact and adaptations in agriculture and 
irrigation (climate sensitivity) and in water resources management (at the river basin 
level). The use of these state-of-the-art modeling techniques to integrate climate, 
hydrology and agricultural economics over key spatial and time scales is an important 
and essential innovation in the approaches that will be adopted under the proposed 
project; and  
 
(b) 
Prioritization and selection of adaptation measures and demonstration areas. The 
activities would include: (i) a gap analysis of IAIL3 to identify adaptation measures and 
plan their implementation; (ii) identification and selection of adaptation demonstration 
areas in accordance with well-defined selection criteria. Priority will be given to areas in 
which there is both high vulnerability and a high likelihood of making significant impacts 
in strengthening resilience to climate change; and (iii) use of the above models and 
scientific technical analysis to select and refine adaptation options in content, 
implementation, costs and impacts for each project province and demonstration area.  
 
Component 2: Demonstration and implementation of adaptation measures. The purpose 
of this component is to introduce, demonstrate and implement the specific adaptation 
measures in selected demonstration areas, and adjust and integrate appropriate adaptation 
measures into the implementation of the IAIL3 project.  The main activities under this 
component would include:  
 
(a) 
Based on the gap analysis and preliminary conclusions of scientific studies under 
Component 1, introduce and demonstrate initially identified demonstration adaptation 
measures and relevant techniques for each specific demonstration area in each related 
sub-region of the 3-H Basin (focusing on agricultural production and rural water 
management and utilization).  The selected specific new activities (in addition to IAIL3) 
include: (i) explore/develop alternative water resources based on each sub-region?s 
conditions, including the development of catchments (natural and artificial ponds) to 
enhance rainfall storage capacity and reduce water logging threats in the alluvial plain, 
well-based irrigation with reinforced prevention and resistance to drought in Huang-Hai 
plain, and advanced field water-saving irrigation technologies and works; (ii) promote 
adaptation-oriented farming practices, including adjustment of farming patterns to reduce 
water consumption (proportion of wheat-rice, wheat-rape and other crop would be 
suitably adjusted based on the climate change tendency) combining drainage with 
Page  3
irrigation to avoid soil deterioration in Huang-Hai plain; and (iii) adopt water saving 
oriented farming technologies, including development of drought resistant varieties, 
?seeded in water?, membrane and biological water conservation to deal with water 
scarcity, land and eco-system rehabilitation and amelioration. Water pollution control 
measures would be tested at non-control points. The identified innovative adaptation 
activities would be implemented and tested in selected demonstration area, and then 
supported, expanded and promoted where appropriate in all IAIL3 project area.  
 
(b) 
Integrate and expand appropriate adaptation measures into IAIL3 project 
implementation, focusing on those activities that are part of IAIL3 (which did not 
consider climate change in their design) and which are at risk from climate change. The 
scientific analysis and modeling (under Component 1) would be applied in the redesign 
of these components, leading to more climate resilient outcomes (sometimes referred to 
as ?climate proofing?).  Based on a gap analysis of IAIL3 from a climate change 
perspective, this component will review and refine the original IAIL3 technical design for 
all adaptation-related activities and adjust the IAIL3 Project Implementation Plan to 
respond to actual or expected short-term climate variability and long-term change and 
their effects in each specific region. All identified IAIL3 activities related to adaptation 
measures would be supported and expanded where appropriate. These include the 
following IAIL3 sub-components: (i) engineering water-saving irrigation and drainage 
technologies and facilities; (ii) agronomic water-saving measures, including land 
leveling, deep plowing, balanced fertilizer use, recycling of crop residues, introduction of 
improved quality seeds, on-farm forestry belts and restoration of riparian zones; and (iii) 
water-saving management measures, including development of water user associations 
and farmers? professional cooperatives, installation of water measuring facilities and 
equipment, and preparation and implementation of groundwater management plans in 
water-short counties in Hebei project areas, pilot crop ET monitoring and management 
programs.  
 
Component 3. Mainstreaming adaptation in the national CAD program and institutional 
strengthening. The component would aim at integrating climate change adaptation in the 
national CAD program. Given CAD?s limited experience and capacity with this issue, a 
series of capacity building, technical assistance, knowledge sharing, and public 
awareness activities would be needed. Based in part on experience with adaptation 
activities under IAIL3, a ?national climate change adaptation plan? for CAD would be 
prepared under the leadership of SOCAD, with the close cooperation with the national 
climate change adaptation offices of the National Development and Reform 
Commission?s (NDRC) and the Ministry of Finance?s (MOF).The main activities under 
this component would include:  
 
(a) 
development of the national CAD climate change adaptation policy and 
replication/implementation plan;  
 
(b) 
capacity building including training/workshops, technical assistance, study tours 
and information dissemination;  
 
(c) 
implementation of a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system and a 
management information system (MIS) focusing on adaptation measures. Adaptation 
M&E would be linked to and coordinated with (and may be added on to) the 
comprehensive M&E system of IAIL3 and will be designed to assess the effectiveness of 
adaptation implementation mechanisms and measures; and  
Page  4
(d) 
project management and institutional coordination, and in particular the 
development of mechanisms to promote and support cooperative work on adaptation 
between MOF, NDRC, and SOCAD.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area will comprise the IAIL3 provinces of Hebei, Jiangsu, Anhui, Shandong, 
and Henan in the 3H Basin and the Autonomous Region of Ningxia in the arid northwest. 
There are Hui minority communities in project demonstrations sites in Tongxin county in 
Ningxia. An EMDP has therefore been prepared for Ningixa, and covers the Hui ethnic 
groups residing in Tongxin county.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Partially blended with the IAIL3 project, which is focused on improvement and 
upgrading of existing irrigation schemes with limited new construction and no major civil 
works, the project is an environmental project. In line with its development objectives, 
the project will introduce new concepts of risk management, new standards for irrigation 
management and infrastructure, and the use of natural resilience (land, water, and forests) 
to moderate the impact of extreme weather conditions and climate change. Environmental 
and social impacts of project activities are expected to be positive.  In addition, the 
proposed project will primarily provide technical assistance, capacity building and other 
software support for climate change adaptation.  The project has been classified as a 
Category C project. In case there are EA related issues, the project will follow the Bank 
safeguards and mitigation policies applied to IAIL3, including the EMDP, EMP and 
Environmental M&E plan prepared for each participating province.  
 
Page  5
Involuntary Resettlement: The proposed project will not undertake activities that 
required taking of land, and neither land acquisition nor involuntary relocation is 
expected during project implementation.  Any potential impacts resulting from the 
proposed testing of adaptation measures at demonstration sites will be dealt in accordance 
with the Resettlement Policy Framework prepared for the ongoing IAIL3.  
 
The Bank?s Indigenous People policy was not triggered by IAIL3 as there are no ethnic 
minority groups identified in the five original Project Provinces based on the social 
impact review carried out for the project by SOCAD.    However, IAIL3 included 
provision to add ?Participating Provinces? for WUA development, and social 
assessments had been undertaken for all proposed Participating Provinces; Ethnic 
Minority Development Plans (EMDPs) had been required for Participating Provinces 
which may include ethnic minorities.  Recently five Participating Provinces have been 
added to IAIL3, and for three of those ethnic minorities have been identified and EMDPs 
have been prepared.  The proposed GEF project demonstrations sites are all within the 
project areas of the original IAIL3 Project Provinces, except for Tongxin county in 
Ningxia, which is newly added to IAIL3 as a Participating Province and in which there 
are Hui minority communities; an EMDP has therefore been prepared for Ningixa, and 
covers the Hui ethnic groups residing in Tongxin county.  
 
Based on prior and informed consultation with local ethnic minority groups during the 
project information dissemination campaign and social assessment process, the EMDP 
analyzed the local Hui people?s needs and aspirations as related to project activities, and 
set forth measures to help ensure equal opportunities for Hui ethnic groups to participate 
in project design and implementation. Although the GEF program in Ningxia covers only 
10 villages in one township, 6 of the ten have Hui populations which account for 47% of 
the total project beneficiaries in Ningxia. The EMDP is intended to ensure these people 
participate in the GEF project voluntarily, and also ensure that project design in Ningxia 
is in conformity with the required social safeguards under OP4.10.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no major adverse environmental impacts expected as a result of this project.  
The project is designed to be entirely positive from an environmental point of view, 
particularly by protecting vulnerable ecosystems from the impact of climate change. 
Some expected direct positive impacts include: (a) reduced uncertainty of impacts of  
climate change and formulation of adequate adaptation measures; (b) mitigation of 
impacts of unsustainable agricultural practices and development  and implementation of 
sustainable alternatives; (c) reduced vulnerability of agro-systems, and planning and 
management of irrigation water supply; (d) increased public awareness building on 
adaptation needs and increased social and institutional capacity to manage the 
ecosystems.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The GEF project has been designed to upgrade IAIL3 in view of further avoiding or 
minimizing environmental adverse impacts.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Under IAIL3, the EMDP, EMP, a Policy Framework for Resettlement and Land 
Aquisition and Environmental M&E plan were prepared for each related project 
province. Mitigation measures, monitoring programs and other activities described in the 
EMDP, EMP and Environmental M&E plan would also apply to GEF-supported 
activities.  
 
Under IAIL2 and IAIL3, significant capacity has been developed within SOCAD and its 
lower-level implementing bodies. Their capacity to address social and environmental 
issues is substantial and would be further strengthened during the process of the 
preparation and implementation of the proposed adaptation project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The major direct intended beneficiaries/stakeholders of the project are farmers and local 
communities in the demonstration sites and the counties where these sites are located.  
Preparation of the proposed project has paid close attention to Bank social safeguards 
policy.  The social development goal in the project context is to support the 
empowerment of local farmers through their involvement in design and implementation 
of project activities and adaptation measures, as exemplified by farmer participation in 
and management of Water User Associations (WUAs) and Farmer Associations (FAs).  
Extensive consultations were conducted with farmers on the proposed components to 
ascertain their views and priorities. A questionnaire survey of 5,070 farm households 
under IAIL3 showed that project area farmers looked forward to the improved on-farm 
works and better irrigation efficiency and would participate with their labor inputs.  A 
number of consultations during the preparation of the project also showed that farmers 
would welcome adaptation measures that would eventually help them reduce risks of 
climate disasters.  
 
Consultation and disclosure on social safeguards policy have been undertaken through 
strengthening the farmers? own capability to deal flexibly with climate change, and 
support for expansion of WUAs and FAs as the farmers? own organizations that have 
been included in IAIL3 to enable the farmers themselves to participate in and (where 
appropriate) control decision-making on local irrigation management and agricultural 
production.  Each of the IAIL3 provinces prepared WUA and FA development plans 
which have been modified to include agricultural adaptation to climate changes as part of 
project component design.  In doing so, care was also taken to ensure the participation of 
women farmers in WUAs and farmer associations (FA), particularly as managers of 
household land and water when males migrate out for work.  
 
Moreover, the project has also paid particular attention to vulnerable groups in the 
official poverty counties (about one-third of the project areas), to promote inclusive, pro-
poor institutions which increase poor farmers? participation in and benefit from both 
IAIL3 and the GEF project.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/24/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/24/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/24/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/27/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  8
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Qun Li 
08/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
08/28/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
08/28/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
09/06/2007 
Comments:   
