Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/14/2007 
Report No.:  AC3022
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P084874 
Project Name:  China Energy Efficiency Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Leiping Wang 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P098916 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (90%);Banking (10%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
13.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.80 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
206.35 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
171.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.00
383.15 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to improve the energy efficiency of 
medium and large-sized industrial enterprises, and to reduce their impact of climate 
change. The project development objective will be achieved by (a) developing 
sustainable energy conservation lending businesses in selected banks to support energy 
conservation investments in medium and large-sized industries; and (b) strengthening 
government capability to enforce related laws, regulations, and standards, and to 
supervise and monitor energy efficiency
–related activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have following components:  
 
Component A: Promotion of Energy Efficiency Financing (estimated cost: US$16.65 
million; US$9.9 million of GEF cofinancing). The proposed activities will remove key 
barriers to developing energy conservation financing businesses in the domestic banking 
Page  2
sector primarily for medium and large-sized industrial energy conservation investments. 
They comprise:  
 
(1) Assistance to participating financial intermediaries (PFIs) for IBRD loan onlending 
in (a) business startup, including creation, organization, staffing, and initial business plan 
of the energy conservation lending business unit (or team); (b) capacity building and 
training, including development of necessary internal mechanisms, procedures, and 
adequate knowledge base to evaluate and extend loans to industrial enterprises for energy 
conservation projects; (c) marketing and energy conservation subproject pipeline 
development, (d) subproject due diligence support, including financial, technical, social 
and environmental assessment; (e) development of energy conservation-related financing 
instruments and risk management tools; and (f) output-based payment scheme linked to 
energy conservation lending to cover part of the incremental operational cost incurred by 
the PFIs to maintain a functioning EC business unit or team during the project period as 
mandated by the project.  
 
(2) Assistance to other banks in (a) business startup; (b) capacity building; and (c) due 
diligence. This assistance will be extended to at least two additional commercial banks, 
which will lend their own funds to eligible industrial energy conservation subprojects, 
amplifying the impact of the proposed project and demonstrating the commercial 
attractiveness of lending for industrial energy conservation investments. These two banks 
will be selected in the second year of the project implementation.  
 
(3) Assistance to the overall banking sector. This will include a series of national 
workshops to present successful case studies of subprojects carried out by the PFIs in first 
one or two years, as well as introducing energy conservation technologies and financing 
products.  
 
(4) Assistance to energy conservation investment project demonstration. This will 
support the preparation and implementation of two or three industrial energy 
conservation projects in sectors with large replication potentials, but with significant 
project development difficulties. The objective is to demonstrate effective business 
models and institutional arrangements for the preparation and financing of energy 
conservation projects. It will focus primarily on pre-investment activities, such as 
feasibility studies, due diligence and financing, and institutional arrangements.  
 
Component B: Energy Conservation Investment Lending (estimated cost: US$571.4 
million; US$0.4 million GEF cofinancing). This component includes a total of US$400 
million energy conservation investment lending over five years, and a corresponding 
US$171 million equity investment by beneficiary enterprises, and energy conservation 
investment lending monitoring and verification activities:  
 
(1) Energy conservation investment lending by PFIs. A US$200 IBRD loan will be on-
lent by the GOC to two to three domestic banks, which in turn will lend the funds to 
enterprises for energy conservation investment subprojects.  These banks, alternatively 
referred to as PFIs, will be allocated IBRD loan in the range of US$50
–100
million each 
(the final allocations will be determined at project appraisal). They will be responsible for 
the repayment of the IBRD loan and will assume all financial risks. The PFIs have also 
preliminarily agreed to lend at least another US$200 million for energy efficiency 
investments from their own resources. It has been agreed that their formal commitments 
will be submitted to the Bank before project negotiation.  The subproject beneficiary 
Page  3
enterprises are also expected to contribute 30 percent equity investment, a standard 
requirement by Chinese banks, totaling US$171 million.  
 
The project staff of the PFIs will be trained to identify potential carbon financing 
candidates from their subproject pipelines. GEF assistance will not directly support any 
activities related to the implementation of carbon financing for the identified subprojects. 
However, the PFI project staff will maintain full transparency with its carbon finance 
counterparts with regards to GEF support for the identified subprojects. Prior review by 
the World Bank will be required for any eligible subprojects that have applied for carbon 
financing from the funds managed by the World Bank. The prior review will assess 
whether the agreed due diligence process is being strictly followed.  
 
(2) Monitoring and verification of energy conservation lending: independent verification 
of energy conservation lending for the disbursement of the out-put based incentive grant, 
as well as monitoring of energy conservation subproject performance.  
 
Component C: National Policy Support and Capacity Building (estimated cost: US$7.8 
million; US$2.8 million of GEF cofinancing): This component will strengthen 
government capabilities to implement industrial energy efficiency policies and programs 
in the following ways:  
 
(1) Assisting establishment of the National Energy Conservation Center (NECC), 
approved by the State Council in August 2006. The main objective of NECC is to support 
the implementation of national energy conservation policies and programs. This 
subcomponent will provide organizational and strategic planning assistance to the 
establishment of NECC, as well as help develop initial work programs of NECC.  
 
(2) Supporting the implementation of priority national energy conservation programs of 
the 11th Five-Year Plan. This will mainly include a midterm review (2008) of 
implementation activities to identify problems, recommend remedy measures, and 
prepare and implement recommended measures.  
 
Component D: Project Implementation Support and Reporting (estimated cost: US$0.8 
million; US$0.4 million of GEF cofinancing): Because of the innovative character, 
complexity, and scale of the project, consultants will be recruited to support the 
implementation of the project, including coordinating technical assistance activities to the 
banks and the government, as well as organize project monitoring, evaluation, and 
reporting activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Investments in energy conservation sub-projects by the PFIs will be nationwide. The 
energy conservation subprojects are primarily process additions, process modifications, 
or process changes that either recover waste heat or improve energy efficiency. Typical 
sub-projects include waste heat boilers, pressure recovery turbines, and changes of 
inefficient equipment with efficient ones, etc., which are anticipated to have either minor 
or no environmental impacts or do not require land acquisition. As required for FI 
Page  4
projects, the PFIs prepared a Framework EIA Document (Framework Document) 
acceptable to the World Bank. The Framework Document specifies that any proposed 
sub-project which Chinese environmental authorities determine as requiring a full EIA 
during screening or requiring land acquisition will be rejected from further consideration 
under the World Bank loan. Further reviews of the related Chinese environmental 
regulations by the Bank team confirm that Chinese EIA requirement of “full EIA” is 
equivalent to the World Bank “Category A”.  
 
Potential sub-projects would then have to demonstrate to the PFIs that all Chinese EIA 
procedures and approvals have been followed and obtained. The energy efficiency sub-
projects will be associated with existing operations/processes on the property of an 
existing operation/process or project. Furthermore, procedures specified in the 
Framework Document will also require that the existing operation or project demonstrate 
that it has obtained the necessary Chinese EIA approvals prior to construction and/or 
operation of the existing project and that it is in compliance with all applicable 
environmental regulations, waste disposal and emission standards.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
Mr Youxuan Zhu (EASTE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The screening criterion in the Framework Document discussed above will reject any 
proposed sub-project that either involves land acquisition or could have significant 
environmental impacts. The possible impacts of the sub-projects that will be considered 
for financing   are the minor ones normally associated with a construction activities, e.g. 
dust, noise, disposal of construction wastes, etc. These are short duration, reversible and 
for the most part likely to be confined to the area within the plant fence. Operation 
impacts are expected to be minor, and are process specific. At the very least, the energy 
Page  5
efficiency aspect, will reflect reduced need for additional fuel which will translate into 
reduced emissions resulting from improved combustion.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Once the energy efficiency investments are operational, there will be a reduction in 
energy consumption, which will result in a decrease in fuel utilization. Since coal is the 
preferred fuel of choice in many Chinese industrial enterprises, the project is therefore 
likely result in a reduction of coal consumption and an associated reduction in dust, sulfur 
dioxide and carbon dioxide emissions. Dust and sulfur dioxide reductions could improve 
local air quality and a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions supports improvements to 
the global environment.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
At the individual subproject level project sponsors would be considering potential energy 
efficiency technology/technical options.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As previously discussed, the PFIs prepared a Framework Document acceptable to the 
World Bank. The Framework Document describes procedures to be followed by any Sub-
borrower and PFI to satisfy both Chinese and World Bank EIA regulations and policies. 
Chief features of the Framework Document include procedures to be followed by the 
sub-borrower for screening, EIA documentation, public consultation, EIA review and 
approval, disclosure, supervision and reporting. The PFIs will assure that all these 
procedures were properly followed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultation and disclosure will be done in accordance with Chinese regulations and the 
World Bank requirements for any potential sub-project. The Framework Document 
specifies that the sub-borrower will be required to present the PFI with documentation 
that these requirements were properly followed and during supervision the PFI will check 
with local environmental authorities to ensure all EA requirements are being followed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/06/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Leiping Wang 
06/13/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
06/13/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Youxuan Zhu 
06/13/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
06/14/2007 
Comments:   
