Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/03/2007 
Report No.:  AC2751
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P052608 
Project Name:  Antioquia Secondary Education Project 
Task Team Leader:  Martha Laverde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 3, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
22.87
22.87 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The high-level objective of the project is to contribute to the improvement ofsocial and 
economic inclusion, targeting Antioquia?s poorest youth, by increasing their opportunity 
to receive quality secondary education and acquire pertinent basic and general labor force 
competencies; thereby increasing their potential to pursue higher education or 
successfully participate in the labor market.  
 
The success of the project will be measured by the following Project Development 
Objective (PDO) indicators (the Impact Evaluation will compare the 2006/7 baseline data 
with the 2011/12 project impact data on beneficiary and control municipalities in similar 
departments):  
 
?
Increased upper-secondary gross enrollment from 46% to 96% and net  
enrollment rate from 22% to 36%.  
 
?
Increased average mathematics and language test scores (national ICFES test) in 
the poorest areas. Mathematics test scores from 44 to 49 and language test scores from 46 
to 52  
 
?
Increased upper secondary completion rate  in the poorest areas from 81,2 % to 
90%  
Page  2
?
Increased transition rate from secondary to tertiary education from X% to Y% + 
5%  
 
Note:  The base line of this indicator will be the 2007 data, collected in the monitoring 
and evaluation system.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project target will focus on upper-secondary education and opportunities 
for transition to tertiary education by including the following three components:  
 
Component 1: Equitable Access to upper-secondary and opportunities for transiting to 
tertiary education. (Total: 14.2; Bank financing: US$ 7.5 million).  This component 
would support an integrated strategy to increase coverage, retention, and completion at 
the upper-secondary level and provide increased opportunities for transition to tertiary 
education for low-income students, especially from the rural areas through the following  
sub-components:  
 
Sub-component 1.1. Implementation of flexible pedagogical models (Total: US$ 6.2 
Bank financing: US$1.0 million.  The application of the appropriate flexible models will 
offer students the possibility of continuing their studies in an alternative non-traditional 
learning modality that has  been proven effective for education delivery to populations in 
vulnerable situations, such as the poor communities in rural areas.  Antioquia has a lot of 
experience in the implementation of flexible pedagogical models, most of them 
contracted and provided by the private sector. The models will be evaluated and selected 
based on  the following criteria : (i) curricular content delivery strategies; (ii) pedagogical 
methods to facilitate teacher-student and student-student interaction in the classroom; (iii) 
didactic materials for students, teachers and classrooms; (iv) appropriate use of TICs; (v) 
extracurricular and community-school strategies to provide applied learning and facilitate 
the school-to-work transition; and (vi) evaluation strategies of students.  
 
Sub-component 1.2. Direct subsidies to upper secondary-education students (Total: 
US$3.3; Bank financing: US$3.0 million) Students from poor families often drop out of 
school due to economic reasons and this is especially the case at the upper secondary and 
tertiary levels, where the costs of education are higher and there are alternative work 
opportunities.  Experience in Colombia and other countries has shown the positive impact 
of demand side incentives that complement supply-side interventions in keeping students 
in school and improving their prospects in completing their education. This sub-
component will finance a direct monetary subsidy to students in grades 10 and 11 to help 
with expenditures, such as tuition fees, transportation, and food. Eligible students will be 
selected by departmental and municipal authorities based on SISBEN data . The subsidies 
will be conditional on continued satisfactory academic performance and certified by 
principals. The target population in the 120 uncertified municipalities is 22,640 youths. 
The beneficiaries would be 3,361 youths per year with the available resources, which 
would be annually distributed to about 60 percent of students in 10th grade and 40 
percent of students in 11th grade.  Subsidies will amount to a total of US$175 per year as 
follows: US$15 monthly and US$25 delivered at the beginning of the school year for 
Page  3
initial expenses. The project will include youths at SISBEN level 1 who are not 
participating in the national-funded Familias en Accion and in addition to SISBEN level 
2
youths.  
 
The criteria  for selection of the beneficiaries for subsidies will be as follows: (i) the 
beneficiaries must belong to families of level 1 and 2 according to SISBEN and 
coordinate with the Familias en Acci?n program; and (ii) municipalities with the highest 
rate of dropouts in  grade 9.  These subsidies will be managed in a similar way as the 
Familias en Acci?n program, with a direct deposit in the commercial bank account of the 
beneficiaries. In this case it will be under the administrative and financial responsibility 
of IDEA Instituto para el Desarrollo de Antioquia (Institute for the Development of 
Antioquia) ? a legally established Departmental public entity with administrative 
autonomy and its own financial resources.  
 
Sub-component 1.3. Conditional Scholarship to increase access to tertiary education 
(Total: US$3.5; Bank financing: US$ 0.5 million) The conditional scholarship program 
consists of financial benefits that upper-secondary students would use when they enter 
tertiary education. This will provide an additional incentive for students to stay in upper 
secondary school and to continue to the tertiary level. It is assumed that the total value of 
the conditional scholarship for each beneficiary entering a qualified tertiary education 
institution (university or technical institute) will be $300. During the five years of project 
implementation, the program will finance approximately 22,220 students (4,444 each 
year). The beneficiaries must meet the requirements set forth under the conditional 
scholarship program. The criteria for selection of the beneficiaries for the savings 
program will be as follows: (i) the beneficiaries must belong to families at income level 1 
according to SISBEN; (ii) they must live in municipalities with access to some kind of 
tertiary education institution (university, technical institute)?to encourage young people 
to stay in their area of origin; (iii) they must preferably live in the municipalities under 
conditions of extreme poverty; and (iv) a proportion of beneficiaries will be selected 
among the indigenous population, population groups of African origin, people displaced 
by the civil war, and young people among the recently demobilized groups.  
 
The conditional scholarship sub-component will be financed by the Department. The 
Bank will finance the impact evaluation of this program, measuring the increased 
transition rate from secondary to tertiary education.  
 
Sub-component 1.4. Vocational and professional counseling and guidance (Total: 
US$2.2; Bank financing: US$ 1.0 million) This sub-component?s objective is to establish 
a
program for  guiding  and motivating students at the upper-secondary level with respect 
to technical, technological, professional, and non-formal education programs, and 
provide employment prospects and access to tertiary education. This program will be 
developed and implemented with the participation of universities, the community, and the 
private sector. The vocational and professional counseling and guidance program will 
highlight sectors with the greatest demand in the local, regional and national job markets. 
The school will receive financial transfers to implement this vocational and professional 
counseling and guidance program as part as the school grant program.  
 
Page  4
Component 2: Quality and Relevance of Upper-Secondary Education (Total: US$25.3; 
Bank financing : US$ 11.2 million)  
 
This component would support integrated strategies to improve the quality and 
relevance of upper-secondary education. To contribute to long-term quality 
improvements in upper-secondary schools, the component will also support a feasibility 
study and the design of relevant proposals for technical education at the upper-secondary 
level.  
 
Sub-component 2.1.  Strengthening Upper-Secondary School Management for  
Education Quality through school grants (Total: US$22.1; Bank financing: US$ 10.2 
million) This component supports the provision of school grants as an instrument to 
improve quality and to help upper-secondary students complete their education and 
achieve higher test results in order to allow them to gain access to tertiary education 
institutions or eventually enter the labor force. This subcomponent will provide technical 
assistance and provide tools and instruments to the Department to support the schools. 
The schools will receive financial transfers for school improvement sub-projects that 
would include a strategy to: (i) develop a competency-based curriculum and the 
organization of the corresponding training for academic counselors, principals, 
coordinators, and teachers; (ii) implement the competency-based curriculum within the 
School Improvement Plan framework; (iii) improve the pedagogical practices of teachers, 
especially with respect to the application of the new competency-based curriculum; (iv) 
formulate plans to develop a school culture that favors education for peaceful coexistence 
and democratic participation, and the application of existing mechanisms for that purpose 
(Manual on Peaceful Community Coexistence, PEI, Academic Governing Bodies and 
Student Elected  Representative (personero estudiantil); (v) design and implement a plan 
for the adequate utilization of ICT and pedagogical resources within the context of the 
new competency-based curriculum; and (vi) train school principals and teachers for the 
implementation of an Improvement Performance Plan for upper-secondary education.  
 
Subcomponent 2.2. Improve the Effectiveness of technical upper-secondary education 
(Total: US$3.4; Bank financing: US$2.0.million) This sub-component aims to initiate the 
process for enhancing the effectiveness of technical upper-secondary education in 
Antioquia. The sub-component will support a feasibility study and the design and 
implementation of the relevant reform proposal in a sample of technical upper-secondary 
education schools. The study,  will be conducted to achieve the following objectives: (i) 
to assess the current organization and outcomes of the technical upper-secondary 
education system in Antioquia; (ii) to identify relevant national and international 
experiences that have proven   to improve the quality and relevance of upper- secondary 
technical education; and (iii) to propose an appropriate model that would make technical 
upper-secondary education relevant to Labor market needs as well as  improve students 
prospects to continue on to tertiary education institutions. The results of the study will 
serve as a basis for developing methods to improve and enhance technical education.  
Approximately 15 technical schools (about 15 % of the total technical schools) 
demonstrative experiences in the Department of Antioquia will be selected as pilots to 
assess the effectiveness of the selected model and identify necessary adjustments.  
 
Page  5
The results of the study and the Demonstrative Experiences will provide the necessary 
measures that need to be in place  to expand the model by: (i) improving the linkages 
across secondary education, technical-professional-vocational education, tertiary 
education, and the labor market; (ii) introducing  curricular changes in terms of general 
and specific labor competencies; (iii) establishing mechanisms for the accreditation of 
institutions and the certification of competencies acquired by individuals within and 
outside the educational system; (iv) improving the quality of education by training 
teachers and providing quality pedagogical inputs (learning materials, information 
technologies, classroom and laboratory facilities); and (iv) establishing a management 
information system, including a career guidance and placement system coordinated with 
Antioquia?s Secretariat of Labor and SENA, Servicio Nacional de Aprendizaje (National 
Service for Job Training).  
 
The project will finance technical assistance to carry out a feasibility study for 
improving the effectiveness of secondary technical education.  For the Demonstrative 
Experiences, the project will provide financial transfers to eligible schools to implement 
the selected subprojects. Approximately 15 schools will prepare a sub-project to meet the 
proposed objectives.  
 
Component 3.   Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project 
Management (Total: US$5.5; Bank financing: US$ 3.3 million)  
 
This component will include support for overall Project coordination, supervision, and 
evaluation by: (i) strengthening the capacity of the Secretariat of Education to provide 
technical assistance to the municipalities and schools; (ii) strengthening the capacity of 
the Project Coordination Team to comply with its responsibilities for managing the 
project; (iii) carrying out project-related studies and audits; and (iv) designing and 
implementing a project-related monitoring and evaluation plan.  
 
Sub-component 3.1. Building the Department?s Capacity to Provide Technical 
Assistance to Municipalities and Schools (Total: US$1.4; Bank financing: US$ 
1.1million) The project will strengthen decentralization at the municipal and school level 
through a structured and systematic technical assistance plan based on the experience of 
the previous Bank-financed education project. The necessary consultancy services were 
designed as part of the implementation of the previous Project for Improvement in the 
Quality of Basic Education. To improve school-level decision-making and performance, 
the Department?s offices need to strengthen their capacity to provide technical assistance 
and supervision in terms of pedagogical processes in the classroom and school 
management. In each sub-region--depending on the size of the schools and the demand 
for upper-secondary education--there will be a local advisor?s group comprised of nuclei 
directors, who, after being trained in using the SEDUCA technical assistance model, and 
becoming familiar with the project structure, scope, components, indicators etc., will be 
responsible for providing technical assistance and training to the municipalities and 
schools.  The project team in SEDUCA will provide support to establish and strengthen 
the local advisors group. This support will include: (i) strategies, instruments, and 
Page  6
knowledge to support the pedagogical and the school management models; (ii) 
preparation of school improvement plans; and (iii) use of achievement test results.  
 
Sub-component  3.2. Impact Evaluation and Monitoring Strategy (Total: US$2.0; Bank 
financing: US$ 1.2million) During project preparation, strong emphasis was placed on 
impact evaluation to be able to confirm the results of the key interventions supported by 
the project. This sub-component will support the design and implementation of an impact 
evaluation model to conduct a systematic and objective analysis of the results achieved 
by the Project. The following aspects of the project will be looked at: relevance, 
attainment of objectives, efficiency, impact, and sustainability of actions. The monitoring 
system will track project implementation. The proposed monitoring and evaluation model 
is based on the establishment of relationships between education results (i.e., access, 
retention, quality, and opportunities to matriculate in tertiary education), inputs 
(interventions), and processes, the majority of which would be carried out at the school 
level. The sub-component will support: (i) instrument design, (ii) information gathering, 
(iii) analysis, and (iv) use and dissemination of the results.  
 
The monitoring would be implemented both at the department level and in the schools--
with full participation of the school?s principals and teachers. The evaluation will be 
carried out by an external consulting firm, with SEDUCA involvement.  
 
Sub-component 3.3.  Project Management (Total: US$2.0; Bank financing: US$ 1.0 
million) The Secretary of Education will have overall responsibility for managing the 
project within the structure of the Education Secretariat, which should facilitate 
compliance with the technical, financial, and administrative procedures supporting the 
project objectives. This subcomponent will design and implement a social 
communications strategy to inform and motivate the general community about the project 
and the impact expected. The target of project activity will be the school.  The school will 
receive support to become more autonomous and efficient in delivering education 
services and managing its resources.  The municipalities will monitor and support project 
implementation at the school level.  The project will be under the oversight of the 
SEDUCA Quality Unit.  A Project Committee, chaired by the Secretary of Education and 
comprised of the different Unit Directors, will steer the project and provide guidance as 
required.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Minitry of Education   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
 
Page  7
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are approximately 0.48% of Indigenous and 23% of Afro-Colombian peoples in 
the project area. Therefore, SEDUCA prepared, with technical assistance of the Bank, an 
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to include the five indigenous groups of Antioquia, and an 
Afro-Colombian Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) as an umbrella strategy to ensure 
the Afro-Colombian population have access to project benefits.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As described above, an IPP for Indigenous Peoples and an IPPF for Afro-Colombian 
peoples have been submitted to the Bank by SEDUCA. Antioquia has the technical and 
institutional capacity for the implementation of these policies within the regular structure, 
procedures, and responsibilities of existing SEDUCA Units. At the local level, 
communities have vast experience in participation schemes and social control to ensure 
the implementation of the social safeguards proposed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The mechanisms of consultations included a series of interviews, visits, focus groups and 
nine project preparation workshops with stakeholders and beneficiaries such as School 
Principals and Nuclei Directors, Mayors, parents, entrepreneurs, the Planning Department 
of the Subsystem of Higher Education (SESA), the Health and Agriculture Secretariats, 
Page  8
private sector representatives and school communities, from November 2005 to January 
2007. Moreover, workshops with the Departmental Indigenous Committee (CODEIN) to 
redefine targeting of indigenous peoples in the project area, and with teachers, parents 
and students of seven indigenous communities to discuss the diagnosis of the socio-
cultural conditions and educational expectations of indigenous peoples. Finally, 
consultations were carried out with the Afro-Colombian communities of Apartado and 
Churid? to discuss the diagnosis of the conditions and educational expectations of Afro-
Colombian peoples.  
 
Annex 10 of the PAD which includes the social safeguards strategies mentioned above 
is being translated to Spanish for dissemination in the SEDUCA website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/27/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  9
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Martha Laverde 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
04/03/2007 
Comments:   
