Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2914 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/08/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P083904 
Project Name: Justice Sector Development Project 
Task Team Leader: David F. Varela 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (50%);General public administration sector (50%) 
Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (P);Access to law and justice 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will support sector authorities in implementation of a justice sector strategic plan to:  
(a) improve the quality, timeliness and efficiency of services; (b) build sector capacity to plan, 
execute and monitor reforms; and (c) enhance access to justice for disadvantaged group.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Description (From PDS)  
 
Preliminary project design has benefited from the most recent Bank experience in the justice 
sector (in particular, the lessons learned from a previous Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL) 
and has been structured around three key pillars.  Specific progress and impact indicators will be 
developed during project preparation for each component, in conjunction with sector institutions 
and users.  
 
(a) 
Justice Services Delivery Component (Approx. US$24 million)  This component will 
support the implementation of the Superior Judicial Council's (CSJ) strategy to improve service 
Page  2
delivery in coordination with  the Supreme Court, the State Council, Superior Courts, 
Administrative Tribunals, Circuit and Municipal Courts.  
 
(b)  
Human Resources Development Component (Approx. US$8 million):  This component 
will introduce measures to: (a) attract, select, and retain qualified judicial staff; (b) improve 
human resource planning and management at the central and regional levels; and (c) develop in-
service professional development, including training in new legal, procedural, and managerial 
approaches.  
 
(c) 
Enhanced Access Services (Approx. US$8 million):  The Project will implement a 
demand-side strategy to increase access for disadvantaged groups. Likely activities include: (i) 
consolidating alternative justice services by strengthening the justices of the peace, thus bringing 
justice closer to the poor, and promoting extrajudicial conciliation in law and equity; (ii) 
implementing mechanisms to make the formal court system more accessible and more equitable, 
with a particular focus on municipal courts; and (iii) developing mechanisms to enhance the 
users' role in designing and monitoring improvements.  
 
(d) 
Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation: CSJ's Executive Directorate of Judicial 
Administration (DEAJ) will be responsible for procurement, financial management, monitoring 
and evaluation.  It will liaison with the CSJ's line units, regional offices, and other sector 
institutions, and address issues of donor coordination. An Inter-institutional Coordination 
Committee with representatives of other sector institutions will also be established.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
As in the case of the previous LIL, the project will only work in the country's major urban 
centers (including a few mid-size cities to be selected during preparation) where most of justice 
services demand is located. For non-urban areas, the Government (with the assistance of other 
donors like USAID) has developed separate programs that include dispute resolution 
components.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project will address the priority justice sector defined in the National Development 
Plan, and CSJ's strategic plan, including the development of innovative approaches to enhancing 
access to justice through the justice of the peace and Alternative Dispute Resolution 
mechanisms. The institutional capacity to address safeguard policies (in particular indigenous 
people's issues) will be reviewed during preparation and, if needed, strengthening measures will 
be considered.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda (LCSSO) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The project setting is urban, and indigenous groups are unlikely to be affected. However, a 
social assessment will be undertaken that will include attention to, and documentation of, 
indigenous groups along with other relevant stakeholders groups.  The consultation process will 
also include indigenous groups or their representatives. If the social assessment finds that 
indigenous peoples may be affected by the project, recommendations related to their 
incorporation will be  discussed with the government, and any actions or decisions agreed on will 
form the basis for an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan, IPDP. The team will meet again to 
discuss and agree upon the findings and recommendations from the overall social assessment and 
consultation process.  Therefore the section in the ISDS related to Indigenous Peoples is rated as 
TDB (To Be Determined), until the social assessment process has provided sufficient 
information to make a judgment regarding the applicability of OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/03/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
social assessment will be undertaken as part of the preparation for the project with 
attention to and documentation of indigenous groups along with other relevant stakeholder 
groups. The assessment should start not later than July 2007 and finish not later than 
September 2007.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David F. Varela 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Nicholas Paul Manning 
 
Comments:   
