Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2709 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/25/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P082908 
Project Name: Second Rural Education Adaptable Lending 
Task Team Leader: Martha Laverde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (25%);Vocational training (25%);General education sector 
(25%);Secondary education (25%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project will increase rural access to quality education from pre-school to upper secondary 
education, higher retention of children and youths in the school system, and improved programs 
relevant to rural communities and their school populations.  
 
The Project seeks to consolidate the rural education policy developed and implemented during 
Phase I of the Rural Education Project (2001-2006).  Phase I extended coverage of education 
services to vulnerable populations, particularly in the remote areas.  Phase II will: (i)  improve 
rural education quality (at all levels: pre-school, primary and secondary); (ii) develop education 
equity mechanisms for vulnerable populations (including ethnic groups); and (iii) institutionalize 
rural education delivery capacity in departmental and municipal education secretariats of 
Colombia.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed lending instrument is an APL (Phase II) for an estimated amount of US$50 
million. The Project components?which will focus on all rural education levels (preschool, 
Page  2
primary and lower and upper secondary) ?are: (i) Secretariat of Education Management Capacity 
for Rural Education Quality; (ii) Improved Rural Education Quality; (iii) Rural Education 
Equitable Access; and (iv) Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management. The execution of 
the Project will be the responsibility of the Ministry of Education, the certified Secretariats of 
Education and participating schools.  
 
Component 1 Secretariat of Education Management Capacity for Rural Education Quality  
 
This component will build the capacity for systemic change of Secretariats of Education in 
Departments and municipalities of Colombia, which are certified (by the central Ministry of 
Education) to manage their own education systems. The proposed education system reforms, at 
the Departmental and municipal levels, seek to provide equitable education services, 
compensation strategies to close the gap between rural and urban areas, and education delivery 
mechanisms for the most vulnerable and remote populations and ethnic groups.  
 
The component will develop a systematic strategy to provide technical and financial support to 
increase the capacity of departmental and municipal Education Secretariats.  The systematic 
approach will initiate at the central Education Ministry level by creating and strengthening (i) a 
MEN Technical team specialized in education management and equitable rural education 
services, (ii) a methodology for training and technical assistance for Certified Education 
Secretariats and its respective instruction manuals; (iii) design and reproduction of multimedia 
instruments for online technical assistance; and (iv) workshops, visits and other technical 
assistance events and monitoring related to territorial entities planning and execution of their 
rural education subprojects.  
 
At the level of certified Departmental and Municipal Education Secretariats, the component 
will provide technical assistance (including from the MEN Technical Team) to: (i) diagnose the 
rural and ethnic education needs in their regions; (ii) prepare education improvement subprojects 
to address the curricular, pedagogical, delivery and assessment needs of rural, inter and multi-
cultural and bilingual education; and (iii) support rural education improvements in ?and 
management capacity of? non-certified municipal education secretariats.  
 
For territorial entities with ethnic populations (indigenous, Afro-Colombian and Raizal?i.e., San 
Andres and Providence Islands populations), the component will work with the autonomous 
indigenous associations responsible for education and other social services in their communities.  
These indigenous associations will receive technical assistance for the identification and design 
of subprojects for appropriate linguistic policies, the selection and training of teachers, design 
curricula and study plans, and preparation of bilingual and cultural school materials.  
 
Component 2: Improved Rural Education Quality  
 
This component will assist teaching staff, school principals, and teacher training institutions to 
develop a better understanding of the education needs in rural contexts and the corresponding 
education interventions in rural areas.  
 
Through three interrelated sub-components?to be detailed below?the expected integrated results 
for this component include: (i) quality education improvements in beneficiary schools, allowing 
Page  3
a
more equitable system and increasing the retention of children and youths; (ii) teacher capacity 
to implement competency-based curricula, which include basic, citizen and overall labor 
competencies; (iii) improve bilingual (second language )  pedagogical processes among teaching 
staff and students; (iii) improved principal pedagogical and school management capacity, 
including reformulation or updating of the PEIs and the design and implementation of 
Improvement Plans; and (iv) application of information and communication technology (ICTs) 
pertinent for the rural sector and to close rural-urban gaps.  
 
Component 3: Increase equitable access to rural education from preschool to upper secondary  
 
This component will support the territorial entities in the improvement, adaptation and 
implementation of flexible pedagogical models that promote both increased coverage and higher 
retention of children and youths in the school system.   Colombia has generated a number of 
pedagogical innovations, including Escuela Nueva (a world known multigrade model), Sistema 
de Aprendizaje Tutorial, SAT ( a flexible secondary education model), telesecundaria (a full 
adaptation of video-supported education program), Accelerated Learning and Post-Secondary 
Models, etc.  To build on these and other pedagogical innovations in Colombia, the 
subcomponent will seek to identify second generation reforms, especially needed for rural 
contexts, the present international competitiveness environment, multicultural and bilingual 
contexts, and required school to work transition required of secondary education graduates.  
 
This sub-component seeks to evaluate and strengthen the flexible pedagogical models for 
preschool, basic, lower and upper secondary education, which initiated application support 
during phase I of the APL.  The evaluation of the pedagogical models will emphasize needed 
reforms related to expressed needs of rural stakeholders (students, parents, teachers, and labor 
markets).   The financing of improvement strategies will include: (i) update in the context of the 
new competency-based curricula (basic academic, citizenship, science and work competencies); 
(ii) a training plan for teachers and tutors, (iii) an evaluation of the learning resources needed to 
implement the strengthened flexible models.  In addition the improvement strategies will propose 
more effective education inputs (textbooks, teacher training, infrastructure, etc.) delivery and 
logistical strategies to reach the remotest rural population.  
 
Finally, in territorial entities with indigenous and ethnic populations, the subcomponent will 
evaluate the cultural and bilingual adaptations required of rural flexible pedagogical modalities.  
Given the autonomous management of education and other social services in indigenous and 
ethnic communities, the subcomponent will support the preparation of Ethno-education 
subprojects at the community level, and will support their implementation.  
 
The subcomponent will provide funds for minor renovations of the physical conditions of 
schools facilities, classrooms, dining rooms and sanitation areas to improve the school physical 
environment.  The project does not trigger OP 4.12 because the project does not finance civil 
works activites which would require the adquisition of land or the physical or economic 
displacement of persons currently occupying school property.  
 
Environmental Category C- Not required.  The project does not involve activities or 
investments that may pose a risk to the environment.  
Page  4
Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation and Project Management  
 
This component will include support for overall Project coordination, supervision, and 
evaluation by: (i) Designing and implementing a project related monitoring and evaluation 
strategy; and; (ii) strengthening the capacity of the Project Coordination Team to comply with its 
responsibilities for managing the project. The project coordination team will be placed within the 
Vice Ministry and there will be an special effort to facilitate ownership, continuity of program, 
activities, and ensure sustainability.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
In rural areas nationwide. Demand-driven project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Social Safeguards: The project will support the Ethno-education Model proposed by MEN to 
respond to the particular cultural and linguistic needs of Indigenous and Afro-descendant people 
of Colombia. Permanent consultation processes, Mesas de Concertaci?n, have been carried out 
by MEN with the national and subnational Indigenous and Afro-descendant Organizations such 
as the Comisi?n Pedag?gica Nacional (CPN), Autoridades Ind?genas de Colombia (AICO), 
Organizaci?n de los Pueblos Ind?genas de la Amazon?a Colombiana (OPIAC), Organizaci?n 
Nacional Ind?gena de Colombia (ONIC), and Cabildo Mayor de la Sierra Nevada de Santa 
Marta,particularly since 2002.  
 
The general criteria for financing of rural education projects in zones inhabited by Indigenous 
and Afro-descendant population is: Project proposals originating in Territorial Entities which 
have Indigenous and/or Afro-descendant population should include an Ethno-education strategy 
agreed on by the ethnic groups.  
 
A
pilot project is being carried out by the Populations Directorate of MEN, under the Social 
Japanese Development Grant, with three ethnic groups (Ette Ennaka, U?wa and Way?u) to test a 
methodology for project preparation and implementation by ethnic groups. Ethno-education 
subprojects submitted for financing will be formulated by the ethnic groups themselves with 
technical assistance of MEN and support of their education specialists, teachers, and traditional 
authorities. The ethno-education projects submitted may include: teacher recruitment and 
training, curriculum development and preparation of culturally-appropriate materials (bilingual 
or monolingual)  MEN will draw from the lessons learned from the pilot experience, to formulate 
an Ethno-education Model to be implemented in this demand-driven project. The borrower is 
preparing an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) adequate to respond to the vast 
ethnic and linguistic diversity in Colombia (87 Indigenous groups speaking 67 languages, and 3 
Afro-descendant (Afro-Colombian, Raizales and Palenqueros). A demand-driven approach will 
provide more equal opportunities to access the Rural Education Project.  
 
Synergies with the Antioquia Secondary Education Project and the Peace and Development 
project will be explored.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
TBD   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
09/15/2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Martha Laverde 
09/17/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/17/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
09/17/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
