Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC2972
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P094986 
Project Name:  CO BOGOTA URBAN SERVICES 2 
Task Team Leader:  Daniel A. Hoornweg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: August 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (30%);Water supply (25%);General transportation sector (20%);Sub-
national government administration (15%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed Project is to improve the quality of life for 1,000,000 
residents in 26 Bogota low-income neighborhoods. Specifically, the Project will improve 
living conditions for the urban poor by: (i) improving the quality and coverage of access 
infrastructure; (ii) increasing access to and the quality of network water, sanitation and 
drainage infrastructure; (iii) facilitating the regularization of informal settlements and the 
provision of land titles; (iv) improving public spaces and community infrastructure; (v) 
support social programs that aim to enhance public safety; and (vi) strengthening the 
management and technical capacity of key district government institutions responsible for 
the provision of basic services to the poor.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Integrated Urban Upgrading (US$ 169.8 million, including US$ 20.5 
million of Bank financing)  
 
Component 1 of the Project aims to improve access to basic water, sanitation, drainage, 
transport and community infrastructure services in 26 priority UPZs in Bogota. The 
component will also support the legalization of informal settlements, urban land titling 
and the formalization of substandard housing units. Lastly, the component will finance a 
Page  2
series of innovative and pilot initiatives that aim to limit the growth of new informal 
settlements enhance the environmental sustainability of low-income urban informal 
settlements and create access to social services that aim to enhance public safety. The 
component is structured with five subcomponents including: (i) Mobility; (ii) Water and 
Sanitation; (iii) Regularization and Titling; (iv) Environmental Sustainability; and (v) 
Community Development.  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Mobility (US$83.0 million). The subcomponent will be 
implemented by IDU and will finance the construction and rehabilitation of: (i) feeder 
routes to facilitate access of residents in the target 26 UPZs to the Transmilenio rapid 
public transit system; (ii) local mobility corridors within target UPZs to improve mobility 
for low income residents; and (iii) non-motorized transport infrastructure. The component 
is expected to benefit approximately 480,000 residents of low-income Bogota 
neighborhoods.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Water and Sanitation (US$52.9 million). The subcomponent will be 
implemented by EAAB and will finance costs associated with the construction and 
rehabilitation of water, sanitation and stormwater drainage networks in target UPZs. 
Specifically, the subcomponent will finance consultant services for the design and 
supervision of investments and civil works and equipment for the rehabilitation and 
expansion of water, sanitation and drainage systems in Project areas. It is estimated that 
the Project will increase or improve access to potable water, network sanitation and 
drainage for approximately 140,000, 220,000 and 110,000 residents, respectively.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3: Regularization and Titling (US$15.1 million). Activities to be 
financed under the subcomponent will be implemented by both the Caja de Vivienda 
Popular (CVP) and Secretaria de Habitat. Key activities to be financed under the 
component will include consultant services, goods and training for: (i) the legalization of 
approximately 31 low-income informal settlements enabling the District to extend basic 
infrastructure and social services to the estimated 16,500 residents in these settlements; 
(ii) mobilization of a program to prevent the growth of existing illegal settlements at 13 
strategic sites covering 2,566 HA on Bogot? perimeter; (iii) a land titling program that 
will confer to approximately 3,500 titles benefiting approximately 15,750 residents; and 
(iv) the formalization of over 5,200 housing units through a program of technical 
assistance.  
 
Subcomponent 1.4: Environmental Sustainability (US$5.5 million).  The subcomponent 
will be implemented by the Secretaria de Ambiente and will finance consultant services 
and works associated with the conservation and rehabilitation of environmentally 
sensitive areas within or bordering target UPZs.  
 
Subcomponent 1.5: Community Development (US$13.3 million). The subcomponents 
will support a suite of community development initiatives that aim to increase public 
safety through access to preventative social programs, improve the quality of community 
infrastructure and public spaces, and support local entrepreneurship. The component will 
be implemented by the Secretaria de Habitat and the Secretaria de Desarollo Economico 
Page  3
(SDE). Specifically the subcomponent will finance works, consultant services, training 
and the procurement of goods and equipment to support: (i) the mobilization of a 
community infrastructure fund; (ii) a public safety program - Convivencia; and (iii) the 
development of a pilot technical assistance program to support local entrepreneurs.  
 
Component 2: District Development and Institutional Strengthening (US$ 20.5 million, 
including US$ 9.5 million of Bank financing)  
 
Component 2 of the Project aims to enhance the capacity of District institutions to 
provide basic services to the urban poor. The component also aims to support strategic 
technical assistance with the aim of strengthen citywide management, planning and 
monitoring systems that will have an impact on the quality of life of Bogota?s poor. 
Lastly, the component will finance consultant services, training, operating expenses and 
acquisition goods and equipment to enable key District institutions to effectively manage, 
monitor and evaluate the Project. Specifically, the component will finance technical 
assistance for the: (i) Secretaria de Habitat; (ii) Secretaria de Hacienda; (iii) IDU; (iv) 
Secretaria de Movilidad; and (v) Secretaria de Ambiente.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be developed in the District of Bogota, with specific upgrading activities 
in the poor neighborhoods, located in the urban fringe. The specific neighborhoods of the 
26 UPZs to be covered by the project activities will be identified during preparation. The 
project will include small infrastructure works in urban consolidated areas such as road 
maintenance and rehabilitation for the feeder routes to the mass transit system 
(Transmilenio); pedestrian facilities and bikeways; small urban upgrading works in 
public spaces; and laying pipes for water supply and sewer collection.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (LCSSO) 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A
screening of the potential impacts was carried out for the first phase (BUS I), which 
has determined that the most relevant aspects to be considered in the EA are associated to 
the construction period and include: (i) re-routing of traffic; (ii) increase in air pollution 
and noise levels during construction; (iii) disposal of construction waste; (iv) potential 
interruption or limitation in the access to housing and businesses; (v) potential increase of 
accidents; (vi) impact and potential interference on urban infrastructure (pavement, phone 
lines, electricity wiring, water pipes and sewage mains, etc); and (vii) potential nuisance 
during construction (noise, dust, waste, and traffic congestion). For these types of 
activities, a Category B environmental rating is considered appropriate. 
 
The preparation of the resettlement framework for BUS 2 was carried out by 
resettlement specialists in CVP and IDU and supported by Secretariat de Habitat. Future 
and potential resettlement planning and implementation will continue to be implemented 
by the Caja de Vivienda Popular (CVP) for the urban upgrading component, and by 
Instituto de Desarrollo Urbano (IDU) for the mobility component. Both institutions have 
acquired many years of experience of planning and implementing resettlement, and have 
comprehensive knowledge of the Bank?s environmental and social safeguard policies.  
 
It is assumed that the activities under the mobility and urban upgrading components 
may temporarily and/or permanently have an impact on people and property in terms of 
acquisition of land, houses and/or access to property.  Therefore, preparation and 
implementation of potential resettlement plans will be carried before any civil works 
and/or resettlement of families in high risk zones take place. The responsibility for the 
mobility component is the IDU and the CVP for the urban upgrading component.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term negative impacts are expected. The cumulative impacts from the 
interventions in the UPZs are expected to be wholly positive. The environmental impacts, 
as described in the point A.1 above, are not expected to be significant, or irreversible.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In compliance with OP4.01 requirements, an independent stand-alone EA took place and 
its report has been disclosed. The EA report includes (i) assessment of IDU's experience 
in BUS I with application of existing guidelines (including statistics, case studies and 
evidence); (ii) assessment of existing guidelines for dealing with the environmental issues 
of the proposed interventions; and (iii) assessment of potential measures for 
Page  5
strengthening existing procedures, including field supervision. The EA conclusion is that 
the current guidelines and practices followed under BUS-1 are in compliance with the 
Bank's environmental and social safeguards. Some recommendations for updating 
existing guidelines, or enhancing environmental management procedures, such as the 
inclusion of a specific EMP for cultural property and heritage chance finds in the 
guidelines, are included in the report.  
 
The borrower's capacity and experience is adequate for complying with the Bank's 
environmental and social safeguard policies. As a principle, all EMPs will be 
implemented by the contractors in charge of the civil works, and its compliance will be 
ensured through the bidding documents and legal contracts. The project's key 
stakeholders (such as IDU, CVP, SMA, and EAAB) will be responsible for overseeing 
the implementation of the project's works, according to the environmental management 
guidelines. Their bidding documents will include provisions that require the contractor to 
prepare an environmental management plans; also,  periodic audits to ensure compliance 
will be carried out. Both EAAB and IDU have institutionalized their environmental 
guidelines; both have environmental departments staffed with qualified specialists that 
have experience in managing the environmental impacts of similar projects. Other entities 
involved in works, will follow IDU's acceptable environmental guidelines.  
 
The resettlement component is integral to the overall objective of improving the living 
conditions in low-income neighborhoods. A Resettlement Policy Framework RPF) has 
been prepared for BUS 2 based on the RPF which was prepared for the first urban 
services project. Resettlement of population is likely to happen due to civil works on the 
one hand and due to resettlement of families in high risk zones (urban upgrading 
component) on the other hand.  Resettlement activities will be planned and carried out in 
accordance with the Bank's OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).  The resettlement 
operations under BUS 1  are still ongoing and are joined efforts, but with separate teams, 
within the same institutions.  
 
IDU and CVP have acquired considerable resettlement experience over the years in 
different areas such as the urban and transport sectors. Both institutions  have 
institutionalized resettlement planning and implementation in the form of permanent 
social management units and sub-units specialized in resettlement.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project development under BUS-I has included in-depth interviews and consultation 
with stakeholders. Considered stakeholders included bus service operators and 
associations, communities, universities and NGOs. Representatives from governmental 
agencies were consulted on a regular basis. BUS-II is building on such information and 
community and stakeholder.  
 
Disclosure of IDU's Environmental Guidelines has been done through IDU's 
institutional webpage: http://www.idu.gov.co/entidad/gestion_ambiental4.asp. Specific 
EMP for the works will be published on the websites of the institution carrying out the 
Page  6
investments. The independent EA on BUS-I and recommendations for BUS-II has been 
published in Hacienda's website and sent to INFOSHOP.  
 
Disclosure of the Ressetlement Framework has been done through the Caja de Vivienda 
Popular webpage: http://www.cvp.gov.co/eventos_noticias.asp.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/08/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/08/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/19/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  7
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel A. Hoornweg 
05/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
05/10/2007 
Comments:   
