Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2694 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P104567 
Project Name: Rural Productive Partnerships II 
Task Team Leader: Pierre Werbrouck 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 19, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agro-industry (60%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
9.40 
 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
0.60
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the proposed repeater project are: to increase rural 
competitiveness and build up rural entrepreneurship in poor rural communities in a sustainable 
manner through demand-driven partnership schemes with the commercial private sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The second  project will have the same components as the first one:  
 
1.
Partnership promotion and preparation.  This includes the organization by the 
departmental agricultural secretariats of competitive processes amongst farmer organizations and 
private sector to request project assistance, the preparation of pre-investment studies and the 
initial organization of the partnerships.  The objective is to prepare at least 300 additional 
partnerships.  Cost estimated at US$8 million.  
 
2.
Partnership implementation.  This includes the provision of (i) financial incentives to 
farmer organizations to enable farmers to adjust to the competitive conditions of national and 
international markets; and (ii) technical assistance to farmer organizations to obtain higher level 
of productivity and entrepreneurship.  Financial incentives will be limited in accordance to 
economic and social criteria contained in the operational manual.  The objective is to get at least 
Page  2
250 additional partnerships successfully in operation by the end of the project.  Costs estimated 
at $27 million.  
 
3.
Management, monitoring and evaluation.  This includes the administrative project 
management costs such as salaries, consultant fees, monitoring and evaluation studies, audits and 
operational costs.  Costs estimated at US$5 million.  
 
The proposed project would be implemented by a Directorate of the Ministry of Agriculture 
through regional intersectoral committees while the management would be subcontracted to the 
private sector.  These private sector organizations (NGOs, consulting firms) are being trained 
during the ongoing project, but their capacity needs further strengthening.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All departments of the Republic of Colombia   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has an environmental Specialist and a Social Specialist on the team.  Both have 
several years of experience in their assignment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda (LCSSO) 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Category B assessment   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
EA will determine whether this policy is triggered   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
EA will analyze whether this policy is triggered   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
As part of environmental assessment and management plans only   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2007 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No specific studies are needed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Werbrouck 
02/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr McDonald P. Benjamin 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
