Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/16/2007 
Report No.:  AC2851
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P104567 
Project Name:  Rural Productive Partnerships Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Werbrouck 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agro-industry (60%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
12.40 
 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
0.60 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
27.10 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
9.90 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
43.00
93.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To increase rural competitiveness and build up rural entrepreneurship in poor rural 
communities in a sustainable manner through demand-driven partnership schemes with 
the commercial private sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
Partnership promotion and preparation.  This includes the organization by the 
departmental agricultural secretariats of competitive processes amongst farmer 
organizations and private sector to obtain project assistance, the preparation of pre-
investment studies and the initial organization of the partnerships.  
 
2. 
Partnership implementation.  This includes the provision of (i) financial 
incentives to farmer organizations to enable farmers to adjust to the competitive 
conditions of national and international markets; and (ii) technical assistance to farmer 
organizations to obtain higher level of productivity and entrepreneurship.  
 
Page  2
3. 
Management, monitoring and evaluation.  This includes the administrative project 
management costs such as salaries, consultant fees, monitoring and evaluation, audits and 
operational costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project location is all over the country and the specific locations will be determined 
through a selection process.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jean-Claude Balcet (LCSAR) 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda (LCSSO) 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Five safeguard policies are triggered.  Environmental Assessment (4.01); Forests (OP 
4.36) ; Natural Habitats (OP4.04)and Pest Management (OP4.09)and Indigenous Peoples 
(OP 4.10).  The project will finance small, scattered and very diverse productivity 
enhancing partnership projects for farmer associations that on average have 75 members 
and together cultivate no more than 200 ha. The project sites are scattered all over the 
country. Hence all environmental impact will be small and there is no risk for cumulative 
impact  Possible impacts are related to land use. On average the project is expected to be 
positive from an environmental standpoint since it will promote the implementation of 
environmentally safe productive practices, particularly in terms of Integrated Pest 
Management.  Since the types of partnerships to be eventually selected were not known 
at the time of project appraisal, the EA and attendant Environmental Management Plans 
(EMP) at the project level take the form of an environmental framework presenting the 
steps, processes and procedures to be followed for environmental management by each 
partnership.  An estimated 5 percent of the project beneficiaries will belong to excluded 
groups such as indigenous peoples and afro-colombian people.   
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential impacts are:  
 
-
Natural habitats may be encountered near the core areas of the productive partnerships 
or in their area of influence.  These habitats could possibly be negatively impacted at a 
very local level.  Similarly the areas for the development of productive partnerships may 
contain patches of natural forests.  The establishment of productive partnerships near 
patches of natural forests may constitute a factor contributing to their degradation.  
 
In Colombia there is little experimental evidence related to the efficiency of pesticides 
for specific pests or crops in specific production areas. Hence, there is a risk that 
pesticides may not be adapted to crops and conditions prevailing in the areas where they 
are being used, and/or that they may not be used properly.  
 
There will be no adverse impact on indigenous and afro-colombian people.  Their 
participation in the project is voluntary .   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As is already the case in the ongoing project, each partnership will be subject to 
environmental screening and a list of environmental mitigation measures will be included 
in the environmental management plan of each partnership as well as in the business 
plan.  
 
The indigenous and afro-colombian people will participate on their terms in commercial 
agreements with the private sector. They will be able to participate in a culturally 
acceptable way.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures are: (i) obligatory environmental screening of each partnership; (ii) 
environmental management plan of each partnership to be included into the investment 
budget; (iii) environmental monitoring by the project staff; and (iv) a negative list of 
partnerships that can not be financed.  
 
The project has prepared an outreach strategy towards excluded groups (indigenous and 
afro-colombians).  This strategy will induce and help members of excluded groups to 
prepare proposals and their proposals will have a certain advantage during initital 
evaluation to compensate for some deficiencies in preparation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are in majority the participants in the partnerships.  They will have 
to draw up an environmental management plan with assistance of some selected 
specialists during the pre-investment phase.  
 
Consultations took place with elected officials of the indigenous and afro-colombian 
districts who have committed to encourage their members to participate in the project and 
prepare proposals   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/10/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/25/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2007 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/10/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
Page  5
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Werbrouck 
03/16/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz 
03/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda 
04/30/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Jean-Claude Balcet 
04/09/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/07/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr McDonald P. Benjamin 
05/07/2007 
Comments:   
Page  6
