Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2750 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/07/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P104507 
Project Name: Additional Financing for Colombia Social Safety Net Project (Ln. 7337) 
Task Team Leader: Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P);Education for all (S);Child health (S);Nutrition and food 
security (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
105.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
40.30
40.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to strengthen the country's social safety net by 
consolidating and expanding the successful Familias en Accion Conditional Cash Transfer 
program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Consolidating and expanding the Familias en Accion program ($105.0 million).  The project 
would disburse cash transfers (grants) to poor families linked to compliance with key human 
development conditions.  Under the current Familias program these include: a) assuring that 
children 0-5 have all vaccinations and growth monitoring controls, according to the Ministry of 
Social Protection's (MSP) protocols; and b) assuring that children 6-17 years of age are enrolled 
in schools and regularly attend classes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The scaled-up program would cover 1,027 municipalities, of which 167 are ones not currently 
covered in the original loan.   
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Based upon the findings of the social assessment, the following recommendations were made to 
better adjust the Familias en Accion Program to the needs of ethnic minority households and 
communities.  
 
1. 
It is recommended to expand coverage in Afro-Colombian populated areas, particularly 
in the case of the Department of Choco based on the new SISBEN database and to improve the 
promotion strategy.  The projected expansion of the Program to be supported by the Additional 
Financing would increase coverage among Afro-Colombians.  Out of the 167 new 
municipalities, 53 have a high share of Afro-Colombian population.  
 
2. 
To ensure higher coverage rates and smoother program operation in areas that have 
significant indigenous and/or Afro-Colombian populations, the Program should organize a 
coordination committee made up of traditional leaders, local health and education officials that 
will meet at least quarterly to discuss strategies for achieving high coverage and participation 
rates and to identify any cultural insensitivities or other barriers affecting program success in the 
municipality. To date, these committees have not been formed.  Instead the Program is using the 
municipal coordinators to carry out this task.  
 
3. 
With the purpose of strengthening women's self-esteem, it is recommended that the 
program integrate a new educational component for beneficiary mothers designed to build 
awareness of their rights and responsibilities as individuals, but also explore the cultural origins 
of the ethnic groups present in the area, in an effort to strengthen cultural identity while building 
greater tolerance from members of other ethnic groups.  This program component should be 
delivered to all women living in areas with high numbers of indigenous and Afro-Colombian 
people, regardless of their ethnic origin, based upon the assumptions that all women need to be 
empowered and the behaviors of both majority and minority women need to be changed if 
stigma against ethnic minority is to be eliminated.  The outreach strategy being developed by the 
program for areas with Afro-Colombian people is incorporating this recommendation.  
 
4. 
The program should incorporate a question on the impact survey regarding the 
beneficiary's ethnicity.  This would enable the program to evaluate the beneficiary performance 
by ethnicity and thus better detect performance problems that may be caused by cultural 
differences and require more culturally sensitive program adaptations to correct.  The program 
budget will include some funding to finance the analysis of this data through a cultural lens and 
for follow-up work required to define appropriate corrective measures.  
 
A
detailed Action plan is presented in the Safeguard Preparation Plan.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda (LCSSO) 
Ms Maria Claudia Vasquez Alvarez (LCSHS-DPT) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Among the beneficiaries targeted by this project are the poor in Colombia's indigenous and 
Afro-Colombian communities.  Currently in 30 of the municipalities where the program 
operates, there is a high share of indigenous population.  The original project triggered the 
safeguard policy relating to indigenous peoples.A rapid social assessment (including 
consultations) was conducted in April 2005 in 3 communities, two with indigenous communities, 
and one with Afro-Colombian population, to identify ways in which the project design should be 
adjusted to ensure eligible indigenous and Afro-Colombian families are reached and served by 
the program in a culturally appropriate way.  The assessment drew from the experience of ethnic 
beneficiaries already enrolled in the Familias en Accion program which proved to be a rich 
resource. Based on the assessment, an Indigenous People's Development Plan was elaborated 
and agreed with the Colombian authorities. Environmental safeguards do not apply to the 
project.  
 
The additional financing would not lead to any new safeguard issues beyond those of the 
ongoing project, but in the areas of expansion (the 167 new municipalities) the new Indigenous 
Peoples Policy (OP 4.10) would apply.  While the majority of the project area would remain the 
same, this project would expand into additional Indigenous and/or Afro-Colombian areas.  
Among the 167 new municipalities, 45 contain indigenous people, in 23 the indigenous 
population exceeds 10 percent and 7 have a majority of indigenous population.  There are 28 
municipalities which contain indigenous communities for which OP 4.10 would apply.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/08/2007 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
medium term action plan has been developed which is being implemented under the 
project, forming part of the project's overall implementation plan. The borrower is well 
positioned to implement the plan. In fact, the authorities have decided to expand the planned 
additional study, in order to pilot the recommendations of the study in 3 indigenous 
communities.  The following actions are included in the plan which has been agreed upon 
with the Colombian authorities:  
 
i.  A study aimed at developing a program strategy for ethnic populations with special focus 
on the program's promotion activities, targeting procedures, training needs and payment 
procedures.  The recommendations would be tested in 3 pilot areas in order to develop a 
special annex for the operational manual.  The estimated time for the study and the pilots is 6 
months.  The selection of the three areas is currently in process (first stage), based in 
principle, on different situations relating to reserves, leadership structure, and the 
municipality, in order that the findings could be applied to other communities.  At least one 
of the pilots would be among the 167 new municipalities covered in the additional financing.  
The estimated time for the study and the pilots is 6 months.  The second stage of the study 
includes a process of consultations with the indigenous authorities and the communities. This 
stage would take place during February/March.  The final stage, which is carrying out the 
pilots is expected to last for 3 months.  The study as well as the results of the pilot should be 
ready in July.  
 
ii. Training for municipal staff (enlaces municipales) to become more aware of the ethnic 
population's specific characteristics and their own behaviors toward this population group.  
 
iii. 
Promotion of more cooperation of the program with health facilities, particularly 
in the program's training activities (encuentros de cuidado).  
 
iv.  
Further data collection and analysis will be done in order to better understand 
some of the problems identified by the social assessment and an action plan will be 
formulated to address them.  It will be ensured also that data is tracked by gender.  
 
v.
Inclusion of information on ethnicity in the impact surveys.  
 
The expansion of the coverage of the Program would not raise the environmental category 
of the Project which was classified as C. There are no unresolved safeguard problems.  The 
October 2006 supervision mission reviewed progress on the action plan.  The management of 
the Program has transmitted to the Bank municipal data containing information regarding 
indigenous participants in Familias en Accion.  In addition, the  planned study to identify the 
specific needs of ethnic populations, promotion strategy, identification of training needs and 
promotion of more cooperation with health facilities, has been contracted and results are 
expected to be available by mid-2007.  The Bank team reiterated in the aide-memoire 
prepared at the end of the October 2006 supervision visit, the recommendation of the action 
plan that the new registration form incorporate a question regarding the beneficiary?s 
ethnicity.  In addition, the above-mentioned study would be expanded to address cultural and 
other relevant aspects of the Indigenous populations in the proposed project areas.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.  
 
Key stakeholders of the Familias en Accion program are municipal governments and 
indigenous and Afro-Columbian communities. The program will offer training to municipal 
staff to get a better understanding of ethnic communities and families in order to provide 
better services for them. At the local level, the program will work with community leaders to 
continue to monitor how the program is working for the different ethnic groups which will 
also be captured in the program's management information system (MIS).  
 
The study described in the paragraph above would incorporate a consultation process 
around the overall approach and framework, to ensure that issues of culturally appropriate 
benefits and broad community support are included in the project activities.  The 
Government and the Bank will update the ongoing project?s Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan (IPDP) by disclosing a document containing the following information no 
later than the anticipated date for Board approval of the additional financing, currently 
scheduled for March 15:  
 
?
The contents of the conceptual and technical elements of the terms of reference of the 
study to be undertaken, its principal activities, and the schedule.  
 
?
Criteria for the selection of the indigenous communities in which the pilots will be 
carried out.  This analysis will take into account the municipalities that have indigenous 
population and are included in the 167 new municipalities that are included under the 
additional financing and other municipalities where the program operates, with the exception 
of indigenous communities.  The criteria and selection will take into account location as well 
as leadership structure.  The document would include the details of the analysis of the 
population composition of the 167 new municipalities.  
 
?
In regard to the Afro-Colombian communities, the strategy of promotion will be 
described as well as progress on training which the program is currently carrying out and 
details on the new municipalities which contain a majority of Afro-Colombian population 
will be provided.  
 
In addition, the results of the consultations will be published in April prior to the initiation 
of the pilots.  The Bank will supervise the process of access in the program for Afro-
Colombian populations and will monitor the progress on the study and the application of the 
pilots in order to ensure the application of OP 4.10.  Once the findings of the pilots are 
available, the IPDP will be updated and issued as an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) as per OP 
4.10.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
02/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/06/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
02/07/2007 
Comments:  Ian Walker (Acting SM)cleared for Helena Ribe 
Page  6
