Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2844 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P104687 
Project Name: Mainstreaming Sustainable Cattle Ranching 
Task Team Leader: Juan Pablo Ruiz 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Animal production (40%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P);Participation and 
civic engagement (P);Climate change (P);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
33.00
33.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project?s objective is to mainstream sustainable resource management practices in 
Colombia?s cattle ranching sector.  
 
Preliminary key performance indicators include: (i) 61,500 hectares of previously degraded 
lands under biodiversity-friendly cattle ranching production and conservation use, including 
4,000 new kilometers of forests, live fences and watershed corridors; (ii) 50 globally important 
plant species conserved and multiplied in cattle ranching farms; (iii) 10 small to medium 
producer organizations and 5 large agribusiness companies selling organically certified products 
coming from cattle farms, and (iv) water quality improved 40% in project intervention zones. 
During project formulation, these indicators will be transformed into specific, observable 
variables with baseline and targets, as suggested during the PCN Review Meeting.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project total cost of US$40.0 million consists of a US$7 million GEF donation, US$20.5 
million in government contributions and US$12.5 million in contributions from other donors, 
including Fedegan and various NGOs. The project would offer an integrated farm management 
package to cattle ranchers consisting of: (i) attractively-priced loans for conversion to 
silvopastoral systems and for incorporation of biodiversity considerations into sectoral 
technologies; (ii) a GEF subsidy through PES to ensure that cattle ranching systems are 
biodiversity friendly, conserving valuable environmental services and to support liberation of 
lands for restoration and biodiversity conservation activites, and (iii) technical assistance through 
27 specialized centers operated by Fedegan to ensure cost-effectiveness and sustainability of land 
use changes.  The project would finance the following components: (i) Recovery of Degraded 
lands through SPS and Restoration; (ii) Improved Watershed Management and Reduced 
Contamination; (iii) Biodiversity Conservation in Cattle Farms; (iv) Green Markets 
Development, and (v) Employment Generation and Local Business Strengthening.  
 
This project has found a strong national promoter in Fedegan. The project would also involve 
various national and international organizations, including: (i) the Environmental and Childhood 
Action Fund, which would provide a technical team to coordinate project activities and execute 
financial resources; (ii) FINAGRO, a government second-tier bank to offer specialized credit 
lines to cattle ranchers; (iii) the Ministries of Agriculture and of the Environment, to support the 
implementation of norms and public policies supporting incentive application, and mobilize 
regional autonomous corporations for additional counterpart contributions; (iv) research NGOs 
CIPAV and CATIE, to support with research and technical assistance, and (v) The Nature 
Conservancy, which would contribute to private conservation agreements, integrated land 
planning and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
To support the social sustainability and benefits of project outcomes, the proposed project will 
focus its efforts on small and medium farms. Some large landowners may be included in the 
project, but maximum limits on payments for environmental services will be imposed, as is being 
done in the Regional Silvopastoral project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would take place in five regions in Colombia: (i) the traditional livestock production 
region in the northern Cesar River; (ii) the adjacent lower Magdalena River region; (iii) the 
region surrounding Bogota and its northern mountains; (iv) the coffee producing region and 
upper Cauca river, and (v) the buffer zone with the eastern Llanos region. All regions were 
selected for their high levels of biodiversity, proximity to strategic ecosystems and protected 
areas, and potential to supply niche organic and value-added markets. Zones 1 and 2 contain the 
Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta and the last remaining fragments of dry tropical forest, considered 
one of the Neotropical zone?s most endangered ecosystem types and with degradation in 98.5% 
of its surface area in Colombia. Zones 3 and 4 are mountainous regions with Andean forests and 
paramos that regulate water supply to urban centers and include strategic wetlands between the 
Magdalena and Cauca Rivers. Zone 5 is a strategic tropical forest ecosystem producing vast 
water resources and with a high presence of endemic species.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The grant recipient and executing agency will be defined during the PPG stage, based on an 
Institutional Assessment and risk analysis. Comprehensive social and environmental assessments 
will be performed during project preparation to identify and mitigate potential conflicts between 
cattle ranchers and surrounding communities/farmers, as well as ensure that the project does not 
establish perverse incentives to promote land clearing for cattle ranching, among other issues 
highlighted during PCN review meeting. The role of different partners in project execution will 
be revised as a result of the institutional assessment to be undertaken.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project is expected to be largely beneficial to the environment, but there is a slight 
chance that productive activities incur in negative environmental impact. In order to help ensure 
the environmental soundness and sustainability of the Project, the Recipient will prepare an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) under terms of reference agreed upon by the Bank, focusing on 
eligibility criteria and operational procedures needed to avoid perverse incentives for 
environmental harmful activities and to optimize biodiversity and other environmentally 
beneficial outcomes. The project will not finance any subproject classified as Category A under 
the Bank's EA policy, or subprojects implemented in violation of Colombia's environmental laws 
and environmental impact assessment procedures, or activities that according to Colombia's 
environmental laws require an environmental license to be implemented. A negative list of such 
subprojects will be included in project documents.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Natural habitats may be encountered near project areas or in their area of influence.  While 
the emphasis of the project is to support connectivity between agricultural landscapes and nearby 
forests and natural habitats, such habitats could potentially be negatively impacted by harmful 
emissions or residues from productive activities. EA will seek to ensure that project activities do 
not perversely encourage further deforestation to expand the land area used for cattle ranching.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Areas used for livestock development may contain patches of natural forests in good standing 
or at various levels of degradation. The project may support the sustainable use of such forests in 
the exploitation of wood or other products.  The establishment of cattleranching near patches of 
natural forests may constitute directly or indirectly an additional factor contributing to their 
degradation. To avoid perverse effects throughout project intervention areas, EA would establish 
mechanisms to exclude farms with recent deforestation, agricultural frontier zones and land with 
unresolved property rights issues.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project would be fully consistent with the Bank Integrated Pest Management Policy. The 
project will support the use of biological or environmental control methods and reduce reliance 
on synthetic chemical pesticides. When this is not feasible, the project will finance the use of 
pesticides for control of disease vectors, following Integrated Pest Management Bank 
application
.
Application of the Bank Integrated Pest Management policy will include training in 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
pest management for agricultural producers in project areas. The information related to pest 
management will be incorporated in the EA report, including an indication that any procurement 
of pesticides will require the Bank's prior review and no-objection to particular compounds, if 
these are not previously identified in the Environmental Management Plan.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
A
Social Assesment will be performed to identify and mitigate tensions between cattle 
ranchers and surrounding communities.  If there are indigenous peoples in project zones, the SA 
will design specific participatory and implementation measures   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Issues such as land tenure conflicts, economic displacement of non-ranchers and cultural 
norms in project areas regarding cattleranching, conservation and environmentally sustainable 
resource management will be looked during the SA process dertermine if OP/BP 4.12 will be 
trigered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/11/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/11/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
10/2007 through 02/2008   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz 
08/10/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
