Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/03/2006 
Report No.:  AC1806
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P083075 
Project Name:  Colombia: Integrated National Adaptation Program 
Task Team Leader:  Walter Vergara 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 17, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 18, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (80%);Health (20%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Biodiversity (S);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.30 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.20 
 
FOREIGN PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
5.10
12.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support Colombia’s efforts to define and 
implement specific pilot adaptation measures and policy options to meet the anticipated 
impacts from climate change.  These efforts will be focused on high mountain 
ecosystems, insular areas and on human health concerns related to the expansion of areas 
for vectors linked to malaria and dengue, as identified as priority areas in the National 
Communications and other studies.  
 
Key performance indicators:  
 
•
Strengthened capability to produce and disseminate relevant climate change 
information through availability of continuous and reliable climate information of 
relevance to major climate change vulnerabilities in health, mountain ecosystems and 
insular areas (157 climate stations modernized)  
 
•
At least six pilot adaptation activities have been implemented and 
monitored,addressing vulnerabilities to climate change in high mountain ecosystems, 
insular and coastal areas and health, including:  
Page  2
o
Maintenance of the hydropower generation ability, measured through sustained 
water regulation of the Las Hermosas Massif on the Amoya river watershed.  
 
o
Adaptation program designed and incorporated in regional development plans for 
the Las Hermosas Massif.  Positive impacts on biodiversity and land degradation 
documented.  
 
o
Adaptation program designed and incorporated in regional development plans for 
the Colombian Caribbean insular areas including increased management performance of 
key marine ecosystems and  reduced vulnerability in water supply to local communities; 
and  
 
o
Strengthened public health program incorporating management measures to meet 
the increased threats from dengue and malaria induced by climate change resulting in a 
30% reduction of Malaria and Dengue morbidity within the pilot areas by project closure.   
 
3. Project Description 
a) 
Making climate, climate variability, and climate change information available for 
adoption of adaptation measures and policies (total cost $3.3 m; GEF funding $1.0 m). 
This component seeks to strengthen Colombia’s capabilities to produce and disseminate 
climate information (useful for resource allocation and operational decision making), in 
support of adaptation to climate change measures and programs.  The component will 
strengthen IDEAM’s and INVEMAR’s capabilities to provide: (i) forecasts to improve 
resource management and biodiversity conservation decisions in high mountain 
ecosystems; (ii) climate scenarios to develop ecosystem management plans land 
conservation and adaptation options in Paramo, insular and coastal areas; and (iii) 
warnings for Malaria and Dengue. Under the component, the following activities will be 
supported: (i) improvements in technical and scientific capabilities at IDEAM and 
INVEMAR to produce information relevant to climate change; (ii) development of local 
climate change scenarios in support of selection of adaptation measures; (iii) 
strengthening the existing climate data network of relevance to climate change by 
supporting equipment renovation for 157 key climate stations (out of 3100 operated by 
IDEAM) with at least 20 years of high quality data (for 1961-1990), including quality 
control and assurance; (iv) strengthening scientific and technical personnel to ensure long 
term sustainability of the project activities.  
 
b) 
Design and implementation of an adaptation program that supports maintenance 
of environmental services (including hydropower potential) in the Las Hermosas Massif 
in the central range of the Andes (total cost $4.3 m, GEF funding $1.6m).  The Massif is 
the most humid high altitude moorland in the planet, a highly diverse biotope of 
particular concern for climate change impacts.  It is also important for potential hydro-
power generation.  The selection of the Massif was made on the basis of the significant 
biodiversity in the ecosystem, including endangered or threatened species.  The selection 
of Las Hermosas enables synergies between this project and the Amoya River project, 
already approved, which seeks to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the power 
sector. The component supports the following activities: (i) Ecosystem planning and 
management  in Las Hermosas Massif, seeking to maintain its high biodiversity assets; 
(ii) Maintenance of potential for hydropower generation through adoption of measures to 
protect the Amoya watershed; (iii) Adaptive land-use planning model seeking to reduce 
Page  3
impacts from climate change on land degradation. (iv) Improvement of productive agro-
ecosystems and reduction of their socioeconomic vulnerability to GCC impacts  
 
c) 
Adaptation measures in Caribbean Insular areas (total cost $3.5 m, GEF funding 
$1.2 m).  The objective of this component is to support the implementation of physical 
adaptation measures in order to reduce the vulnerability of the Caribbean Insular area, 
especially with regard to changes in rainfall and temperature and sea-level rise.  The 
activities under this component consist of: (i) Implementation of GLOOS (Global Ocean 
Observing System)-based monitoring stations in the Western Caribbean (complementing 
the regional network under CPACC); (ii) Integrated water resources management to 
enhance the availability of fresh water in the Caribbean insular areas (San AndrÃ©s 
island); (iii) Implementation of the marine protected areas system in the Seaflower 
reserve and the CRSBeIF in order to contribute to the conservation of marine ecosystems 
in the face of climate impacts; and (iv) Integrated Coastal Management to reduce the 
vulnerability of ecosystems, infrastructure and population living close to the coast.  
 
d) 
Responses to the increased exposure to tropical vector-borne diseases (malaria 
and dengue) induced by climate change (total cost $6.1 m, GEF funding $1.0m). The 
objective of this component is to address the increased exposure to tropical vector-borne 
diseases (malaria and dengue) induced by climate change through the implementation of 
an Early Warning System for Malaria and Dengue Surveillance and Control (DMEWS) 
seeking a 30% reduction in both malaria and dengue morbidities in pilot areas. During 
the INAP, the DMEWS will be implemented in approximately 12 pilot municipalities for 
malaria and 12 for dengue, selected based on perceived climate threats.  The project will 
support the design, implementation and operation of the DMEWS: developing a 
framework that permits the continuous evaluation of the local risk of dengue and malaria 
transmission in the face of global climate change and the determination of the most 
appropriate actions in order to prevent epidemics before they begin. (See Annex 1 for 
further details). The project will contribute to the strengthening of the institutional 
capabilities through the evaluation and strengthening of local (municipal) health agencies 
and through the strengthening the National Health (M&D) Surveillance System 
ultimately changing the current reactive institutional organization into a proactive public 
health system.  
 
e) 
Administrative and Financial Management (total cost $ 0.72m, GEF funding 
$0.5m).        This component will support the administrative and financial management of 
the project activities and will include goods; consultancy services; travel and operational 
and incremental costs undertaken by the NCU and CI-Colombia. Specifically this 
component will finance the project manager, the procurement specialist, other required 
personnel for the project management, and the project external audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in different areas according to each component:  
Page  4
Component a) IDEAM - climate stations: 157 key climate stations have been selected as 
reference network all over the country for equipment renovation (out of 3100 oeprated by 
IDEAM)  
 
Component b) High Mountains Ecosystems in Las Hermosas Massif, in the central 
range of the Andes.  
 
Component c)Archipielagos of San Andres, Providencia and Santa Catalina, as well as 
of the Rosario, San Bernardo and Isla Fuerte.  
 
Component d) During the INAP, the EWSDM will be implemented in approximately 12 
pilot municipalities for malaria and 12 for dengue, already pre-selected based on climatic 
and epidemiological characteristics.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Walter Vergara (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Safeguard policies.  The safeguard policies Environmental Assessment and Natural 
Habitats are triggered by the project.  No social safeguard policies are triggered. The 
adaptation measures to be implemented for the Seaflower Marine Protected Area under 
Component 3 are based on a previously agreed zoning with the local marine resource 
users that establishes no-take and no entry zones as well as areas for traditional artisan 
fishing, which resulted from the implementation of the GEF/WB project Colombia 
Caribbean Archipelago Biosfere Reserve: Regional Marine Protected Area Systems.  
 
During the implementation of the above mentioned project the overall methodology 
emphasized community participation at the decision-making level to resolve resource use 
conflicts, empower the native community, integrate threat mitigation into management 
planning, and achieve equitable distribution of benefits with emphasis on local nature-
based tourism and fishing. The ICR states that participatory zoning agreements were 
obtained with local stakeholders, demarcating no-take, no-entry, special use, and artisanal 
Page  5
fishing zones. Conservation action plans and monitoring action plans were written with 
high levels of community involvement to support the conservation of key species and 
MPA enforcement. As a direct result of this Project, artisanal fishers have regained 
access to traditional fishing sites, artisanal fishing zones have been legally enacted in 
collaboration with the Departmental Fishing Board, and agreements have been 
established with industrial fishers and the tourism industry.  For the native community, 
sustainable access to the MPA is economically and culturally essential to survival. The 
Project Team obtained over 90% support from active fishers in the area.  This high 
stakeholder backing was achieved as a 
result of incorporating fishers in the Project’s 
planning and execution.  Indeed, the fishers and other marine resource user groups agreed 
that establishing a marine protected area was their preferred management alternative even 
before the PDF A was designed.  
 
A
series of stakeholder consultations incorporating conflict resolution and local 
empowerment were realized. A total of 47 meetings and workshops were conducted 
regarding zoning, threats, enforcement and monitoring. The demarcation of zones in the 3 
MPAs included stakeholder formal agreements. The management structure of MPAs was 
enacted by stakeholder agreements and includes 4 advisory committees. Management 
agreements were established with 2 stakeholder’s advisory committees (fishers, artisanal 
and industrial, and water sports and marina and tourism).  
 
As stated in the ICR, CORALINA’s principal success in designing and obtaining 
ratification for the Seaflower MPA was in its thoroughness and effort to obtain high 
community participation in every aspect of project execution, including design, 
monitoring, zoning, outreach and capacity building.  
 
As can be seen Coralina’s project implementation has included in practice all the 
provisions and requirements of a Process Framework. This is why INAP project does not 
need to prepare a Process Framework, for to do it would be to repeat the processes and 
agreements already reached with the local stakeholders.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Social.  The project is expected to generate social benefits from an increased adaptive 
capacity of ecosystems, as well as from reduced incidence of malaria and dengue.  The 
increased availability of information on GCC impacts as well as the management 
associated with the uncertainties related to GCC impacts will enable decision makers to 
implement adaptation measures oriented towards the protection of vulnerable 
populations.  The specific adaptation measures will work against the collapse of 
vulnerable productive systems thereby avoiding migration of populations or adoption of 
unsustainable practices. In the Caribbean insular and coastal areas the project will 
improve sustainable access to fresh water.  Without adaptation strategies, it is expected 
that GCC impacts would increase poverty; not only because local economies (tourism, 
fishing) depend on productive coastal and marine resources but also because local public 
and private sectors do not have the funding or expertise to deal with the potential damage 
Page  6
to coastal human settlements and infrastructures.  Finally, the project is expected to 
reduce malaria and dengue incidence by 30 %.   
 
Among the activities to be implemented  
 
Environment. There are no major adverse environmental impacts expected as a result of 
this project.  Minor environmental impacts might be expected from some on the ground 
investments.  The project is designed to be entirely positive from an environmental point 
of view, particularly by protecting vulnerable ecosystems from the impact of GCC.  
Some expected direct positive impacts include: (i) reduced vulnerability of the high 
mountain ecosystems and Caribbean insular and coastal areas in the face of the climatic 
variations (CV) and of GCC, as well as contribution to the maintenance of the 
environmental services; (ii) reduced uncertainty of impacts of GCC and formulation of 
adequate adaptation measure; (iii) mitigation of impacts of unsustainable agricultural 
practices and development and implementation of sustainable alternatives; (iv) reduced 
vulnerability of agro-systems and planning and management of water supply; (v) 
increased public awareness building on adaptation needs and increased social and 
institutional capacity to manage the ecosystems; (vi) environmental benefits from the 
rationale and selective use of insecticides  An Environmental Assessment will be 
performed as part of the preparation of the adaptation measures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is being implemented by the Colombian Ministry of Environment and local 
environmental authorities which provides a guarantee that the project is in line with high 
environmental objectives. In addition, Colombia has exacting environmental standards in 
place. Where required the Environmental Assessment of the project will be 
complemented with Bank environmental requirements. The EA will be done for each 
adaptation measure during the first project year which is dedicated to the formulation of 
the measures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Extensive consultations have been undertaken and continue to be held with key 
stakeholders. Two workshops were held in the Archipelagos of San Andres and Rosario-
San Bernardo with local governmental representatives (disaster preparedness and 
attention offices; planning and public services authorities); communities and 
representatives of the local governments, tourism, fisheries and water supply sectors. 
Information on GCC scenarios and possible local effects was presented by the PDFB 
coordination team. Adaptation options to GCC were discussed and a short list of 
adaptation measures was recommended for further analysis and possible inclusion in the 
project.  
Page  7
The scientific community, marine and insular component, also was consulted through a 
technical workshop during project preparation. Main topics addressed included the 
identification of research topics, description of the expected social benefits and the design 
of the monitoring system for the Western Caribbean Colombian insular areas.  
Consultations continue to be held with key stakeholders (including local government 
authorities and non-governmental organizations) in Las Hermosas Massif.  Inter-agency 
meetings have taken place to define activities and involvement during INAPÃ‚Â´s 
implementation phase.  Proposed implementation agencies have held many coordination 
meetings and consultations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Page  8
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Walter Vergara 
01/31/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Walter Vergara 
01/31/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
01/25/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/27/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
01/27/2006 
Comments:   
