Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2313 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/11/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P099139 
Project Name: CO Monitoring and Evaluation Loan 
Task Team Leader: Gladys Lopez-Acevedo 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 16, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSPP 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To achieve quality, efficiency, and effectiveness of public services in Colombia is essential the 
further enhancement of monitoring and evaluation tools in the implementation of public policy 
and investment. The proposed project will contribute to this medium term goal by helping to 
ensure that SINERGIA is further institutionalized so as to become more influential and fully 
sustainable. The subordinate project objectives are that new tools and quality controls be 
developed, and that M&E functions and activities are accompanied by expanded dissemination 
and consultation efforts. Another objective is that other GOC agencies are upgraded in their 
M&E capabilities and programs so that they can contribute to SINERGIA and at the same time 
make better use of SINERGIAís strategic products.  
 
Therefore, the loan would be successful if capable of achieving the following results:  
 
ï
Strengthening the M&E institutional base. It would strengthen the M&E systemís 
institutional base by defining precise M&E functions, responsibilities and system resources, as 
well as synergies between SINERGIA, as the central system, and sector-specific systems 
managed by sector ministries and executing agencies at the national level. The same would apply 
to the relationship between SINERGIA and the Contralor√≠a. It would also support 
Page  2
institutionalization of mechanisms thathelp coordinate performance information and prioritize in-
depth impact evaluations.  
 
ï
Improving M&E coordination at national level. It would tighten the linkages between 
Colombiaís central M&E system (managed in DNP) and the Office of Budget, so that both DNP 
and the Ministry of Finance rely on the same indicators and evaluators during budget 
preparation, execution, and evaluation. By the sharing of this M&E information, the project 
would also contribute to creating fresh fiscal space and establishing the necessary basis for future 
application of a Medium Term Expenditure Framework.  
 
ï
Improving the M&E designs and their effectiveness. It would raise the level and 
performance of M&E systems country-wide by strengthening their designs and implementation, 
both nationally and through selected sub-national pilots.  
 
ï
Enhance the M&E supply. It would improve the ìsupply sideî of M&E informationby 
raising its quality and credibility, and the objectivity and breadth of types of evaluations which 
are conducted, e.g., desk (also known as logframe) evaluations, intermediate evaluations and 
rigorous in-depth evaluations.  
 
ï
Strengthen the M&E demand.  It would strengthen the ìdemand sideî for M&E 
information within government, Congress, and civil society, specifically to support budget 
decision-making, and the management of government programs by ministries and other 
executing agencies. In the process, it would help the Government increase its accountability. In 
particular, the project would help introduce and institutionalize desk evaluations that can be 
jointly used by sector-budget analysts at DNP, sector ministries and the Ministry of Finance at 
the time of budget preparation. The project would also test and establish procedures to regularly 
report performance indicators and evaluation reports to Congress and the Contralor√≠a. It would 
also strengthen the capacity of the Contralor√≠a in those areas not covered by SINERGIA, 
particularly institutional performance evaluations.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
loan amount of $10.0 million has been proposed by the GOC.  This would be used to finance 
the following components.  The distribution of the loan amount is still under discussion with the 
GOC.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening the institutional framework for SINERGIA and, more broadly, the 
countryís M&E systems. The goal of this component is to improve the Government central M&E 
systemís regulatory framework and to provide the basis for its sustainability.  This will entail:  
 
i. 
Clearly defining and implementing institutional arrangements for the proper functioning 
of M&E systems, expanding synergies among them and rationalizing divisions of responsibilities 
among participating institutions;  
 
ii. 
Strengthening the roles of key governing institutions regarding the operation, 
management, and uses of M&E in results-based management (i.e. DNP, the Ministry of Finance, 
the Intersectoral Evaluation Committee, among others);  
 
iii. 
Ensuring incremental budget financing for SIINERGIA (as opposed to external 
financing); and  
 
iv. 
Improving the roles of the Contralor√≠a and Congress in the oversight of theM&E 
system and public.  
 
Performance of this component could be measured with the following indicators: the percentage 
of SINERGIAís operating and capital costs which is budget-funded,the number and outcomes of 
Page  3
SINERGIA evaluations reviews, the number (and percentage) of impact evaluations completed, 
the percentage of the budget evaluated, the percentage of evaluations recommendations accepted 
and implemented, the number of congressional hearings using the M&E findings, request for 
reports, or press reports indicating the use of the M&E system results.  
 
Component 2: Development of M&E at national and sub-national level.  The goal of this 
component is to develop consistent and coordinated M&E.  This component would include:  
 
i. 
Further consolidation of results based management at the central level;  
 
ii. 
Development and expansion of ongoing pilot experiences in Past
o
and Medell√≠n, and 
development of a standard M&E model based on these pilots and expanding its application;  
 
iii. 
Strengthen the evaluation agenda (e.g., rapid evaluations, impact evaluations); and  
 
iv. 
Broadening of accountability mechanisms through engaging civil society participation.  
 
Performance of this component can be measured with the following indicators: the percentage 
of evaluation recommendations accepted and implemented, requests for reports (downloads of 
evaluation reports), the number and outcomes of SINERGIA logframe evaluation reviews, 
demand and access by civil society organizations for M&E data, and press reports indicating the 
use of the M&E system results.  A similar set of indicators can be used to judge progress at the 
sub-national level, as well as in the Contralor√≠aís institutional performance evaluations.  At the 
subnational level, it could include the number of results-based management systems developed 
as a result of the project, the number of consolidated results-based management systems, the 
number of evaluation used and produced encouraged by these systems, number of strategic 
alliances fostered with civil society to disseminate M&E and to analyze M&E information.  
 
Component 3: Improving the quality and availability of information feeding the national M&E 
system.  This component refers to the M&Eís own accountability, in the sense that it functions 
objectively, produces accurate information, feeds the policy and decision-makers on time and 
responsibly.  The goal of this component is to improve the credibility and accountability of the 
national M&E system, so it increases its use and acceptance not only by government agencies 
but also for others including the Contralor√≠a, Congress, the media, and the public at large. This 
component includes  
 
i. 
Financing of both external evaluations and selected data audits by independent auditing 
firms;  
 
ii. 
Standardizing data reporting and entry processes from data producers to the M&E 
system;  
 
iii. 
Strengthening registry systems that directly feed into the M&E systems;  
 
iv. 
Improving the regulatory framework and coordination of policies in the area of 
information for M&E,  
 
v.
Strengthening the dissemination of information to the public, and  
 
vi. 
Strengthening the Presidentís use of M&E results to hold him or herself andthe 
government accountable for results.  
 
Performance of this component can be measured by the following indicators: the percentage of 
SIGOB performance indicators that have been audited by independent agencies, outcomes of the 
evaluations on the quality of M&E policy guidelines, outcomes of the evaluations on the quality 
of the data produced by SIGOB, and beneficiary surveys to measure the demand and the 
perceived credibility of SIGOB information.   
 
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
Colombia   
 
E.  Borrowerís Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
None of the actions considered in this intervention will trigger any of the environmental or social 
safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/31/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gladys Lopez-Acevedo 
04/18/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi 
05/09/2006 
Comments:   
