Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  August 29, 2006 
Report No.:  
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P098615 
Project Name:  
COLOMBIA: San Nicolas Carbon Sink and Arboreal Species 
Recovery Project
 
Task Team Leader:  Walter Vergara 
Estimated Begin Appraisal Date: August 
29, 2006 
Estimated ERPA Date: October 24, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Bio Carbon Fund 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Themes: Climate Change (P), Other environmental management (S) 
BCF Amount (US$m.): 
US$ 2.1 million 
Other sources:  
Cornare: US$ 1.7 million 
Municipalities: US$ 0.2 million 
Masbosques: US$ 0.4 million 
Climate Change Implementation Grant : US$ 0.4 million 
Total : US$ 4.8 million 
Environmental Category: B 
–
Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ ] 
Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to pioneer carbon sinks in Colombia, through 
reforestation, agroforestry , on about 2,500 ha of abandoned pastures and through 
avoided deforestation and induced regeneration in about 7,300 ha of remaining 
forest stands in the valley of San Nicolas.  The project also seeks to protect 
biodiversity through the recovery of endangered and vulnerable local arboreal 
species
.
The Project will create a sink for carbon (partly through the planting of 
endangered and vulnerable species) and in the process improve the income of small 
landowners, through the sale of timber, non timber and agro-forestry products, reduce 
land degradation and contribute to the restoration of ecosystem integrity in the San 
Nicolas region of Colombia. The project also includes training and capacity building for 
sustainable forest management, strengthening of social capital and biodiversity 
protection. By the inclusion of 20 native species for the reforestation activities and a 
program aimed at the recovery of populations of 3 endangered species, the project will 
contribute to restore  biodiversity in abandoned pastures. The BioCarbon Fund intends to 
purchase, 280,000 tCERs, (Temporary Certified Emission Reductions) from the Project, 
measured in tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO
2
e) and 317,000 tons of emission 
reductions (ERs) resulting from avoided deforestation, measured in t CO2.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
a) Reforestation Program
.
The main project activity is the implementation of a 
reforestation  program (developed through a participatory community process) under 
which individual landowners voluntarily reforest their land. The program includes the 
reforestation of about 2,500 ha from a total of 11,300 ha eligible for CDM (as defined 
under the Marrakesh Accords) with 22 species out of which only two are exotic non 
invasive species (Pino
tecunumani
,
Pino
oocarpa
,
introduced more than four decades ago 
in the region). The forestry management program is a component of a much wider 
watershed management plan in the area led by CORNARE.  Under the program, about 
2000 ha of highlands will be reforested using plantations and agro-forestry systems, 
while about 500 ha of lowlands will be reforested using agro-forestry systems.  Seventy 
percent of the restored soil cover will be under native species.  A training program for the 
participating community to properly manage, monitor and maintain the carbon sinks is 
part of this component. 
 
b) 
Reintroduction and strengthening of native vulnerable and 
endangered populations of arboreal species.  
In addition, the reforestation program 
will be complemented with a program to reforest at least 5% of the restored lands with 
native vulnerable and endangered species (
Cariniani
pyrifomis
-IUCN-CR, 
Godoya 
antioquensis
and 
Podocarpus
oleofolius
).  This will involve the development of 
nurseries, planting and monitoring protocols and the actual reintroduction in the region of 
these endangered arboreal species.  This component will be largely supported by a 
Climate Change Implementation Grant (CC-IG), already approved and expected to 
become concurrently effective with the carbon sink agreement. 
 
c) 
Avoided deforestation and induced forest regeneration.  
The project 
will also support the implementation of a program to maintain and promote remaining 
forest relicts in the Valley of San Nicolas.  The program will focus on the conservation 
and regeneration of about 7,300 ha of existing forest stands with native, locally present 
species (Cedrela 
odorata, 
Tabebuia ssp, Quecus 
humboltii, 
and Podocarpus 
oleofolius
).  
This component will take place in the area of conservation, of the Valley of San Nicolas.  
The component will include activities that will directly support rehabilitation of degraded 
forests as well as support to prevent deforestation, mainly through the use of carbon 
revenues and training.  
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location. 
 The project is located in the valley of San Nicolas, made up of 9 
municipalities in the eastern part of the Province of Antioquia, Colombia (See map 
below).  The valley of San Nicolas covers 193,000 hectares. The valley is on the 
watershed of the Negro and Nare rivers, which feed water to several hydroelectric power 
plants that jointly generate approximately 33% of the electricity demanded in Colombia.  
Location of project area 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Walter Vergara (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed 
project. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts: 
 
The project is expected to trigger Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), and Forests 
(OP/BP 4.36) Operational Policies.  The forestry policy is triggered by projects with the 
potential to impact the health and quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests; or aim to bring about 
changes in the management, protection or utilization of natural forests or plantations. 
Page  4
The proposed project will implement a forest management program, 
reforesting an area of about 2,500 ha. In addition to the forest management 
program, the project will support the reintroduction and strengthening of 
native vulnerable and endangered populations of arboreal species. The 
project will also bring about changes in the current management practices of 
forests.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
 is triggered by the intention to restore soil cover 
with arboreal species under endangered and critical status.  The recovery of 
germ-plasm, seed collection and generation of nursery stock required careful 
management to prevent any further impacts on the remaining populations of 
the target species.  No use of biocides is considered under the project.  
 
2.  Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Direct Social Benefits 
The project will benefit around 21,000 families; and is expected to generate around 9,000 
jobs in reforestation activities and around 3,000 jobs in agroforestry activities. The 
benefits are:
 
·
Improved income  
·
Higher valuation of lands 
·
Consolidation of institutional links 
·
Promotion of the communities capacity for management and negotiation 
·
Formulation of a territorial planning process in a participatory manner 
·
Training in forest-management activities 
·
Creation of direct and indirect employment 
·
New products for the local market 
·
Reduction of pressure on natural forests as wood sources. 
·
The establishment of agroforesty and 
silvopastoril
 systems will improve the food 
safety inside the region. 
 
The project is not expected to result in negative environmental impacts. Expected 
environmental benefits include: global emission reductions, development of tools and 
methodologies for the development of carbon sink projects in the country, restoration of 
ecosystem integrity, re-introduction of species under critical status and reduction of 
extinction, sustainable forest management, strengthened biodiversity protection and 
maintenance of environmental services (water and carbon retention in soils) in the project 
area.  All reforestation activities will be undertaken under a careful planting protocol to 
be developed prior to appraisal, to reduce any negative impact on soil compaction, 
existing natural stands or soiling of surface waters.  The protocol will be supervised by 
MASBOSQUES (see Annex 16). 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
N.A.  
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
An environmental assessment of the project has been prepared.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The project
 
can only be developed with the active participation of the farmers from San 
Nicolas. The project scope is the direct result of years of interaction with and 
participation of the local community. The forestry plan was drafted in the course of a well 
designed and executed consultation process, during the last 20 months, with the 
communities in the area of the project.  The communities are represented in the 
institutional arrangements for implementation of the project.  
MASBOSQUES 
itself is 
the result of a participatory process that includes several institutions, municipalities and 
local organizations. The project was developed by CORNARE, which enjoys a very good 
reputation in the region. The project is expected to improve the income of small 
landowners, through the sale of non timber and agro-forestry products, directly 
contributing to income improvements and quality of life of the involved community.  
MASBOSQUES through the assistance of UNALMED has undertaken a socio-economic 
characterization of the local farming community, identifying the following types of 
landholders: 
†\03
Agricultural worker: temporal worker without land. 
†\03
Employee: permanent worker without land. 
†\03
Low income farmer or peasant: peasant with land that in addition works as a 
temporal agricultural worker. No more than 3 ha. 
†\03
Medium income farmer or peasant: peasant with land that can work only with 
his family in his land. More than 8 ha. High income farmer or peasant: peasant 
with land that can hire additional workers to work in his land. More than 8 ha. 
†\03
Rural Businessman: landowner that has land, employees and also other business. 
 
Land tenure and Project Participants.  
The project will be implemented by low and 
medium income farmers. The individual land owners have empowered MASBOSQUES 
with valid and binding arrangements that entitle MASBOSQUES to the carbon sink 
income and commit individual participants to the reforestation schemes.  Individual 
agreements will be in place prior to implementation of project activities on the respective 
parcels.  Under the agreements the landholders commit to the maintenance of the 
reforested systems.   
 
Page  6
The process of selection of participants was open and transparent. The criteria employed 
were: a) tech
nical (compliance of the participant’s land with the definition of forest area 
by the Ministry; participant’s land identified as of forest aptitude, as per land zoning by 
CORNARE; participant’s land that met the conditions of lack of soil cover by 1990 as 
per Landsat images); and b) legal:  clear title with no encumbrances; “libertad y 
tradicion” certificate from the office of land records and willingness to participate 
through the signing of the participation agreement. 
 
Community participation.  
CORNARE and MASBOSQUES have conducted an 
extensive community consultation process in the context of the development of the 
Management Plan for the San Nicolas valley and consequently of the formulation of the 
carbon sink project.  The community consultation has taken 21 months from the start of 
the process. The community participated in the original forest inventory and in capacity 
building workshops.  The process of selection of participants led to further community 
participation.  MASBOSQUES is an association made up by the local community with 
the support of CORNARE.  
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Not yet 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
Page  7
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Walter Vergara 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Walter Vergara 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Alonso Zarzar 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Reidar Kvam  
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
