Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3050 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/04/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P101279 
Project Name: CO Solid Waste Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Taimur Samad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 28, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project development objective is to improve public health and the quality of basic 
solid waste management services in Colombia. Specifically, the Project aims to: (i) reduce 
exposure to pollutants and disease vectors associated with solid waste by financing the closing of 
open-air dumps; (ii) promote commercial and operational modernization in the sector through the 
development of regional landfills and the associated optimization of collection, transport and 
transfer services within regional SWM systems; (iii) reinforce incentives for the continued 
transition to the ?specialized operator? model for SWM in the country: (iv) strengthen the 
regulatory framework in the sector and build capacity amongst national, regional and local actors 
in its appropriate application; (v) deepen efforts to encourage waste minimization, recycling and 
source separation in the context of commercially viable regional operations;  and (vi) reduce 
poverty and vulnerability amongst waste pickers through the development of appropriate social 
inclusion and economic transition  programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project is structured with three components.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Regional Solid Waste Disposal Systems (US$26.0 million): The component 
would primarily finance the construction of between an estimated four and six small 
commercially viable regional landfills ranging in size from approximately 70 to 300 tons/day, the 
closing of open-air landfills principally in areas where new regional landfills are financed under 
the component and the construction of transfer stations in selected sites. The component would 
also finance technical assistance for the development of regional landfill subprojects including 
engineering designs, environmental impact assessments, social assessments and other related 
studies required under the sector regulatory framework. Additionally, the component will finance 
technical assistance and consultant services to develop social inclusion, skills development and 
entrepreneurial programs for waste pickers to mitigate the adverse impact on livelihoods caused 
by the closing of open-air dumps. Lastly, the component will finance costs associated with 
resettlement and compensation for loss of property in the case that such adverse impacts emerge 
under subprojects.  
 
A
sample of regional landfill investments will be subject to assessment as examples of potential 
operations that could be financed under the Project (Annex 1). These investments do not 
constitute a pipeline of identified investments to be financed under the operation but rather a 
sample of investments that will be analyzed to ensure that MAVDT possess a framework in 
place to develop technically optimal regional operations and that environmental and social 
screening mechanisms are in place.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening in Solid Waste Management (US$3.0 million): The 
component would finance five key areas of technical assistance as outlined below.  
 
?
Regional Waste Management Systems and Service Improvements: The component will 
finance: (i) modeling studies to identify a pipeline of regional landfill and SWM system 
investments that to the greatest extent possible reflect optimal technical and economic solutions ? 
including the use of transfer stations; (ii) optimization and route frequency studies for solid waste 
collection and transport services to identify cost-effective and efficient service delivery models 
for specific service areas; and (iii) a review of contract structures and the development of 
improved contract models for collection, transfer and disposal services.  
 
?
Strengthening Sector Regulatory Framework and Capacity Building: The component will 
finance at the national level through technical assistance the review, adjustment and development 
of the sector regulatory framework. At the subnational level the Project would finance capacity 
building for local governments and regional environmental authorities in: (i) elements of the 
regulatory framework; (ii) tariff regime; (iii) use of the Sistema ?nico de Informaci?n (SUI); (iv) 
technical norms and benefits associated with sanitary landfills; and (v) waste minimization and 
recycling.  
 
?
Promotion of Carbon Finance in Solid Waste Management: The component will aim to 
support the deepening of Clean Development Mechanism initiatives in the SWM sector. In 
particular, the Project would support technical assistance to: (i) to incorporate technical norms 
and specifications relevant for the generation of emission reductions (e.g., best-practice designs 
for capture and flaring of methane) in the regulatory framework (e.g., Reglamento T?cnico del 
Sector 2000, RAS); (ii) identify means to optimize the potential of different alternatives of CDM 
projects within the sector; and (iii) improve the capacity of operators to identify and assess 
emission reduction (ERs) opportunities prior to and beyond 2012.  
Page  3
?
Recycling and Waste Minimization: The component would finance: (i) market and 
demand assessments for recycling products and associated cost-benefits analyses for recycling, 
composting and waste minimization; (ii) pilot initiatives to test the feasibility of different 
recycling and waste minimization programs; (iii) an international review of waste minimization 
best practices and an assessment of their application to Colombia; and (iv) the development of a 
national draft strategy for recycling and waste minimization.  
 
?
Public Education: The component would finance public information and education 
campaigns to socialize and educate consumers on the benefits and safety of regional waste 
disposal, waste minimization and recycling, amongst other key activities. It is estimated that 
campaigns will use a wide range of formats and media and will target schools, key consumer 
segments and community leaders.  
 
Component 3: Project Management (US$1.0 million): The component would finance costs 
associated with project management including goods, works, services and operating expenses 
associated with financial audits, mid-term and end-project evaluations, training and capacity 
building of MAVDT, Comisi?n de Regulaci?n de Agua Potable y Saneamiento B?sico (CRA) 
and Superintendencia de Servicios P?blicos y Domiciliarios (SSPD) and other regional and local 
government staff. The component will also be used to reinforce technical, environmental, 
community outreach, communications, administrative and fiduciary capacity within MAVDT.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
It is proposed that the Project will be developed as a framework operation under which specific 
regional landfill investments to be financed would not be identified during preparation. The 
Project will instead define framework technical, financial, economic, social and environmental 
guidelines that will be applied in the preparation and implementation of proposed investments. 
The Project will also outline transparent eligibility criteria for the selection of subprojects. As 
noted elsewhere in this document, Colombia has developed a comprehensive regulatory 
framework in the sector that in many respects already details technical norms for the screening, 
development and implementation of sector investments. The team will seek to work within this 
regulatory framework to the greatest extent possible and during preparation will assess whether 
these existing norms meet Bank requirements. In this regard, the team will also appraise the 
application of existing norms in a sample of two regional landfill operations recently financed by 
the Government of Colombia. Lastly, the team will also rapidly review an identified sample of 5-
6
regional landfill investments currently in advanced stages of development that could be 
financed by the Project to both: (i) confirm that they meet preliminary technical and economic 
eligibility criteria; and (ii) to validate that a pipeline of ready operations exists.  
 
Under Colombia's legal and regulatory framework indigenous communities possess veto over 
public infrastructure investments in areas of immediate influence. The Government - recognizing 
this constraint and the potentially controversial nature of landfill investments - has made the de-
facto decision to not site landfills on registered indigenous lands or in areas where indigenous 
communities are present. This has been done out of consideration for indigenous belief systems 
which treat the earth as sacred - and the large-scale dumping of waste as a potential violation of 
these belief systems. In order to ensure that proposed subproject investments will not affect 
indigenous communities, a screening instrument has therefore been developed and will be 
applied prior to selection of each subproject site. 
Page  4
It is important to note that the scope of project activities relates to the final disposal of waste 
and does not finance municipal waste collection. Therefore, while indigenous peoples may 
experience potential indirect benefits from future improvements and expansions in solid waste 
collection, these benefits are not considered to be directly caused by the project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower, Ministerio de Ambiente, Vivienda y Desarrollo Territorial (MAVDT), has 
extensive experience with Bank safeguards policies given its experience in parallel investment 
Projects in the water, sanitation and wastewater treatment sectors. In the context of compliance 
with Bank safeguard procedures, the Ministry has prepared and supervised the preparation of 
Environmental Assessment and Resettlement framework documents, EIAs, Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), RAPs and other related information. The Ministry also has an 
advanced screening mechanism (Ventanilla ?nica) which includes the consideration of social and 
environmental issues in proposed subprojects. Additionally, MAVDT has developed a regulatory 
framework in the sector that requires EIAs for all investments in landfills as a condition for 
environmental licensing.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (LCSSO) 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The main environmental impacts related to solid waste final treatment and disposal can be 
summarized as: (i) health and environmental impacts of accumulated uncollected waste and 
clandestine disposal sites; (ii) health and environmental impacts of solid waste facilities, 
including transfer, composting and landfill facilities; (iii) air emissions from waste collection and 
transfer vehicles.  
 
Key environmental impacts involved in the development of a waste disposal project are of 
different nature. The most significant environmental and social impacts in each of the operational 
phases of construction, operation and closure are summarized below:  
 
..Construction: (i) Impacts on soil: Removal of the soil?s superficial layer creates a negative 
impact on the quality and capacity of the land, its compacting capacity and also in terms of 
erosion; (ii) Impacts on fauna: Indigenous fauna will suffer a negative impact as the vegetable 
cover is completely removed, although this will be partially reverted at the time the landfill?s 
final cover is placed in the ground; (iii) Impact on air quality and noise: The vegetable cover 
removal can trigger erosion and atmospheric pollution including: increased noise, odors, 
particulate matter and gases. Particulate matter will increase as roads are opened, materials are 
extracted and the land is cleared. Movement of heavy equipment and machinery will 
permanently generate dust. Also, combustion gases from machinery and vehicles will affect air 
quality during this phase. Any use of equipment will generate odors as a result of the combustion 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
process. The noise generated by the use of machinery negatively impacts the regular conditions 
of the site; (iv) Impact on water quality: The use of fine materials (limes and sand) on the sides 
of the roads being built and as part of any infrastructure works generates water erosion risks that 
can threaten the stability of those works. The equipment operating during this phase will 
generate residues (oils, fuels, and dirty water); and (v) Potential Social impact: new sources of 
employment will temporarily arise. However, closing waste dumps to open sanitary landfills may 
generate negative economic impacts on the nearby dwellers living out of waste picking and 
recycling.  
 
..Operation: (i) Impact on soil: Removal of superficial soil layers (modification of 
vegetation and local fauna); (ii) Impact on water: Interception and deviation of superficial rain 
water as internal canals and rain water channels are built. Pollution of superficial water or 
underwater as leachates can migrate inside and under the landfill as a result of inadequate 
coverage; (iii)Impact on air quality: Dust production as collection vehicles circulate and unload 
in transfer stations and in dumping areas. Air and noise emissions coming from motor vehicles 
and equipment as a result of increased vehicle traffic and operation of solid residues. The 
uncontrolled emission of gases can generate unpleasant odors, transport hazardous materials, 
create vegetation loss and contribute to global warming. Atmospheric pollution as a result of the 
use of incinerators and open air waste burning; (iv) Modification of the landscape: changes in 
topography, changes of the area?s regular activity; and (v) Potential social impacts: There are 
risks related to work accidents. Sources of employment (short term). Exposure to illnesses as a 
result of pollution for sanitary landfill workers.  
 
..Closure: (i) Impact on Landscape: recovery of vegetation and fauna; (ii) Potential Impact 
on water: Pollution of superficial water or underwater as leachates can migrate inside and under 
the landfill as a result of inadequate management after closure; (iii) Potential Impact on air 
quality:  Inadequate leachate management may generate unpleasant odor emissions; and (iv) 
Social impact: reduced sources of employment and integration of certain geographic areas to the 
local community.  
 
According to Colombian legislation, Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA), 
Environmental Licensing, and appropriate environmental investigations related to site selection 
will be required for all investments in new facilities to avoid, minimize and mitigate potential 
environmental and social impacts. Furthermore, the project will develop strategies to mitigate 
and prevent long-term impacts during operation and closing phases and develop comprehensive 
strategies to minimize waste streams and maximize cost-effective recycling and composting 
activities.  
 
The project will provide guidance on public participation in site selection, facility design, 
operational aspects of solid waste service delivery, and addresses special issues related to waste 
picking and recycling communities.  
 
As the team does not anticipate identifying specific areas of intervention prior to appraisal, 
it is proposed that an Environmental Management Framework is developed specifying detailed 
procedures for the screening, evaluation, preparation and implementation of subprojects under 
component 1 ? from an environmental perspective. The EMF will provide ToR and guidelines 
for conducting EIA and developing EMPs for specific subprojects.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
An important aspect of siting analysis is to prevent impacts on natural habitats and 
ecosystems. The project is unlikely to trigger the policy, however natural habitats issues will be 
screened as part of the Environmental Assessment process and, if necessary, appropriate 
measures will be designed to prevent and reduce potential impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The Project does not expect to encounter cultural property on sites that will be identified for 
regional landfills. Nonetheless, as site selection will only take place under implementation, it has 
been decided to trigger the policy and address mitigation measures by integrating ?chance finds? 
procedures into the EMF.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although resettlement will be avoided and minimized in siting facilities, the development of 
new sanitary landfills and transfer stations might require land acquisition and might impact 
property values of surrounding populations.  
 
The closing of existing open dumps and controlled landfills will likely affect population 
currently living and working on these landfills. The physical and economic displacement of these 
people will be addressed through comprehensive socio-economic integration strategies.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared to address potential resettlement issues 
identified projects. For specific sites and project interventions known at the time of appraisal, 
individual Resettlement Action Plans will be devised accordingly.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/27/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  7
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1.  Conduct an assessment of existing technical and environmental norms in the sector 
regulatory framework (Decree 1220, RAS) which specify procedures for the environmental 
and social screening and preparation of subprojects, EIA, EMPs, etc. The objective is to 
determine the extent to which these norms are consistent with relevant Bank safeguard 
policies. July 2007  
 
2. Preparation of Environmental Assessment Framework: September 2007  
 
3. Preparation of Resettlement Policy Framework: September 30, 2007  
 
4. Although not a safeguard requirement, a social assessment for the sector will be prepared 
and a final version presented on September 30, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Taimur Samad 
10/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francis Ghesquiere 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
