Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3143 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/09/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P105164 
Project Name: SCALING -UP STUDENT LOANS TO PROMOTE EQUITABLE 
ACCESS PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Alberto Rodriguez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (95%);Secondary education (5%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Education for all (S);Improving labor 
markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
87.00
87.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective is to improve access to higher education in Colombia, in particular to 
enhance access to advanced learning opportunities for talented students from low-income 
families.  Concretely, the project seeks to: (i) increase the availability of student financial 
assistance in Colombia for needy but talented students; and (ii) strengthen ICETEX's capacity to 
effectively manage its portfolio, reduce default rates and increase access to private capital and 
financial markets.  
 
Progress towards meeting these development objectives will be measured by a number of 
implementation and impact indicators, which will be sharpened during project preparation.  
These indicators will be measured and monitored to establish the achievement of whole 
program's objectives, the achievement of the intermediate objectives for the first phase of the 
APL, and the achievement of the triggers that will allow the program to move from phase I to 
phase II.  In initial discussions with the Colombian authorities, the following indicators have 
been identified:  
Page  2
Impact indicators for the project are expected to include: (i) increase in transition rate between 
secondary and tertiary education (from x% to y%); (ii) increase in the number of tertiary 
education graduates from quintiles 1 and 2 (from x to y); (iii) increase in satisfaction with quality 
of graduates as reported by employers (as measured through existing and upgraded surveys); (iv) 
increase in the gross enrollment of students in quintiles 1 and 2 (from x% to y%); (v) decrease in 
the administrative costs of ICETEX as measure by percentage of total income (from x% to y%); 
and (vi) reduction in the re-payment default rate among beneficiaries (from x% to y%).  
 
Implementation indicators for the project are expected to include: (i) number of new students 
obtaining an ICETEX ACCES loan; (ii) number of new students from quintiles 1 and 2 obtaining 
an ICETEX ACCES loan; (iii) number of renewals disbursed for students currently under the 
loan program; (iv) number of new agreements signed with participating tertiary education 
institutions; (v) percentage of resources available for student credit generated from other sources 
within the capital markets; and (vi) modernized software for loan administration.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is proposed to be an APL with two phases in a period of 6 years of implementation.  
The first phase (2008-2010) would be financed through a loan of US$ 300 million with co-
financing by ICETEX of US$ 87 million.  The second phase, (2011-2013) would be financed 
through a loan of US$ 200 million with co-financing by ICETEX of US$ 245 million.  The 
project would be managed by ICETEX under similar implementation arrangements from those 
currently in place for the ongoing Bank-financed operation.  The project would achieve the 
above-mentioned objectives during the two phases through two components:  
 
Component 1. Equitable Access to Higher Education (total estimated IBRD financing: US$ 490 
million; ICETEX estimated co-financing: US$ 332 million).  This component would ensure 
access to tertiary education and lower repetition and drop-out rates for talented low-income 
students, as well as the improve the social, economic and academic conditions of low-income 
students through increased support of tertiary education institutions for program beneficiaries.  In 
part, this will be achieved through the provision of student loans for low-income students who 
wish to access tertiary education and have the adequate qualifications to do so.  The loan may be 
used to pay for tuition fees and/or living expenses while enrolled in school.  The maximum 
amount of the loan would be 100 percent of the tuition cost for technical and technological 
programs, and 75 percent for university programs, according to the socioeconomic 
characteristics of the beneficiary as defined by ICETEX.  
 
Further to the development of the labor market observatory financed by the Bank under the 
ongoing operation, this project is expected to enhance information and career services. Similarly, 
ICETEX would continue working in coordination with the Ministry of Education on quality 
control and accreditation to ensure that the beneficiaries of loans enroll in reputable institutions 
and programs.  
 
Interest rates for students will continue to be advantageous (that is, well below available market 
rates) although they will likely become variable based on market fluctuations.  It is estimated that 
during the first phase of the APL (2008-2010) this component will assist ICETEX in providing 
76,000 new loans (out of a total of 100,000 for the period) and will finance 333,000 renewals  
Page  3
(out of a total of 433,000 for the period).  During the second phase (2011-2013), this component 
will assist ICETEX in providing 49,000 new loans (out of a total of 110,700 for the period) and 
220,000 renewals (out of 496,600 for the period).  
 
Component 2. Institutional Strengthening of ICETEX (total estimated IBRD financing: US$ 10 
million, no co-financing). This component would be designed to enhance portfolio and risk 
management, operational efficiency, collections, and access to financial markets in both phases. 
It is expected that the World Bank Treasury and the IFC will actively contribute in providing the 
TA critical for the success and impact of this component.  
 
The first subcomponent would strengthen and modernize the management of ICETEX through 
the adoption of new technologies and information management systems for applicants' data. This 
will include software development for risk assessment, portfolio management, contingency and 
security, and information system development (confidentiality, data digitalization, etc.).  The 
second subcomponent would contribute to the modernization of ICETEX and its insertion to the 
financial markets. In particular, this subcomponent will support efforts for ICETEX to tap the 
financial markets for capital through, for example, the issuing of bonds and securities. ICETEX 
also plans to explore initiatives to bring commercial banks and private investors into the 
financing of student financing assistance, through public-private risk-sharing arrangements, such 
as guarantee funds. The third subcomponent would support loan administration, in order to 
enhance its capacity to manage all phases of student financial assistance including the 
socioeconomic profiling of applicants, portfolio M&E, long term capitalization strategies, 
disbursement mechanisms, subsidy focalization and follow-up of higher education institutions 
and third-parties contributions. This will also include setting up a task force to reduce 
delinquency and default rates. Impact evaluation of this project will be conducted through this 
component.  
 
This component will mostly finance consultancies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Both components would be implemented nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The APL is expected to trigger the Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) policies. Therefore a separate 
Indigenous People's Plan is necessary.  
 
The project will support the Indigenous and Afro-Colombian policy to provide equity access to 
higher education to this population. ICETEX will conduct a national consultation with 
Indigenous and Afro-descendent organizations such as the Comision Pedagogica Nacional 
(CPN) and Organizacion Nacional Indigena de Colombia (ONIC).  ICETEX has a special fund 
under implementation to support Indigenous and Afro-descendent (since 1990 and 1993 
respectively) with  both instruments, student loan and scholarship to access to different tertiary 
education programs and regions. The project will draw from lessons learned from this experience 
to respond to the particular needs of these two groups.  
 
In relation to Environmental safeguards the project does not involve any activity or investment 
that may pose a risk to the environment.   
 
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSUW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The APL is expected to trigger the Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) policies. Therefore a 
separate Indigenous People's Plan is necessary.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/06/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
November 12, 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alberto Rodriguez 
09/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
09/26/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
