Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
Report No.: 39753 
Date prepared/updated:  May 7, 2007 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P101356
 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  CO Integrated Mass Transit Systems Project 
 
Task Team Leader:  Mauricio Cuellar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007  
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  AF 
Sector:  General Transportation Sector (90%), Central Government Administration (5%), Sub- 
National Government Administration (5%); 
 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S)
 
IBRD Amount (US$m.):  207 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Environmental Category:  B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [x ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ x] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ x] 
2. Project Objectives: 
 
This Additional Financing will maintain support for the National Urban Transport Program 
(NUTP) under the same terms defined in the initial Integrated Mass Transit Systems project 
(IMTS Loan 7231-CO). The geographical expansion of the NUTP through the incorporation of 
Participating Cities in 2005 is consistent with the development objectives, which are: (i) develop 
quality and sustainable Bus Rapid Transit Systems (BRTS) in selected medium and large cities in 
order to improve mobility along the most strategic mass transit corridors; (ii) improve 
accessibility for the poor through feeder services and fare integration; (iii) build greater 
institutional capacity at the national level in order to formulate integrated urban transport policies, 
and also at the local level in order to improve urban transport planning and traffic management, 
while at the same time 
enhancing the GoC’s strategic vision for the sector in the long term.  
 
3. Project Description: 
 
The eligible categories of the proposed Additional Financing do not require a change in the 
project components with respect to those described in the original IMTS Loan’s Project Appraisal 
Page  2
2
Document (Report No.: 28926-CO). The disbursements 
will correspond to the original project’s 
Component B- BRT Development
 classification.  
·
Category under geographical expansion of the Project through the incorporation of 
Participating Cities in 2005
,
which subprojects will correspond to Component B.1. ($107 
million) with the addition of 34.8 km of segregated transportation corridors (13.0 km for 
Medellin-Valle de Aburra 13.2 km for Barranquilla and 8.6 for Bucaramanga), including, 
inter alia: 
(i) construction of segregated busways; (ii) construction of terminals and 
transfer centers; (iii) construction of mixed-traffic lanes adjacent to busway 
corridors (when their geometrical specification is affected); (iv) the construction 
of sidewalks; (v) construction of pedestrian walkways along busway corridors; 
and (vi) construction or adaptation of complementary transport corridors to the 
segregated busways. 
 
·
Category under project Financing Gap for the Bogota NQS subproject
 ($100 million) 
will correspond to Component B.2., which includes the construction of about 20 
kilometers of segregated corridors including, among other: (i) construction of segregated 
busways; (ii) construction of terminals and transfer centers; (iii) construction of mixed-
traffic lanes adjacent to busway corridors (when their geometrical specification is 
affected); (iv) the construction of sidewalks; and (v) construction of pedestrian walkways 
along busway corridors. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis: 
 
The project is located in main urban transport corridors of the Participating Cities: 
Bucaramanga, Barranquilla, and Medellin-Valle de Aburra. 
Bucaramanga’s system also 
extends to the Municipality of Floridablanca and in a later phase to the Municipalities of 
Piedecuesta and Girón. Barranquilla’s BRTS covers the Municipality of Soledad. Finally, 
Medellin’s Metroplus includes the Municipalities of Itagui and Envigado.   The 
infrastructure works will be implemented in consolidated urban areas, where traditional 
urban transport systems are already operating. In Bogota, the project location is the NQS 
corridor, one of the main arterial transport corridors of the city, which runs diagonally 
from South to North. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSEN) 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (LCSSO)
 
Page  3
3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental 
and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP 
4.00) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
All civil works under the project follow closely the alignment of existing roads. A 
screening of the potential impacts was carried out, and it was determined that the relevant 
aspects to be considered in the EA are associated to the construction period and include: 
(i) re-routing of traffic through secondary roads during construction, (ii) increase in air 
pollution and noise levels during construction; (iii) disposal of construction waste; (iv) 
potential interruption or limitation in the access to housing and businesses, both temporal 
and permanent; (v) reduction and impact on green areas, parks, and other entertainment 
and public spaces; (vi) potential increase of accidents; (vii) impact and potential 
interference on urban infrastructure (pavement, phone lines, electricity wiring, water 
pipes and sewage mains, etc); and (ix) potential nuisance during construction (noise, dust, 
waste, and traffic congestion). It is expected that the ongoing civil works will potentially 
require additional land acquisition which will result in temporary and permanent 
resettlement. All the included cities have extensive experience from preparing and 
implementing resettlement action plans (RAPs) and the same implementing agencies, 
with the same social management teams, will continue to plan and implement any 
potential new resettlement. In the majority of the cities, the resettlement, as a result of the 
additional financing, is expected to be limited while in others the numbers of affected 
people it is expected to be considerable, for example in Medellin-Valle de Aburra. The 
Additional Financing will cover the same type of interventions as the original project, and 
the Category B environmental rating is still appropriate.  
 
More specifically, resettlement action plans are currently being implemented in 
all six cities and these operations will continue under the Additional Financing. It is 
likely that during this time, approximately from now on until the end of the calendar year, 
that the cities of Medellin, Bucaramanga and Barranquilla will request NO for new road 
Page  4
4
sections and corresponding contracts, which will then be financed from funds under the 
Additional Financing. No new contracts are expected for Bogota. The potential new 
contracts in Medellin, Bucaramanga and Barranquilla include the following;  
 
1. Medellin
:
“El Pretroncal” which includes road sections in Medellin, Envigado 
(RAP has been receive by the Bank, has been reviewed and is being revised), and Itagui. 
Medellin and Itagui are also preparing RAPs. 
 
2. Bucaramanga
:
over the next two years nine more contracts are expected in 
Bucaramanga. At the moment, three RAPs are in preparation and they include
:
“El 
Deprimidor Carrera 17 con La Rosita”, “Proyecto Glorieta Quebrada Seca con 
Carrera15”, and “Puentes Peatonales”. 
 
3. Barranquilla:
Only one RAP exists which covers the entire project. The contracts 
which may come up (will possibly take until next year because the designs are not 
finalized yet) are: Olaya 1 and 2, Carrera 50, Barranquillita and Soledad. Updates and 
revisions to the existing RAP will be prepared and each section or sections will have a 
RAP respectively. 
 
As mentioned above, funds from the Additional Financing may help fund these 
potential resettlement operations. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
No long term negative impacts are expected. The potentially adverse environmental and 
social impacts, as described in the point A.1 above, are not expected to be irreversible. 
Overall, the project is expected to continue to generate long-term positive environmental 
and social impacts, as accessibility and road safety is improved, urban space enhanced, 
and emissions and exposure to pollutants diminished.  
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts: 
 
Formal economic evaluation and transport planning models were used to device the 
transport system, including selecting trunk and feeder routes, identifying number and 
type of buses, and determining adequate fares. Planners also considered Land-Use Plans 
(POTs), and urban development strategies. In full compliance with the resettlement 
policy, OP 4.12, and in full compliance with the resettlement policy framework as 
prepared by the Government of Colombia, efforts are made continuously in the planning 
of civil works, with the intention to continue to minimize and manage land acquisition 
and resettlement in a sustainable and socially responsible manner. Involuntary 
resettlements are therefore continuously kept to the minimum both for the purpose of 
diminishing construction and associated costs, and at the same time mitigating social and 
environmental impact. 
 
Page  5
5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
To facilitate the development of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for each 
participating city, and ensure quality and consistency, Guidelines for Infrastructure 
Design; for developing EMP; and for Monitoring or urban infrastructure projects were 
developed during project preparation, using the existing Guidelines at IDU as a basis. 
The guidelines include programs for (i) camp site management; (ii) archeological and 
heritage chance finds; (iii) management of borrow materials and sites; (iv) management 
of wastes and disposal; (v) traffic management; (vi) public participation; (vii) 
management of green areas; (viii) risk and occupational health and safety; (ix) 
management of drainage, pavements and concrete structures; (x) management of 
chemicals, liquid waste, oils, and fuels; (xi) water management; (xii) management of 
equipment and machinery; and (xiii) control of emissions and noise. The DNP and the 
Ministry of Transport were in charge of coordinating the development of the guidelines 
in association with the Ministry of Environment. For the case of Bogota
’s NQS the 
system is under operation, and an Environmental Impact Assessment and an EMP were 
undertaken following IDU’s existing guidelines. 
 
EMPs are required for each city to mitigate the potential environmental impact on the 
project sites and surrounding areas during construction. All potential impacts that cannot 
be averted in the design will have to be mitigated through EMPs.  General EMPs have 
already been prepared and cleared by the Bank for the participating BRTS agencies (ie, 
Metroplus, Metrolinea, and Transmetro). These general EMPs are further developed as 
specific corridors get final designs and become ready for bidding their construction.  
 
The original project includes components which require land acquisition as identified 
during project preparation. Therefore in order to ensure that project affected people are 
fully compensated and resettled, and in order to comply with the Bank´s policy on 
resettlement, OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), the government has prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which has been disclosed in country and in the 
Infoshop. Each city in the first and original project (Bogotá, Medellín, Pereira, 
Bucaramanga, Barranquilla and Cartagena) prepared at least one RAP which was 
reviewed and approved by the Bank before implementation. Extensive experience of 
resettlement planning and implementation has been accumulated in the participating 
citie´s social management teams. This experience will, together with the continued use of 
the RPF, guide resettlement operations which will potentially be implemented during the 
period of Additional Financing. 
 
The borrower’s capacity and experience has been adequate so far, for complying with the 
Bank’s environmental and social safeguard policies. As a principle, all EMPs are 
implemented by the contractors in charge of the civil works, and its compliance is 
ensured through the bidding documents and legal contracts. The RAPs are being 
implemented by the social management teams in each implementing agency. The 
project’s key stakeholders (such as IDU, Transmetro, Metrolinea, and Metroplus) will 
Page  6
6
continue to be 
responsible for overseeing the implementation of the project’s works, 
according to the environmental management guidelines and the RFP. Bidding documents 
include provisions that require contractors to prepare the environmental management 
plans. During the Additional Financing, the implementing agencies capacity to manage 
environmental and social safeguard issues, will be evaluated in depth, in order to ensure 
that the project will continue to be implemented in full compliance with environmental 
and social safeguard requirements and World Bank policies.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
Key stakeholders in the project include those living, working or moving along the bus 
routes, including residents, shop-owners, informal vendors, other merchants, bus users, 
bus operators, bus drivers and others. The project initiated consultations with potentially 
affected people early on. Stakeholders involved in consultations during preparations 
include, among others, people affected by land acquisition,  bus owners, private transport 
associations, local government, and central government officials. During implementation, 
government and local implementing agencies have collaborated with construction 
companies and bus operators to share information and allow public consultation through 
information offices, workshops, and information disseminating material. All EMPs, the 
RPF and RAPs have been and will continue to be disclosed through INFOSHOP and the 
local implementing agencies (Transmilenio, IDU, Transmetro, Metrolinea, and 
Metroplus). 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Equivalence and Acceptability Report: 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
Started March , 2004 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Started March, 2004 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [  x]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
The Regional Environment Unit 
approved first EIAs, EMPs, and 
EMP Guidelines 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  7
7
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [ X ]          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
The project designs are aimed at 
avoiding potential adverse  impact on 
cultural property. In case there are 
chance finds during construction, the 
EMPs include specific mitigation 
measures. 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [X  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
Yes. The RPF was approved in 2004. 
The RAPs have been, and continue 
to be, reviewed and approved during 
further planning and implementation. 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Page  8
8
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [X  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Yes. Environmental remuneration 
expenses associated to complying 
with the EMPs are included as part 
of the contracts. Costs for 
resettlement projects are included in 
government/municipality budgets. 
Page  9
9
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes. Works 
supervisors/implementing agency 
social teams are in charge of 
compliance with EMPs/RAPs. Lack 
of compliance with EMPs diminishes 
remuneration proportionately. 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes.  Bidding documents and 
construction contracts include 
specific clauses and obligations 
regarding EMP. Each implementing 
agency has a social/resettlement 
management team.  
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mauricio Cuellar 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Jua
n
Andrés Lopez-Silva 
March 18, 2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Kristine M. Ivarsdotter
 
April 24, 2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
