Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/02/2007 
Report No.:  AC2735
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P096965 
Project Name:  La Guajira Water and Sanitation Infrastructure and Service Management 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  David N. Sislen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other urban development 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00 
 
Municipalities of Borrowing Country 
10.20 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
8.00
68.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed Project (APL Phase I) is to improve the quality of water 
supply and sanitation services in urban and peri-urban areas of La Guajira, moving 
towards complete coverage with continuous supply of potable water for urban areas. 
Specifically, the proposed operation will increase service quality for water supply, 
sanitation, and wastewater treatment in urban areas for 300,000 consumers and improve 
the sustainability of service by (a) supporting utility institutional performance through the 
Government of Colombias specialized operators approach and (b) delivering the 
necessary water and sanitation infrastructure.  
 
In concrete terms, it is expected that by the end of implementation of the operation, the 
Project will have: (a) achieved 90% coverage of continuous piped, treated water supply 
services for urban residents in participating municipalities; (b) achieved 72% connection 
to sewerage networks and basic wastewater treatment services for the urban population in 
participating municipalities; (c) implemented a small pilot rural water supply and 
Page  2
sanitation sub-project to provide basic services to 11-16 rural communities; and (d) 
defined an overall strategy for water supply and sanitation for the Department including 
indigenous communities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is made up of three components as described below.  
 
Component 1. Urban Water Supply and Sewerage Infrastructure Component (US$ 144.2 
million, including US$ 76 million of Bank financing)  
 
Component 1 of the Project would finance civil works and equipment for water supply 
and sanitation in the participating municipalities of the Department of La Guajira. At the 
time of Appraisal, it is expected that 10 municipalities of the Department would be likely 
to participate in the urban investment component. The loan funds allocated for each city 
have been determined on the basis of the financial model utilized during the preparation 
of the respective contract renegotiations and the availability of loan funds. The funds 
allocated for each city will not be transferred to the specialized operator or local utility 
but rather used to finance infrastructure works considered to be of high priority by the 
operator and which have been approved by the municipal authorities and by the Program 
Implementation Unit.  
 
The Project supports the Government of Colombias policy to leverage management 
expertise in the delivery of basic water and sanitation services and Component 1 is based 
upon the Operation with Investments model used throughout the country. Under the 
Operation with Investment approach, operators at the municipal level for the 15 cities of 
the Department would be private companies or joint ventures with proven experience in 
operating similar size water and sewerage systems which can mobilize the required funds 
for investment. The investment commitment of the operator of each city is set based upon 
the level of tariffs agreed upon with municipal authorities. In the municipalities of La 
Guajira, the arrangements are in general operation contracts under which the operator has 
committed to provide part of the required investment while the remaining resources will 
come from the public sector, in this case, primarily from the Department. In all cases of 
La Guajira, the tariff levels acceptable to the municipal authorities cover the operation 
and maintenance costs of the utility, and thus the utilities are financially viable.  
 
The basic principle of the operation contract is that it only commits the operator to 
provide an investment compatible with the level permitted by the authorized tariff.  The 
financing of any additional investment is the responsibility of the public sector, and 
Project funds will be used to provide to participating utilities the amount of support 
needed.  The operation contract stipulates that the investment program over time (the 
Investment Plan or POI) is required to bring the system to optimal conditions, as 
proposed by operators, and including a commitment of the operator to finance and 
construct the part of it which corresponds to him according to his proposal.  When public 
funding is required, its use and allocation will be derived from the POI.  The Department, 
through the Program Implementation Unit, with guidance from the MAVDT, and the 
Page  3
municipal authorities will reach an agreement with the operator regarding the works 
and/or goods of the POI.  
 
The amount which the public sector has committed to provide will not be made 
available to the operator, for his discretional use, but will be rather used to finance part of 
the infrastructure works stipulated in the POI, which will be proposed by the operator 
(e.g., works considered by him as high priority works) and approved by the municipal 
authorities and the Department through the Program Implementation Unit.  In this way, 
the operator will not receive a financial contribution from the public sector, but rather the 
right to operate additional infrastructure which is provided by the Department as a grant 
and is owned by the municipality. In this manner, the Department, in effect, finances 
additional infrastructure for the city residents and not the provision of funds to the 
operators, a concept more publicly acceptable.  
 
In each city, the works financed will be designed by the operator-managed utilities and 
the executing agency of each sub-project will be the water utility of the city.  This 
arrangement will ensure that the infrastructure provided will be totally satisfactory to the 
operator and will meet operational needs. The works and goods financed with Bank 
proceeds will be procured through public bidding processes in accordance with the Bank 
procurement guidelines.  The supervision and control of the contract will be the 
responsibility of the contracting agency, i.e., the municipality or regional association of 
municipalities, which will receive continuous support from the Program Implementation 
Unit in these matters.  
 
In La Guajira, nine of the fifteen municipalities in the Department are already under 
private management through three separate contracts: (i) Riohacha operated by Aguas de 
La Guajira; (ii) Maicao, operated by Aguas de la Peninsula, which was supported under 
another Bank Project; and (iii) the regional association of the municipalities of the south, 
Aguas del Sur, owned by the same operator of Maicao which includes the municipalities 
Barrancas, Distraccion, Villanueva, El Molino, Hato Nuevo, Fonseca, and San Juan del 
Cesar. The Department has initiated a process of restructuring the contracts to achieve a 
significantly greater level of service quality than that initially envisaged at the time of the 
signing of the contracts and intends to utilize Loan funds to provide the necessary 
investment support as described above.  
 
During preparation a series of studies were undertaken to assess and determine the 
amount of investment required to meet the targets established by the Department and 
municipalities for water and sanitation coverage and continuity. During the initial stages 
of implementation, the operators will finalize their detailed investment plans which will 
be subject to the review and final approval of the Department (through the PIU), 
municipalities, and where applicable, the regional association of municipalities, all with 
support of the MAVDT and the Bank.  
 
For municipalities which are not included in the three existing contracts but choose to 
join the program during implementation, new bidding processes based on the negative 
Page  4
concession/least-subsidy concept will be carried out and new operators will be selected. 
The existing operators will be permitted to submit proposals to these bidding processes.  
 
Component 2. Rural Pilot Component (US$ 7.0 million, including US$ 7.0 million of 
Bank financing)  
 
Component 2 of the Project will finance a small pilot of activities to improve the access 
of rural, mostly indigenous Wayuu, communities to appropriate water supply and 
sanitation services in an efficient and sustainable manner. The objective of the 
component activities is to develop a replicable approach and models for scaling up during 
Phase II of the APL. The Component would finance culturally appropriate in-situ 
solutions in a number of rural communities in the Municipalities of Manaure and Uribia 
in the north of the Department of La Guajira. The pilot approach would include activities 
for (a) social formulation of sub-project design using participatory methodologies; (b) 
physical investment; (c) the establishment of community-based institutional arrangements 
for sustainable management of investment; and (d) education for hygiene and water 
resources management, leveraging the traditions and cultures of the indigenous Wayuu. 
In broad terms, the activities would revolve around the establishment of a community 
micro-enterprise to manage the operation of the basic service, and the component 
activities would include activities with the regional office of SENA to support technical 
assistance and capacity building activities which would accompany the pilot investments. 
The component is described in detail in Annex 15.  
 
While there is no doubt that an improved access to water and sanitation services is 
beneficial to indigenous peoples, the Project incorporates consultation mechanisms to 
ensure that the vital interests of indigenous peoples are not negatively affected and that 
Project activities are carried out in the selected pilot areas after a social assessment, 
consultation process, and communications campaign, with the support of the indigenous 
communities. To this end, specialized consultants within the program Management Unit 
will be responsible for coordinating, overseeing, and ensuring compliance with the 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) agreed upon during preparation.  
 
Once final selection of sub-projects takes place, the pilot projects will be phased in two-
by-two to ensure the institutional capacity to develop a comprehensive Indigenous 
Peoples Plan (IPP) for each selected site.   The sites will be prioritized by the Secretario 
de Asuntos Indigenas (SAI) in dialogue with the PIU, considering the following factors: 
(a) existing leadership within community/pilot project area (b) evidence of past collective 
action/collaboration towards a common goal and (c) receptivity and openness to project 
(i.e. willingness to participate with team in developing sustainable and appropriate water 
solutions).  These factors would be considered in order to begin the pilot component with 
activities that have a relatively higher probability of success.  The IPPF would be 
continually revised based on learning-by-doing to refine the participatory methodology 
for achieving sustainable and appropriate water solutions in the rural areas.  
 
Since each individual sub-project would require an IPP prior to being financed, the 
grievances expressed by Wayuu Indigenous Peoples organizations would thus be 
Page  5
addressed early on, particularly their concerns about the possibility of being excluded 
from the consultation process or eventually alienated of their water rights, as well as any 
complaints about the location of the wastewater treatment lagoons and their effect on 
human health.  Given the traditional social exclusion of indigenous peoples, it is essential 
to provide for full participation of beneficiaries/affected-peoples in order to design and 
implement successful sub-projects.  
 
Component 3. Program Management and Analytical Activities (US$ 7.0 million, 
including US$ 7.0 million of Bank financing)  
 
Component 3 of the Project would finance goods and services associated with the 
management of Project financed activities and related analytical work for the design of 
the follow-on phase of the APL. Component 3 will include analytical studies in the areas 
of groundwater resources as well as activities to improve transparency and accountability 
through performance management and the dissemination of information about sector and 
utility performance. Specifically, the component would support the functioning of the 
Program Implementation Unit with technical specialists and strengthen the fiduciary and 
safeguards management capacity of the entity.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be carried out in the Department of La Guajira, located in northeastern 
Colombia, with a population of approximately 520,000. The Project will benefit 15 
municipalities with an area of 20,848 km?. The 15 main urban centers account for about 
70% of the population and most of the rural areas are inhabited by the native Wayuu, an 
indigenous people that have lived in La Guajira for more than 3,000 years.  
 
La Guajiras  especially the Upper and Middle Guajira is a desertic region, where water 
resources are scarce and subject to a high intensity of variation throughout the year. The 
main course of water in the Department is the River Rancheria that runs from the Sierra 
Nevada to the Caribbean Sea. The superficial waters bear a high mineral content, in 
particular in the southern region, which limits its use for agricultural purposes. Water 
resources are further jeopardized by the exploitation of coal, pollution of watercourses 
due to illegal damping and low degree of proper institutional attention being given to the 
protection of the basins. The average annual pluviometry in the Department is registered 
at 300 mm compared with 9,000 mm in the rest of the Pacific region. According to 
INEAM , La Guajira is the only department in the country that presents a high deficit of 
water resources as measured by the dryness index, which refers to the volume of water 
needed to maintain existing vegetation.  In this context, operation of the water and 
sanitation services calls for strategic water resource management and long-term 
investment planning in order to establish the necessary capacity to meet long term 
demand as the Department develops.  
 
Inadequate water supply and sanitation sector is the most pressing problem that faces 
the Department.  Service coverage in la Guajira is very low by Colombias standard - 
68.2% in water supply coverage and 35.1% in sewerage in urban centers, versus national 
Page  6
averages of 88.3% and 74%, respectively. Access to a reliable source of supply is non-
existent in the rural areas. Poor provision of water supply and sanitation services in La 
Guajira has led to severe environmental problems, which are associated with high rates of 
morbidity and mortality mainly due to water borne diseases. A significant percentage of 
the primary and secondary water supply networks suffer from leaks and breakage, 
making the water unfit for human consumption (DESALUD, 2005). The network 
infrastructure is insufficient and less than 10% of the wastewater receives any kind of 
treatment. Unsanitary conditions result from lack of or inadequate sewerage systems, 
leakage, spillage of wastewater in urban areas, and untreated surface water. In all of La 
Guajiras municipalities, wastewater discharges do not comply with established national 
standards.  
 
Furthermore, in most municipalities the sewerage system is obsolete and the networks 
contain large amounts of heavy solids that enter by way of inspection channels and 
subsequently become lodged in the system. The sewerage system combines sewage with 
runoff water. Some municipalities have oxidation lagoons which do not function 
properly; untreated wastewater spills into and contaminates bodies of water used for 
recreational and other consumption uses. More than 50% of wastewater is not adequately 
collected, transported and treated. In places such as Maicao, oxidation ponds were built in 
places inhabited by vulnerable communities and thus, pose a high risk of direct contact 
with the population.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (SASES) 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda (LCSSO) 
Ms Susanna Shapiro (GPOBA) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In urban areas, the project will finance improvements to the water supply and sanitation 
infrastructure including water uptake works and treatment facilities, primary and 
Page  7
secondary water supply and sewerage networks, and wastewater treatment facilities.  In 
rural areas, the project will include small investments in rainwater catchments, including 
basic tanks and treatment infrastructure, as well as small groundwater investments. 
Probable sub-project types to be financed under the project are summarized in Table 2. It 
is envisaged that the sub-projects will include new works and/or the rehabilitation of 
existing infrastructure.  
 
Table 2: Probable sub-projects for basic sanitation in La Guajira  
 
Table 2: Probable sub-projects for basic sanitation in La Guajira 
 
Component 
             Urban   Rural  Urban    Rural 
 
water   Wtr.   Sewerage Sewerage 
 
supply  supply supply  
 
1
Small civil works/  
 
catchments 
               X  
 
2
Intakes 
               X 
X  
 
3
Conduction lines         X  X  
 
4
Portable water  
 
treatment plants 
       X  X  
 
5
Primary networks        X  X  
 
6
Treated water storage       X 
X  
 
7
Distribution networks       X 
X  
 
8
Pumping stations         X          X  
 
9
Sewage networks   
 
        X X  
 
10
Rainwater drainage 
 
 
        X  
 
11
Combined sewerage and drainage 
 
X  
 
12
River Outfalls 
 
 
        X  
 
13
Wastewater treatment plants 
 
 
X 
 X  
 
14
Submarine outfalls 
 
 
        X  
 
15
Reuse systems 
 
 
        X  
 
It is envisaged that impacts of implementation of sub-projects will not be significant and 
can be prevented or mitigated. The screening procedures will ensure that all sub-projects 
can be classified as environmental category B or C, according to the Bank?s EA policy. 
Table 3 presents a summary of the potential environmental impacts resulting from sub-
project activities.  
 
The sub-project activities will result in possible impacts on soil, air and water media; as 
well as socio-cultural impacts. Potential environmental impacts during construction 
include: (i) erosion, soil quality, use of soil and landscape; (ii) air pollution and noise; 
(iii) water pollution; and (iv) potential social conflicts. Potential environmental impacts 
during operation include diseases associated with: (i) inadequate water supply, sanitation 
and hygiene, (ii) wastewater discharges to water bodies; and (iii) potential social 
conflicts.  
 
Page  8
Projects on International Waters  
 
The Project will contribute to development of water supply and sanitation projects some 
of which will located on the tributaries of basins, which are international waterways 
flowing through the Republic of Venezuela. Due to use of water from bi-national 
watersheds, the Government of Colombia has notified the Government of Venezuela of 
the proposed Project in compliance with OP 7.50. A copy of the letter sent is included in 
the Project files of the Bank.  The investments are not expected to adversely change the 
quality or quantity of water flows to Venezuela or adversely affect Venezuela?s possible 
water use. No dam will be built under the proposed Project. Additional information about 
all specific sub-projects proposed for financing during the implementation of the Project, 
will be posted on the Bank?s website.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Both direct and indirect impacts are described above in Section 1.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EA conducted an analysis of project alternatives to improve provision of potable 
water and basic sanitation service. The analysis entailed a description of environmental 
characteristics, followed by identification and definition of environmental impacts 
associated with the water and sanitation sector. The EA analysis of alternatives included, 
among others, an alternative of no project as well as an alternative of continuing with 
scattered and uncoordinated investments.  
 
The EA demonstrates that alternatives based on no project or scattered and 
uncoordinated investments would have an overall negative impact on the region 
particularly in terms of increasing waterborne diseases. The technical conditions 
embodied in these alternatives would not meet the short and long-term needs of the 
population. Furthermore, the final results of implementing similar investments to the ones 
carries out in the last ten years would include poor quality - as is currently the case - of 
water and basic sanitation service provision, and a tendency to deteriorate owing to 
population growth; deterioration of water bodies from disposal of untreated or 
insufficiently treated wastewater; increased morbidity rates; minimal progress on 
redressing the local culture of non-payment; limited availability of water resources; and 
minimal progress in improving the organizational structure, among others.  
 
The EA found that the project corresponds to the alternative of minimum negative 
environmental impacts. The alternative selected in the EA includes interventions that 
address the current deficit in water and sanitation service provision, and medium term 
goals to achieve: potable water service coverage for 90% of the population in 
participating municipalities, 22-hours per day of water services, and 72% of households 
in participating municipalities connected to sewerage networks. It is envisaged that any 
potential environmental impacts on physical and biotic elements would be minimal and 
Page  9
could be mitigated using adequate technical and environmental technical specifications, 
constructions standards, and environmental management plans.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Assessment  
 
The Government of La Guajira, contracted consultants to prepare the Environmental 
Assessment. The EA includes a stand alone environmental impact assessment (EIA) and 
an environmental specifications manual that includes environmental management 
procedures aimed at preventing, minimizing and mitigating negative impacts. The EA 
identified potential impacts associated with the types of investments envisioned for the 
selected alternative, and developed appropriate mitigation measures to offset those 
impacts. The EA identified ways to improve the design and implementation of sub-
projects through the prevention or mitigation of adverse environmental effects and the 
enhancement of positive impacts.  
 
Environmental Screening  
 
In accordance with the EA, municipalities and the Government of La Guajira 
Department will ensure that all sub-projects comply with legal and national 
environmental standards as well as with the social and environmental safeguard policies 
of the Bank.  The selection of sub-projects to be financed by the loan will be screened by 
the implementing unit to ensure that they do not generate significant negative 
environmental impacts. The EA has also developed screening criteria for sub-project site 
selection, including possible impacts on natural habitats and cultural property. According 
to the EA, if any natural habitats (as defined by OP 4.04) could potentially be 
significantly degraded or converted either directly or indirectly as a result of the project, 
the screening criteria will assess for this possibility, and accompanying environmental 
management guidelines ensure that sub-projects would be in compliance with OP 4.04.  
Screening criteria developed by the EA also include the identification of any cultural 
property (as defined by OPN 11.03) in the area of influence of sub-projects. Guidelines 
for environmental management during construction have also been developed that 
include adequate chance, find, procedures.  
 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP)  
 
The projects environmental management plan incorporates baseline measures to 
minimize and control environmental impacts of the sub-projects and to establish basic 
compliance requirements for specialized operators. These measures are included in an 
environmental technical specifications manual with construction environmental standards 
aimed at for ensuring sustainable investments. The EMP also establishes protocols for 
environmental audits in order to verify whether the sub-projects comply with minimum 
environmental standards (or the proposed management criteria), as well as with current 
environmental legislation. On an annual basis, the PIU will conduct environmental audits 
Page  10
to the water supply and sanitation systems in all municipalities participating in the 
project.  
 
Technical and Environmental Specifications for Water Supply and Sanitation Projects  
 
The manual for technical and environmental specifications for the construction, 
operation and maintenance of works and sub-projects, of water supply and sanitation in 
La Guajira, aims at guiding operators responsible for the service provision to efficiently 
implement environmental protection and management measures.  
 
Environmental Contractual Clauses for Bidding Documents and Contracts with 
Specialized Operators  
 
The implementation of sub-projects implies contractual relationships between 
municipalities and service providers. The environmental obligations will be transferred to 
the contracted parties who will be responsible for designing and building all the civil 
works and thus, will be responsible for preventing, minimizing or mitigating 
environmental impacts. The EA also includes guidelines containing environmental 
covenants that will be included in all sub-project contracts.  
 
Cultural Property  
 
Colombian Law 397 (1997) requires environmental agencies to consult with the 
Ministry of Culture on the possible existence of archeological areas in the project area, 
and, in the affirmative case, to develop protection plans and incorporation of any 
necessary restrictions and obligations in the process of issuance of environmental 
licenses.  Since most sub-projects do not require environmental licenses (due to their 
limited size and scope), the project has adapted the existing good practice guidelines for 
screening of sub-project locations and chance find procedures.  
 
Strengthening of environmental management capacity in Department of La Guajira  
 
The Project will finance activities to strengthen the environmental management capacity 
of the Department of La Guajira and the municipalities participating in the project. Under 
the institutional strengthening component, the departmental government has hired a 
Program Implementation Unit (PIU) with oversight by an advisory board that includes 
representatives of GoG, municipalities, and the federal government. The PIU will ensure 
that adequate capacity exists for the following environment-related functions: (i) 
undertaking the environmental and social screening of sub-projects; (ii) review and 
clearance of the submitted analyses, plans, monitoring plans, and indicators, and making 
recommendations for additional analyses and measures, if required; (iii) elaborating 
terms of reference for any additional environmental and social analyses, and providing 
technical assistance in their elaboration; (iv) developing good practice management 
guidelines; (v)  providing support to municipalities for any environmental and social 
issues; (vi) ensuring the consistent adequate application of environmental procedures for 
sub-projects; (vii) contracting experts to provide additional environmental and social 
Page  11
training and support, when needed; (viii) identifying potential cumulative impacts and 
determining necessary mitigatory actions; (ix) monitoring the quality of reporting from 
the municipalities, and developing measures to solve any environmental and social 
problems that arise; (x) monitoring environmental compliance of sub-projects; (xi) 
establishing links with other institutions to strengthen environmental capacity within each 
municipality; (xii) coordinating with the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia, when sub-
projects might have an impact on cultural heritage; and (xiii) working with environmental 
agencies to facilitate environmental licensing procedures, where necessary.  
 
The PIU will include environmental specialists on its staff who will be responsible for 
preparation, contracting and management of required environmental studies and services 
in addition to the following activities to ensure adequate environmental management of 
the project: (i) organization of bidding processes for the selection of specialized operators 
or negotiation of new contracts with existing operators when needed; (ii) reviewing of 
investment plans of operators and setting of goals; (iii) monitoring of compliance with 
environmental legislation; (iv) environmental auditing of the construction and operation 
of sub-projects; (v) environmental technical assistance for operators; (vi) environmental 
monitoring of the quality and increase in service coverage and compliance with other 
objectives contained in the operators contracts; and (vii) execution of campaigns for 
improvements in water efficiency, culture of payment and technical assistance to 
operators.  
 
Strategic Environmental Assessment  
 
In addition to mitigating the specific potential impacts of the activities to be financed 
under this project, the project seeks to promote sustainable management of water 
resources in La Guajira, by controlling overexploitation of water bodies and water 
contamination. Given that the problems associated with water scarcity and poor water 
quality exist at the watershed-level, the project will finance analytical work to provide a 
basis for the design and implementation of a water resources management policy in La 
Guajira. The analytical work will be complemented by a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA), to be conducted during project implementation, which would develop 
a
strategy for the lower Baja Guajira and the greater Alta Guajira regions during project 
implementation. In Riohacha, Uribia and San Juan, the Terms of Reference for the SEA, 
were consulted with all relevant stakeholders. The SEA itself will be carried out during 
project execution, and will be financed under the projects social and environmental 
management component.  
 
Indigenous Peoples  
 
As stated above, approximately 42% of the populations of La Guajira are indigenous 
Way?u people. The Wayuu live mostly in the rural areas of the Department with legally 
recognized territorial rights to approximately 10,675 km2 (the departmental total is about 
21,000 km2) in the Middle and Upper Guajira in the jurisdiction of the municipalities of 
Riohacha, Maicao, Uribia and Manaure.  
 
Page  12
Any intervention in rural or indigenous areas under APL 1 and APL 2 will require a 
special approach to ensure the development process fully respects the dignity, human 
rights, economies and cultures of Indigenous Peoples, along the lines of Banks 4.10 
Indigenous People safeguard policy. In compliance with this policy, an Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been developed during Project preparation, to be 
applied during the implementation once the pilot sub-projects have been identified and 
selected. Free, prior and informed consultations were facilitated by SAI in the 16 
indigenous communities that are potential candidates for the rural pilots (Component 2). 
Each of these consultations revealed the profound need for potable water and verified 
broad community support for the project. Detailed records of these consultations as well 
as a list of attendees and their signatures can be found in the project files. Before the 
implementation of each individual sub-project, a social assessment and IPP will be 
prepared and submitted to the Bank for review before the respective sub-project is 
considered eligible for Bank financing. This instrument would also apply in cases of any 
potential negative impacts to Indigenous Peoples living in peri-urban areas who might be 
affected by urban investments (Component 1), particularly in regard to wastewater 
treatment.  
 
The IPPF sets out the Projects approach to ensure that the indigenous people benefited 
or affected by the Project will receive culturally appropriate social and economic 
benefits. The IPPF contains:  
 
i) 
Guidelines for elaborating a detailed assessment of rural and indigenous needs, 
including a comprehensive Social Assessment and consultation processes to ensure 
cultural appropriateness of the interventions, and other relevant aspects of the program, as 
well as requirements for the finalization and publication of a departmental rural water 
supply strategy that takes into consideration the result of the indigenous people needs 
assessment and consultation process;  
 
ii) 
Terms of Reference for conducting a social assessment of the pilot sub-projects, 
including an appropriate consultation and participation process and the incorporation of 
elements in Project design for the Development of the Indigenous Peoples;  
 
iii) 
Main characteristics of the Way?u People and recommendations to be included in 
Project Design.  
 
The Projects IPPF can be found in Project files and was publicly disclosed before 
Appraisal in compliance with O.P 4.10.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement  
 
Although no major resettlement is expected under the Project, in some cases the 
construction of the works might require purchasing land and/or the involuntary 
displacement of the resident population and the economic and social activities located 
therein. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed, applicable in said 
context, aimed at supporting the restoration of the socio-economic conditions of the 
population that will have to relocate or whose properties might be affected by the Project. 
This Framework is consistent with the World Banks Involuntary Resettlement policy O.P 
Page  13
4.12. Taking into account that the process of land purchase is an essential part of the 
population displacement and resettlement procedures, and details on this process have 
been included in the RPF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The draft EA was presented at public forums in Riohacha, Uribia (Upper Guajira) and 
San Juan (Lower Guajira) on May 5, 8, and 9, 2006, respectively. Participating in the 
forums were public officials from the Regional Corporation of La Guajira and municipal, 
department and national level governments; municipal councils; and representatives of 
the private sector, the Contraloria, civil society, NGOs, community organization leaders, 
and the press (print, radio, TV). The Government of La Guajira distributed the draft EA 
documents to the participants and provided copies to the administrative offices of the 
department in Riohacha, the office of the mayor of Uribia, and the Municipality of San 
Juan, for reference and feedback. After incorporating comments and suggestions 
provided during the public consultations, the Governor of Guajira delivered the final EA 
to the Bank, on June 23, 2006.  
 
In Riohacha and San Juan, as well as in most municipalities in La Guajira Department, a 
large percentage of losses occur between the drinking water treatment plant and the 
distribution system. In most cases these losses are associated with fraudulent connections 
for agricultural and fishing use. The public consultations of the draft EA highlighted the 
need for governmental enforcement of water and environmental regulations, particularly 
those associated with the allocation of water rights.  
 
Participants in all public consultation meetings were in agreement with the EA's 
proposals to finance the following components of environmental management: i) safe 
water sub-project, aiming to reduce the incidence of water borne diseases (particularly 
diarrhea and other parasitic illnesses) through disinfecting water for human consumption 
and executing education campaigns to change hygiene habits; ii) non structural measures 
to reduce the vulnerability of municipalities to natural disasters, iii) strategic 
environmental assessments of water resources within the Department of La Guajira.  
 
During all public consultations, the main concerns of stakeholders were focused (i) on 
the interest in getting potable water supply on a continuous basis in the municipalities and 
(ii) on ensuring total transparency in the management of public funds, particularly those 
of revenues associated with direct royalties. The public consultations of the draft EA 
highlighted the need for governmental enforcement of water and environmental 
regulations, particularly those associated with water rights regulations.  
 
There are historic demands from the Wayuu people, who have long standing complains 
and claims on human rights violation, social exclusion and discrimination from the 
regional authorities including supposed forced displacements to allow the expansion of 
mining activities and the lack of compliance with promises to provide them with access 
to basic services.  The Wayuu people have suffered further displacements and attacks 
from armed groups. In this context, the prioritization of investment in the urban areas 
Page  14
over the rural could exacerbate the inequality and increase the existing social tensions 
and overall feeling of exclusion and injustice of the Way?u people.  
 
The need for a phased approach needs to be properly and explicitly explained by the 
Departmental authorities to the population of La Guajira, in particular the more 
vulnerable Wayuu rural communities. A communication and outreach campaign will be 
designed and put in place during the first year of the Project - along with measures to 
improve the publicity, transparency and regularity of information sharing with the public 
in the future (in particular the Wayuu). During Phase I, as well as the pilot projects, Bank 
support would be utilized to consolidate a departmental vision for rural solutions as well 
as an appropriate consultation process with the Wayuu communities that ensure the 
participation of the Wayuu in the development process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/24/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/31/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/04/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  15
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  16
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David N. Sislen 
01/22/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana 
01/22/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jairo A. Arboleda 
01/22/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Susanna Shapiro 
01/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
02/01/2007 
Comments:   
