Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2413 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/23/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P094986 
Project Name: CO BOGOTA URBAN SERVICES 2 
Task Team Leader: Maryse D. Gautier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sanitation (30%);Water supply (25%);General transportation sector (20%);Sub-
national government administration (15%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will aim at improving the quality of life of the population living in the poorest areas 
of the city, specifically in the 26 UPZs (urban zones) identified in the city long-term strategic 
plan.  
 
The specific objectives include: (i) create institutional capacity to coordinate and manage 
comprehensive multisectoral investments in poor neighborhoods; (ii) increase quality of life in 
the 26 UPZs by the provision of adequate infrastructure and improving public safety; (iii) 
improve the quality of shelter through tenure regularization, house improvement, and access to 
micro-credit; (iv) promote community participation across the different components of the 
project; and (v) improve urban mobility.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project components, while similar to those of BUS 1, introduce additional innovations and 
strengthen City capacity to address more complex urban issues.  
 
Page  2
Component 1- Urban upgrading. This component design is based on the experience of the BUS 
1, and will expand from the 14 UPZs supported in BUS I to 26 UPZs in the proposed project.  
Subcomponents include: (i) legalization of about 65 neighborhoods; (ii) provision of water, 
sewerage and drainage; (iii) design and construction of local mobility corridors;  (iv) community 
based programs supporting productivity and crime and violence prevention; (v) land 
regularization; (vi) home improvement including micro-credit and subsidies; and (vii) 
construction of urban facilities, public space and equipment.  
 
Component 2 - Mobility. The component will improve access and reduce commuting time for 
poor population of low income neighborhoods, facilitating their capacity to improve their 
economic situation with better access to jobs, health centers and schools.  The component will 
focus on : (i) improving, upgrading and rehabilitation of roads for general circulation as well as 
feeder routes from the poor neighborhoods to the Transmilenio system. By connecting the 
neighborhoods to the Transmilenio system, these feeder routes constitute an essential part of the 
city?s integrated transport system; and (ii) non-motorized transport, including construction and 
maintenance of bicycle paths and sidewalks, parallel sidewalk improvement; improvement and 
maintenance of the existing bicycle paths; and promotion of the use of the bicycle paths.  
 
Component 3 - Technical assistance. This component includes assistance for: (i) 
implementation of the resettlement policy prepared under BUS 1; (ii) institutional capacity 
building for crime and violence prevention; (iii) monitoring urban development; (iv) 
implementation support for the Air Quality Program begun under BUS 1; (v) solid waste 
management, specifically establishing a development strategy with waste pickers to manage 
recycling in parks; (vi) strengthening the capacity for improved mobility including public 
transport restructuring, road safety and definition of road maintenance programs ; and (vii) 
furthering the tax recovery program, initiated in BUS 1.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be developed in the District of Bogota, with specific upgrading activities in the 
poor neighborhoods, located in the urban fringe. The specific neighborhoods of the 26 UPZs to 
be covered by the project activities will be identified during preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower's capacity and experience is adequate for complying with the Bank's 
environmental and social safeguard policies. The project's key stakeholders responsible for 
overseeing the implementation of the project's works (such as IDU, CVP, and EAAB), have 
environmental management guidelines and include provisions in their bidding documents, that 
require the contractor to prepare an environmental management plan as well as  call for periodic 
audits to ensure the plan is carried out. Both EAAB and IDU have institutionalized their 
environmental guidelines; both have environmental departments staffed with qualified specialists 
that have experience in managing the environmental impacts of similar projects.  
 
The preparation of the resettlement framework, as well as resettlement planning and 
implementation, will be overseen by the Caja de Vivienda Popular (CVP), and by IDU, 
institutions which have many years of experience in this area, and which know the Bank policies 
on environmental and social safeguards.  
Page  3
The implementation of the resettlement plan for the improved-mobility component will be the 
responsibility of IDU. This institution has a social management unit which has implemented 
several resettlement plans in last ten years.  
 
In any case, prior to appraisal, the institutional capacity to implement the EMP and enforce 
relevant laws and regulations to ensure protection of the environment and public health, and any 
necessary institutional strengthening measures will be re-assessed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSEN) 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Under the urban upgrading component, the project's investments will consist of small 
infrastructure upgrade works in Bogota's UPZs. These will basically include laying pipes for 
water supply and sewer collection, and construction of access roads, parks and open spaces. 
Appropriate and low-cost technical alternatives will be used. As such, no significant 
environmental impacts are expected. Most impacts will be associated with construction 
nuisances in populated areas.  
 
Under the improved mobility component, feeder routes for the Transmilenio system, will be 
constructed in the UPZ neighborhoods. A screening of the potential impacts was carried out for 
the first phase (BUS I), which has determined that the most relevant aspects to be considered in 
the EA are associated to the construction period and include: (i) a relatively small number of 
resettlements associated to urban space and mobility improvement, including the feeder routes; 
(ii) the re-routing of traffic through secondary roads during construction, (iii) an increase in air 
pollution and noise levels during construction; (iv) the disposal of construction waste; (v)  
potential interruption or limitation in the access to housing and businesses, both temporal and 
permanent; (vi) reduction and impact on green areas, parks, and other entertainment and public 
spaces; (vii) potential increase of accidents; (viii) impact and potential interference on urban 
infrastructure (pavement, phone lines, electricity wiring, water pipes and sewage mains, etc); and 
(ix) potential nuisance during construction (noise, dust, waste, and traffic congestion).  
 
For these types of activities, a Category B environmental rating is considered appropriate. 
The impacts, as described above, are not expected to be significant, or irreversible. No 
significant adverse environmental impacts are expected. The cumulative impacts from the 
interventions  in the UPZs are expected to be wholly positive.  
 
In compliance with OP4.01 requirements, an independent stand-alone EA will take place 
and its report will be disclosed prior to appraisal. Th EA report will include (i) the assessment of 
IDU's experience in BUS I with application of existing guidelines (including statistics, case 
studies and evidence); (ii) assessment of the adequacy of the guidelines for dealing with the 
environmental issues of the propo
sed interventions; (iii) potential strengthening measures for 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
existing procedures, including field supervision. Also, the team will screen some of the expected 
investments to ensure the environmental approach is adequate.  
 
Environmental specifications for contractors will be included in the bidding documents and 
work-specific environmental management plans, subject to the implementing agency's approval 
before works begin, will be prepared by the contractors (as is the current practice by the 
implementing agencies involved).  
 
EMPs will include measures to ensure mitigation of all potential impacts identified through 
updated environmental screening, to be performed once the final designs are known.  It should 
furthermore include an assessment of how effectively EMPs for BUS 1 have been implemented 
and a description of how any shortcomings will be addressed.  
 
EMPs will be prepared in accordance with IDU guidelines for works related to mobility 
corridors; and with EAAB's for water and sewage interventions. These EMPs will need to be 
acceptable to the Bank.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Given that there are several natural habitats in the urban zones where the project may be 
working, the Bank Natural Habitats Policy (OP 4.04) may be triggered. To ensure compliance 
with the policy, the EMP screening procedures should include provisions to identify potential 
impacts to natural habitats and propose mitigation measures, when and if necessary.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
No comment   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
No comment   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The EMP should include provisions to screen for any known archeologically or historically 
significant artifact, building, or other site, and the environmental rules and guidelines for 
contractors should include appropriate procedures for managing potential finding during 
construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
No comment   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The resettlement component is integral to the overall objective of improving the living 
conditions in these low-income neighborhoods. A resettlment framework will be prepared for the 
resettlement of population displaced by construction of the feeder routes, urban space upgrade, 
and non motorized corridors. Resettlement, carried out in accordance with the Bank's 
Resettlement Policy, will be an opportunity for  
 
improving the living conditions of families living in the UPZs, since they can not afford the 
costs of building a safe and titled house.  
 
A
formal ex-post study of resettled families under BUS I will be undertaken during BUS 
II?s preparation, to assess economic stability in order to improve the success of the ongoing 
resettlement efforts.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
No comment   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
No comment   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
No comment   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EA report will be ready for disclosure by October 15, 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maryse D. Gautier 
06/23/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
