Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2399 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/28/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Comoros 
Project ID: P100804 
Project Name: Additional Financing for the Services Support Credit 
Task Team Leader: Maryanne Sharp 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (35%);General transportation sector (20%);Water supply 
(20%);General education sector (15%);Health (10%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Other human development (P);Water 
resource management (P);Other social development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project, which would remain unchanged, are to (i) maintain basic social 
and economic infrastructure for a significant number of disadvantaged communities and specific 
vulnerable groups; and (ii) contribute to building the basic capacity of communities and local 
actors to conduct a local development process.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project components would also remain unchanged:  
 
1) Community-based Subprojects: this component would continue to finance small-scale social 
and economic sub-projects identified by communities, including classrooms and schools, health 
posts, small scale water supply and sanitation, and feeder roads.  
 
2) Capacity Building: this component supports capacity building and social capital formation 
for communities, including information and education campaigns; related strategic capacity 
Page  2
building for civil society; and capacity building of FADC and various stakeholders. By the end 
of the project, it is expected that targeted communities would have developed a community-
based development plan through participatory planning processes.  
 
3) Health Services:  The technical capacity of selected medical personnel in Comoros will be 
strengthened through training in specialized fields and through the acquisition of critical medical 
equipment.  
 
4) Urban Water Supply: these activities were already identified under the IWE project and 
include rehabilitation and extension of water supply in three towns in Anjouan and two towns in 
Moheli. This component would also finance capacity building of water management committees 
and Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaigns on water management, 
sanitation and hygiene.  
 
5) Project Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), and Audits: FADC operating costs and technical 
assistance to undertake technical and financial audits are included under this component and it is 
expected that the project will be successfully implemented in a cost effective and decentralized 
manner. In addition, this component would support M&E activities, including moving beyond 
monitoring of project outputs to undertake an impact assessment of the community-based 
activities over the life of the project. A number of additional activities will also be supported to 
promote local accountability and improved long-term development outcomes: participatory 
monitoring and evaluation by beneficiary communities with facilitation from trained local 
NGOs, and a program of external monitoring by the media.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The additional financing would fund community subprojects similar in scale and scope to those 
implemented under the original project. Examples of these types of sub-projects include 
classrooms and schools, water points, rural roads, small income generating activities and 
community training.  Project implementation will take place on the three islands: Anjouan, 
Grande Comore and Moheli. Sub projects will be implemented in poor rural and urban 
communities on the three islands.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
During the first supervision mission in March 2005, the Bank team recommended strengthening 
the integration of protection of environmental and social safeguards into the community 
development process. To respond to this, the project recruited a consultant to prepare a manual 
on community based environmental management and undertake additional training of project 
staff on safeguard compliance during the sub project preparation process. In addition, a recent 
supervision mission recommended the re-assignment of an Environmental and social specialist at 
the national level to focus full-time on ensuring mitigation of potential environmental and social 
impacts during the implementation of project activities. Implementation of these measures will 
ensure that existing FADC projects are better supervised and that future activities to be financed 
under the proposed Additional Financing will comply effectively with the Bank?s safeguard 
policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment will be triggered since the proposed additional financing will 
support the rehabilitation and construction of community-based infrastructure through a 
participatory process, with the potential of localized environmental and social impacts, albeit 
minor.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered if land acquisition is involved (unlikely as this 
has never been the case under the original project).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/16/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environmental classification of the ongoing project is Category B. As a result, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed on November 17, 2003.    The objectives of 
these documents were to (i) assess the environmental and social impacts of the expected sub-
projects; (ii) outline environmental management procedure and provide the requisite tools, 
including a screening process with sub-project assessment forms and guidelines for 
mitigating impacts; and (iii) integrate environmental considerations into each phase of the 
sub-project cycle.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
The contents of these documents were also disseminated in Comoros through a series of 
stakeholder workshops on each island.  Both of these documents will be re-disclosed in the 
Infoshop and in country by mid-October 2006. These studies continue to be applicable and 
both frameworks and their screening processes have been integrated into the Operational 
manual for the project.  
 
During the first supervision mission in March 2005, the Bank team recommended 
strengthening the integration of protection of environmental and social safeguards into the 
community development process. To respond to this, the project recruited a consultant to 
prepare a manual on community based environmental management and undertake additional 
training of project staff on safeguard compliance during the sub project preparation process. 
Moreover, the consultant prepared a training module for communities on the basis of these 
documents, and the training integrated into the community development process. Forty five 
communities were trained in Year 1 and twenty five will be during Year 2. The project is also 
planning to train communities on environmental and social mitigation measures who 
benefited from sub projects during Phases 1 and 2 of the project.  
 
The March 2006 supervision mission recommended the re-assignment of an Environmental 
and social specialist at the national level to focus full-time on ensuring mitigation of potential 
environmental and social impacts during the implementation of project activities. 
Implementation of these measures will ensure that existing FADC projects are better 
supervised and that future activities to be financed under the proposed Additional Financing 
will comply effectively with the Bank's safeguard policies.  
 
An in-depth review of the application of environmental and social safeguards was 
undertaken during the mid term review. Recommendations from the MTR related to 
environmental issues are being put into effect immediately.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maryanne Sharp 
09/27/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Trina S. Haque 
09/27/2006 
Comments:   
