Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/30/2006 
Report No.:  AC2527
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Comoros 
Project ID:  P100804 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for the Services Support Credit 
Task Team Leader:  Maryanne Sharp 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (35%);General transportation sector (20%);Water supply 
(20%);General education sector (15%);Health (10%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Other human development (P);Water 
resource management (P);Other social development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the project, which would remain unchanged, are to (i) maintain basic 
social and economic infrastructure for a significant number of disadvantaged 
communities and specific vulnerable groups; and (ii) contribute to building the basic 
capacity of communities and local actors to conduct a local development process.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project component would also remain unchanged:  
 
1) Community-based Subprojects: this component continues to finance small-scale 
social and economic sub-projects identified by communities, including classrooms and 
schools, health posts, small scale water supply and sanitation, and feeder roads.  
 
2) Capacity Building: this component supports capacity building and social capital 
formation for communities, including information and education campaigns; and capacity 
building of FADC and various stakeholders. By the end of the project, it is expected that 
Page  2
targeted communities would have developed a community-based development plan 
through participatory planning processes.  
 
3) Health Services:  The technical capacity of pre-selected medical personnel in 
Comoros is being strengthened through training in specialized fields. In addition this 
component supports the maintenance of existing hospital equipment.  
 
4) Urban Water Supply: these activities were already identified under the Infrastructure, 
Water and Environment project and include rehabilitation and extension of water supply 
in one town in Anjouan and one town in Moh?li. This component also finances capacity 
building of water management committees and Information, Education and 
Communication campaigns on water management, sanitation and hygiene.  
 
5) Project Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), and Audits: FADC operating costs and 
technical assistance to undertake the audits are included under this component and it is 
expected that the project will be successfully implemented in a cost effective and 
decentralized manner. In addition, this component supports M&E activities, including 
technical assistance, refinement of the project logframe, strengthening the data collection 
and analysis system, and putting in place a decentralized and user-friendly electronic 
monitoring system.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed additional grant would finance the costs associated with the scaling up of 
the activities to enhance the impact of the Services Support Project (SSP), including (i) 
extending the community development process to a greater number of communities and 
integrating the communal levels into the process, resulting in an increase in the number 
of community and local development plans; (ii) strengthening the quality of certain 
elements of the community development process; (iii) widening eligibility of projects to 
include more environmental protection and conservation activities; and (iv) increasing 
monitoring and evaluation activities as well as operating costs and audits to cover the 
additional implementation period of 19 months.  The additional financing would 
therefore support community and local development plans and well as communal pilot 
subprojects similar in scale and scope to those implemented under the original project. 
Examples of these types of sub-projects include classrooms and schools, water points, 
rural roads, small income generating activities and community training. Project 
implementation will take place on the three islands: Anjouan, Grande Comore and 
Moheli. Sub-projects will be implemented in poor rural and urban communities on the 
three islands.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Environmental Assessment may be triggered since the proposed additional financing 
will support the rehabilitation and construction of community-based infrastructure 
through a  
 
participatory process, with the potential of localized environmental and social impacts, 
albeit minor. Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered if land acquisition is involved 
(unlikely as this has never been the case under the original project).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During the first supervision mission in March 2005, the Bank team recommended 
strengthening the integration of protection of environmental and social safeguards into 
the community development process. To respond to this, the project recruited a 
consultant to prepare a manual on community based environmental management and 
undertake additional training of project staff on safeguard compliance during the sub 
project preparation process. In addition, a recent supervision mission recommended the 
re-assignment of an Environmental and social specialist at the national level to focus full-
time on ensuring mitigation of potential environmental and social impacts during the 
implementation of project activities. Implementation of these measures will ensure that 
existing FADC projects are better supervised and that future activities to be financed  
 
under the proposed Additional Financing will comply effectively with the Bank's 
safeguard policies.   
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The environmental classification of the ongoing project is Category B. As a result, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed on November 17, 2003. The objectives of  
 
these documents were to (i) assess the environmental and social impacts of the expected 
subprojects; (ii) outline environmental management procedure and provide the requisite 
tools, including a screening process with sub-project assessment forms and guidelines for 
mitigating impacts; and (iii) integrate environmental considerations into each phase of the 
sub-project cycle. The contents of these documents were also disseminated in Comoros 
through a series of stakeholder workshops on each island. Both of these documents will 
be re-disclosed in the Infoshop and in country by mid-October 2006. These studies 
continue to be applicable and both frameworks and their screening processes have been 
integrated into the Operational manual for the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/06/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
Page  5
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maryanne Sharp 
10/30/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
10/30/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
10/30/2006 
Comments:   
