Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2508 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/02/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Comoros 
Project ID: P102376 
Project Name: Economic Governance Technical Assistance  Project 
Task Team Leader: Javier Suarez Cordero 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 11, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTP1 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (50%);General public administration sector 
(50%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Administrative 
and civil service reform (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 FOREIGN 
UNIVERSITIES 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching objective of the project will be to support the strengthening of government core 
personnel and financial management systems and improving the transparency and accountability 
of government operations.  The critical areas of intervention will be: (i) budget and public 
expenditure management; (ii) government procurement; and (iii) civil service management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation will have two main components. The first component will focus on 
strengthening public finances and will aim at: (i) Strengthening budget and accounting 
procedures through the establishment of a unit responsible for the accounting of consolidated 
budget execution, the provision of extensive training on budget and accounting procedures to 
core staff from key agencies involved in the budget and expenditure management at the Union 
and Island levels, and the design and implementation in core agencies of the computerization of 
Page  2
budget and accounting practices; (ii) Strengthening of internal and external controls by 
supporting the authorities identify and implement reforms to build its capacity and put in place 
an adequate framework; (iii) Improving transparency of government procurement by reforming 
government procurement rules and practices. The second component will support the 
implementation of civil service reform by: (i) consolidating the high authority of the civil 
service, which has been recently established; (ii) implementing the computerized management 
system of personnel rosters; and (iii) validating the functional review of civil service and starting 
the implementation of the adjustments in line with the new decentralized institutional setting.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a national program that will be implemented by the recipient, the Union of Comoros.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/02/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Javier Suarez Cordero 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Emmanuel Akpa 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
