Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2816 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P101745 
Project Name: CONGO DRC - Pro-Routes Project 
Task Team Leader: Alain L. Labeau 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  72.00
72.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The operations's specific PDO is to reestablish lasting access to markets, and social and 
administrative services in a sustainable way for people in the area of the operation. The purpose 
of the operation is to reinforce the operational capacity of Congolese structures in charge of the 
road network, to enable the re-opening of principal road links and their continued maintenance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This operation is conceived to build on existing institutional capacities, promote low cost narrow 
width roads standards, and favor long-term maintenance over more rehabilitation.  
 
To ensure long-term sustainability through permanent institutions, the project will be managed 
and implemented through existing entities of the Ministry of Public Works and Infrastructure, 
which are the Cellule Infrastructure (CI) and the Office des Routes (OR).  
 
The operation is being designed so as to be replicated and expanded to a larger network of 
roads in DRC.  
Page  2
There are 4 components in the operation.  
 
Component 1 - Road rehabilitation and maintenance  
 
The goal is to reopen as many roads as possible within the allocated budget through appropriate 
technical choices (offering all season access yet with restricted road width and a spot 
improvement and progressive upgrade approach) and maintain roads during the duration of the 
operation. Equal emphasis will be put on rehabilitating and maintaining roads, as maintaining 
roads and sustainability will come hand in hand. The operation will focus on the high-priority 
road network.  
 
Component 2 - Institutional strengthening  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the institutions responsible for managing and 
implementing road rehabilitation and maintenance (Ministry of Public Works and Infrastructure, 
OR) and to support the creation of a Road Maintenance Fund, to ensure that rehabilitated roads 
will be maintained in the longer term.  
 
Component 3 - Social and environmental measures  
 
The objective of this component is to implement specific and concrete actions to enhance the 
positive socio-economic aspects of the operation and mitigate the potential negative social and 
environmental aspects. This component would, inter alia, help address the risks of uncontrolled 
logging and poaching associated to the re-opening of roads in post-conflict DRC, and it would 
help identify high conservation value forests and potential new protected areas in the project?s 
area.  
 
Component 4 - Road sector coordination and harmonization  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen coordination and harmonization within the 
road sector between government and donors, and among donors (initiation on a National Road 
Sector Program, elaboration of a 10-year road strategy and a 5-year investment plan, 
reinforcement of the transport sector group among donors).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will serve areas located on the high priority network.   
 
E.  Borrow
er’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower capacity for environmental and social management capacity is weak. The project seeks 
to strengthen this capacity within the roads sub-sector through the environmental and social 
management component. An expert on Environmental and Social Development will reinforce the 
?Cellule Infrastructure? to help execute the E&S component and ensure the project compliance 
with environmental and social safeguards. The social and environmental unit within the Office 
des Routes will also be strengthened.  
 
The project will help strengthen coordination with the Ministry of Environment and Forests and 
with the Congolese Institute for Nature Conservation. It will aim to foster partnerships with 
NGOs and other civil society organizations engaged in community development and nature 
conservation.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EA for the first year's works will be prepared. Uncertainties will exist until project 
implementation on the exact location of the rehabilitation and maintenance works that will take 
place for roads. An Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) will therefore be 
developed in conjunction with the EA. This ESMF will include a screening mechanism that will 
make identification of specific safeguards issues possible and will guide the preparation of 
appropriate impact management instruments.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The EA will include an overview of habitats that could be affected by the project and will 
identify potential "hot spots" that would require special consideration in planning, design and 
implementation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Improvements of Congolese roads could facilitate timber trade along some corridors, 
including illegal logging trade. Accordingly an environmental component will be developed in 
the project, in coordination with the current forestry project managed by the World Bank.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The EA will include an overview of physical cultural resources that could be affected by the 
project and will identify potential "hot spots" that would require special consideration in the 
project planning, design and implementation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An indigenous people plan will be developped and carried out during implementation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Road rehabilitation and road maintenance will likely involve resettlement of local population. 
Evaluation of the extent and location of possible resettlement issues and needs will be accurately 
identified. A resettlement action plan for the first year's works will be cleared and disclosed prior 
to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/22/2007 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be cleared and disclosed prior to Appraisal.  Environmental 
Assessments (EAs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will also be cleared and disclosed 
prior to Appraisal for first year?s works.  An Indigenous people plan will be developed and 
carried out during implementation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alain L. Labeau 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
