Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2671 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/02/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Republic of 
Project ID: P101981 
Project Name: CG-TRANSPARENCY & GOVERN. SUPPL 
Task Team Leader: Antonius Verheijen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Other accountability/anti-corruption (P);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.60
5.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to to enhance governance, transparency and effectiveness in public sector 
financial management, including the oil sector, through capacity building and financing selected 
investments in IT systems.  
 
Expected outcomes include (i) greater predictability of oil sector revenues and enhanced 
transparency in the management of the National Oil Company (SNPC); (ii) enhanced levels of 
accountability in public management through the establishment of effective anti-corruption 
structures; and (iii) improved effectiveness in budget management, through streamlined budget 
procedures, strengthened public investment planning and implementation systems, a reformed 
public procurement system, and rationalized public sector wage bill management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional grant would help finance the cost associated with: i) adding additional 
activities to scale up existing project components and financing one new sub-component, and ii) 
align the project with the implementation of the HIPC Action Plan agenda, which prioritized 
governance reforms. Additional government financing to the amount of US$ 5.60 Million will 
also be added. This would require modifications in the project development objective and of the 
Page  2
key performance indicators, the re-allocation of credit proceeds, an increase in the disbursement 
percentages (in line with the revised financing parameters for the Republic of Congo), as well as 
the amendment of financial and procurement procedures to reflect revised implementation 
responsibilities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Brazzaville   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The existing PIU has proven capacity in project implementation according to Bank procedures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/09/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Rating is 'C', thus studies would not be required.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  3
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonius Verheijen 
02/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/01/2007 
Comments:  No Safeguard specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, 
should project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social 
impacts,consult ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
02/01/2007 
Comments:   
