Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2982 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/10/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P104041 
Project Name: Enhancing Governance Capacity 
Task Team Leader: Antonius Verheijen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (50%);Sub-national government 
administration (50%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);Decentralization (P);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Other accountability/anti-
corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to: Improve the quality of governance in the DRC by; (i) 
enhancing accountability at central and provincial government level, (ii) strengthening public 
financial management and public service management at central government level; and; (iii) 
establishing functioning public financial management and public service management systems at 
the provincial government level   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed approach is to use the decentralization process as an entry point to governance 
reform, as well as a prism through which to approach central (design) and provincial 
(implementation) level efforts to strengthen the governance system reforms. The decentralization 
process is of particular importance in DRC for several reasons; (i) the transition from a unitary 
state towards a more federal system of government has been a focal point of the political 
transformation, but this change process is fraught with risks, (ii) decentralization is therefore an 
Page  2
agreed priority of the new Government (which in Africa, where decentralization is often donor-
driven, is significant); (iii) a well managed decentralization process is seen as a key condition for 
ensuring the territorial integrity and stability of the state; (iv) the process represents a microcosm 
of all other cross-cutting issues covered in the Governance Compact, in particular transparency, 
public financial management and public service reform. In addition, the process poses a 
particular risk in that, under the provisions of the Constitution, the current 11 provinces, all with 
weak capacities and poorly developed public management systems, will be split, within three 
years of the enactment of the Constitution, in 26 provinces. In order to mitigate the risks posed 
by this process of territorial-administrative reform, the development of a strategic approach to 
address capacity constraints is essential.  
 
The project will have the following three components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening public financial management and public service management at 
central government level, including establishing a functioning system of intergovernmental fiscal 
relations (US$ 13 million)  
 
Component 2: Building Public Sector and Financial Management Systems at Provincial Level 
(US$ 31 Million)  
 
Component 3: Governance reform implementation capacity (US$ 6 Million)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kinshasa, Bandundu, Sud-Kivu, Katanga, DRC   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguard policies have been triggered, but the team will take the necessary measures to 
ensure that the Government will be fully updated on possibly applicable safeguard policies, if 
such arise   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
Since the project includes only minor works, mostly refurbishment of offices to install 
equipment and generators in the provinces, a 'C' rating is currently proposed. However, should 
during the preparation process the need for additional works arise, a change of rating would be 
discussed with the safeguards coordinator   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/18/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
If studies are required, it would be desirable to have them completed by the time of the QER. 
A
decision on whether a change on the environmental assessment is needed would be sought 
after the preparation and pre-appraisal missions   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonius Verheijen 
05/10/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/10/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. 
Later, should project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social 
impacts, consult ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
05/10/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
