Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/21/2007 
Report No.:  AC2243
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Republic of 
Project ID:  P095251 
Project Name:  Agricultural Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Remi Kini 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P096485 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income 
generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The ARRP is a poverty-focused intervention that aims to increase the ability of the rural 
poor to raise their income through the generation and promotion of improved agricultural 
technologies, the provision of market infrastructure, and through the formulation and 
implementation of poverty-focused agricultural policies and expenditure programs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has four components: (i) Capacity building of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries; (ii) Rehabilitation of rural roads and market infrastructure; (iii) 
Support to productive activities and sustainable livelihoods in rural areas; and (iv) Project 
coordination and management.  A brief description of the project components is provided 
below.  
 
Component 1: Capacity building of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock 
(Total US$ 4.8 million).  
 
Page  2
The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP) in pro-poor policy formulation, budgeting 
and public expenditure management, so that it can increase the efficacy and efficiency of 
its expenditure programs.  Two types of activities are envisaged: (i) strengthening the 
basic skills of  staff in policy planning, budgeting, and implementation within MAEP, 
and (ii) strengthening of the public expenditure management system, including M&E, 
public finance management and procurement of MAEP.  
 
Technical Capacity: The project will support:  
 
?
On the job training and targeted short-term training (in-country and abroad) of 
staff in priority skills: (i) public investment planning and budgeting, (ii) procurement, and 
public financial management, and (iii) monitoring, evaluation, and expenditure tracking;  
 
?
Thematic studies to strengthen the strategic focus of policies and expenditure 
programs, including two public expenditure reviews; and  
 
?
The acquisition of offices and field equipments for selected central and regional 
operational units.  
 
Public Expenditure Management: The project will finance:  
 
?
The formulation of medium term poverty-focused sub-programs in the 
agriculture, fisheries, and livestock sub-sectors; the structure of these sub-programs will 
include (i) statement of purpose and link to the strategic priorities in poverty reduction 
strategy, (ii) the objectives, (iii) expected results, and M&E plan, and (iv) the estimated 
medium-term cost;  
 
?
The preparation of annual budgets which are consistent with the content of the 
sub-programs, and which ensure the secured transfer of appropriations to the regional 
operational units of MAEP that are responsible for service delivery to farm households 
and other rural producers;  
 
?
The creation of a procurement unit to support sound procurement practices, 
including planning of procurement, enforcement of procurement rules, and publishing 
quarterly reports of contracts costing US$20,000 and more, and carrying out independent 
procurement audits; and the strengthening of the legal and regulatory framework for 
public financial management through effective accounting and, controls and audits; and  
 
?
Performance measurement and monitoring: the strengthening of the Direction des 
Etudes et de la Planification (DEP) and the establishment of an effective system that will 
monitor and evaluate the implementation of MAEPs? expenditure programs; in order to 
enhance the result-orientation of expenditure programs and to ensure that the managers of 
the central and regional operational units focus on real progress toward the achievement 
of their respective sub-programs, the DEP will help to define output and outcome targets 
and goals for the agriculture, fisheries and livestock sub-sectors, and a small set of 
Page  3
monitoring indicators and their means of verification program.  Annual expenditure 
tracking studies and beneficiary assessments will be used to assess the performance of 
each expenditure sub-program, and the results will be reported in the MAEP?s annual 
performance report.  
 
Component 2: Rural Infrastructure and Roads Rehabilitation (US$ 18.8 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to provide and maintain reliable all-season rural road 
infrastructure that connects rural communities to markets (and other social services) so 
that they sell marketable production at remunerative prices, and buy inputs at affordable 
prices.  In order to achieve this objective the project will finance two types of activities: 
(i) the rehabilitation of rural roads, and (ii) the construction or rehabilitation of rural 
market infrastructure.  
 
Rehabilitation of Rural Roads.  The project will support the rehabilitation of about 1,300 
km (representing 10.4% of the rural roads network) in the project areas.  It will finance 
the following activities: (i) preparation of feasibility studies, including the environmental 
and social environmental assessment studies, (ii) the preparation and publication of 
bidding documents, (iii) civil works, (iv) the supervision of civil works, and (v) the 
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the environmental and social (including 
resettlement, if necessary) mitigation measures, and (vi) the monitoring and evaluation of 
maintenance activities following the rehabilitation of the selected roads.  The Road fund 
will finance the rehabilitation of the roads rehabilitated by the project.  An EU technical 
assistance project is currently helping the Government to strengthen the technical, 
managerial and financial capacity of this Fund.  It has been agreed with the Government 
that the maintenance of the project-funded roads will be included in the annual work plan 
and budget of the Road Fund.  An MOU formalizing this arrangement will be signed 
between the MAEP and METP.  
 
Rehabilitation/construction of Market Infrastructure. The project will finance: (i) 
consultant services for feasibility studies including environmental and social safeguard 
assessment; (ii) civil works; and (iii) supervision of works for the rehabilitation and/or 
construction of market infrastructure. The investments in market infrastructure will 
include: (i) the construction of two small fisheries landing and trade halls; and (ii) the 
construction/rehabilitation of community collection and storage centers, and rural 
markets for agricultural, fisheries, livestock, and non-farm products.  
 
Component 3: Support to productive investments and sustainable livelihoods in rural 
areas (US$ 8.0 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to help increase the capacity of rural producers, 
especially subsistence-oriented farmers in targeted areas to raise their productivity and 
income.  The project will achieve this objective by financing selective bundles of 
complementary activities that meet the specific needs of farmers, livestock raisers, 
fishermen and women, and non-farm producers. The typical bundle of complementary 
activities would include: (i) generation and dissemination of improved production 
Page  4
technologies and market information, (ii) capacity strengthening of producer 
organizations, and (iii) financial support to selected productive investments.  
 
Technology development and dissemination.  Agricultural production: The project will 
finance: (i) the rehabilitation and the operation of two (2) seeds/seedlings centers to 
produce foundation seeds for the promotion of a farmer-based seeds multiplication 
program, (ii) the provision of appropriate inputs to selected improved seed-growers, (iii) 
the establishment of demonstration plots to help disseminate technology packages, and 
(iv) equipment for, and training of extension workers.  Fisheries production: the project 
will finance (i) the rehabilitation of one (1) fish breeding and multiplication station; (ii) 
the development and dissemination of improved fish handling and processing techniques; 
(iii) the dissemination of improved fish farming methods, and (iv) equipment for and 
training of extension workers to provide adequate advisory services to fishermen and 
women.  Livestock production: The project will finance (i) equipment for, and the 
training of extension workers for the provision of advisory services in animal health, and 
improved animal husbandry practices to producers.  The project will finance the 
establishment of a pilot crop market information system (MIS) to collect, process, and 
disseminate information (through media, radio, other means) on production quantities, 
prices, and spatial distribution of marketable surpluses in three of the eight regions 
covered by the project (Bouenza, Niari, and Plateaux).  The resulting reduced search and 
transaction costs will benefit for both traders and producers.  
 
Capacity building of producer and community organizations.. Producer associations and 
community organizations will play a crucial role in the implementation of this 
component, as the project will use them to channel resources to the beneficiaries.  The 
project will help to strengthen the relevance and effectiveness of the developmental role 
and the capacity of these producer and community-based organizations in the following 
ways: (i) using them as the conduit through which capacity building activities and grant 
resources for productive investments will be delivered, and (ii) empowering them 
economically by helping them to establish savings and credits schemes, and accessing 
micro-finance services that will allow members to invest in a range of income generating 
activities during and after the project.  
 
Financial support for productive investments.  The resources channeled through the 
producer and community organizations will help finance matching grants for income 
generating activities in the following core activities:  
 
Support to agricultural development activities would include (but not limited to):  
 
?
Technology package including improved seeds, inputs, and tools to be provided to 
small groups of 5-6 seed-growers to be selected on the basis of their ability, the quality of 
their land, their land use pattern, and the importance of the particular crop in the 
surrounding area;  
 
Page  5
?
Technology package including tools and improved farming practices to upgrade 
current farming practices, and help farmers to adopt and replicate demonstration sites 
technologies; and  
 
?
Small-scale irrigation infrastructure for the production of vegetables (including in 
peri-urban areas) and other crops.  
 
Support to fisheries and aquaculture production:  
 
?
Technology package including tools (e.g., recommended nets and other fishing 
gear), equipment for post capture handling and storage;  
 
?
Repair shops and spare parts for fishing gear; and  
 
?
Pond excavation, stocking and initial feed (aquaculture for groups of fishermen or 
women).  
 
Support to livestock production: the project will finance a community-based mechanism 
for distributing goats and sheep to qualifying households who would have to donate two 
of the offspring to other households within a given period.  
 
The process and methods for micro-project identification, preparation, procedures for 
their selection, mechanisms for disbursing funds, the implementation and monitoring 
arrangements, and a list of non-eligible investments will be detailed in the project 
implementation manual (PIM).  Beneficiary contributions will vary according to the type 
and/or total cost of the proposed micro-project(s) as shown in the table below).  
 
Activity type Maximum  
 
amount  
Beneficiary  
 
contribution  Estimated number  
 
of
micro-projects 
Estimated number  
 
of
beneficiaries  
 
Production US$5000 
5% 
570-700 
6200-7700 
 
 
Conservation/processing US$10000 10% 70-120 
1400-2400 
 
 
Market infrastructure 
US$20000 
15% 
TBD 
TBD  
 
Component 4: Project coordination and management (US$ 4.7 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to ensure the effective management and coordination 
of the project activities.  A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) placed within MAEP will 
ensure that the project activities are executed with efficacy and efficiency.  The PCU will 
establish four regional implementation support units to support and coordinate field 
operations.  The PCU will prepare and consolidate the work programs, the annual 
budgets and the statements of results.  It will ensure the timely deliver of inputs to all the 
Page  6
operational units, and manage the project resources in a transparent and efficient manner 
by using sound financial management and procurement procedures.  Details of the 
financial management and procurement systems are described in annex 7 and 8 
respectively.  The PCU will put in place an effective monitoring and evaluation system 
that will help to adjust implementation when needed, and to track the performance of the 
project through timely periodic reports.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the following regions (d?partements): Bouenza, 
Cuvette, Kouilou, L?koumou, Niari, Plateau, Pool and Sangha; and in the vicinity of 
Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire.  Implementation responsibility for the project rests with the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP).  MEAP will entrust a 
dedicated unit with the responsibility to coordinate the implementation of the project 
activities.  Overall guidance to this Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be provided by 
a
multi-sectoral Steering Committee (SC) chaired by MAEP.  The SC will also oversee 
the operations of the PCU.  Details on the operating procedures are spelled out in the 
Implementation Manual.  
 
The activities of the project are: (i) Capacity Building for the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries,(ii) Rural Infrastructure and Roads Rehabilitation, and (iii) 
Support to Productive Activities and Rural Livelihoods.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is not expected to have large scale impacts. It will have limited 
environmental and social impacts related to some subprojects, such as the rehabilitation 
Page  7
of rural roads, and the rehabilitation/construction of community storage facilities, and 
rural markets.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed project is not expected to generate significant adverse environmental and 
social impacts.  However, the nature of some of the planned investments (e.g., rural roads 
rehabilitation, productive investment sub-projects) may generate undesirable 
environmental and social impacts. Because some of these impacts cannot be clearly 
identified at this stage, the borrower prepared an environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF), and a resettlement policy framework (RPF) that provide the general 
guidelines for dealing with these impacts when they emerge during the implementation 
phase.  These guidelines recommend the screening, and if necessary, the preparation of 
detailed environmental and social assessment of the sub-projects before any funding 
agreement is signed with the beneficiaries.  Similarly, a resettlement action plan would be 
prepared and agreed upon by all affected parties and the Government before any works 
start.  In addition to the ESMF and the RPF, the Borrower prepared an integrated pest 
management plan (IPMP) in order to ensure the safe handling and utilization of 
pesticides.The environmental and social safeguard policies that the proposed project 
triggered are presented in the table below.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Pest Management Framework 
(PMF) to identify and mitigate potential negative environmental and social impacts of 
future sub-projects.  
 
1) The Environmental and Social Management Framework provides the project with 
due analysis, recommendations and operative guidance to prevent the environmental 
impacts, and to mitigate them if prevention is not possible. It includes: (i) a clear 
description of project components; (ii) a brief baseline information pertaining to policy, 
legal, and administrative and institutional framework, within which the project is to be 
implemented; (iii) an analysis of potential positive and negative impacts; (iv) an 
environmental management plan (EMP) with clear institutional arrangements, roles and 
responsibilities for screening, implementing and monitoring sub-projects, along with their 
capacity building requirements to effectively mitigate project negative impacts, as well as 
enhance its positive ones; (v) a monitoring plan and (vi) a budget to cover the EMP.  
 
2) The RPF outlines the policies and procedures to be followed in the event that sub-
projects require land acquisition, or affect private property.  
 
Page  8
3) The PMF provides information supplementary to the ESMF and the RPF. It describes 
the appropriate measures that ADRRP will take in order to ensure that: (i) the health and 
occupational safety of farmers and their families is protected, and (ii) the protection of 
environment (soil, water, fauna, flora) from unnecessary pollution.  
 
All subprojects will have to complete an environmental and social evaluation form, 
which will be part of the subproject application. Based on the environmental analysis 
conducted during project preparation, it appears that the most requested subprojects 
would be classified in the environmental and social categories B (moderate risk) or C (no 
risk). To prevent or mitigate these risks, some mitigating measures have been proposed in 
the Environmental and Social Management Framework. These measures will be taken 
into consideration at 3 levels: (i) during preparation of subproject applications, (ii) during 
the monitoring of the subproject execution; and (iii) throughout the whole Project's 
management. For subprojects classified in the category A, an environmental impact study 
would be conducted, but this type of project is unlikely under the Project.  
 
A
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) established under the Minister of Agriculture, 
Livestocks and Fisheries (MAEP) will have the responsibility for implementing the 
Project. The PCU will be in charge of the quality control of the environmental and social 
dimensions of subprojects, through support to provincial and local actors in terms of 
monitoring of environmental and social analyses, of control of the implementation of 
prevention and mitigation measures and the review of environmental and social aspects in 
the monitoring and evaluation system of ADRRP. Adequate provision of financial 
resources to ensure the execution of these activities are made in the project financing 
plan.  
 
Furthermore, the Project will contract an environmental consultant who will:  (i) prepare 
and disseminate guides and other tools for environmental evaluation of micro projects 
and to set up prevention and mitigation measures for negative impacts; (ii) verify in the 
field environmental aspects of the ADRRP and if necessary recommend improvements; 
and (iii) prepare curricula and materials necessary for the training of beneficiaries and 
relevant project staff in the management of the environment effects of sub-projects.  
 
Finally, the regional offices of the Ministry of Forestry Economy and Environment 
(MFEE) will monitor and control the implementation of the environmental and social 
mitigation measures on the project sites.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Forest Economy and Environment, the Ministry 
of Finance, the Ministry of Public Works and Equipment, beneficiaries and NGOs. 
Consultations were conducted by the teams in charge of the preparation of the safeguards 
documents. They occurred from August until end of September 2006 and included field 
visits and meetings with local authorities, local NGOs, and technical services; (ii) 
meetings with specialized associations, and public services. The ESMF, RPF and PMF 
were disclosed at Infoshop and in Republic of Congo via newspaper.   
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/20/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/20/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  10
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Remi Kini 
02/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
02/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
02/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francois G. Le Gall 
02/20/2007 
Comments:   
