Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2032 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/03/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P091092 
Project Name: Urban Water Supply Project 
Task Team Leader: Franck Bousquet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (90%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s objective is to increase access to potable water in selected urban areas in a 
sustainable manner. The principal outcomes (to be quantified during project preparation) are: (i) 
increased access through household water connections; (ii) more financially viable water utility; 
and (iii) increased hours of water availability in project areas.  
 
The proposed project will directly contribute to the MDGs: particularly MDG7 which aims to 
halve by 2015 the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. In this 
respect it is estimated that approximately 3 million of urban residents will gain access to safe 
water as a result of the proposed Project . The project will also contribute to: MDG1 (quality of 
life), MDG3 (promote gender equality and empowering women), MDG4 (reduce child 
mortality), MDG5 (improve maternal health), and MDG6 (Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other 
diseases).  
 
The primary targeted groups are urban residents including the poor who are currently not served 
by the national water utility and thus have no direct access to safe drinking water. Poor 
Page  2
households will especially be targeted through the implementation of standpipes or 
neighborhood-based provisions. Transparent private management of the standpipes and social 
intermediation to empower local residents to be active in water management will also be 
enhanced.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The lending instrument is a Sector Investment Loan (SIL), with  proposed IDA funding of US$ 
100 million and parallel financing from AFD of approximately US$30 million. The total Project 
cost amounts to US$130 million.  
 
The proposed Project comprises the following two components:  
 
Component 1. Urban Water Supply (US$ 90 million). This component will focus on 
rehabilitating and reconstructing water treatment plants, improving the distribution network and 
financing connections to the distribution systems. Periodic technical audits will be included 
under this component. A preparatory study, to be financed under a PPF, will determine the 
priority works taking into account feasibility studies already available (financed under the EMRP 
IDA-funded Project) while at the same time ensuring  that the selected works provide the 
maximum impact in terms of water access. Based on the priority list of works, the study will 
determine the cities proposed for inclusion into the project, and this will be validated by the 
Government during a workshop to be held before appraisal.  
 
Component 2. Support to Sector Reform, Capacity Building, and Governance (US$10 Million). 
This component will comprise the following sub-components:  
 
(a) 
Support to Sector Reform. This component will help the Government define in detail the 
road map for the water sector reform. This support has been initiated under various donor 
projects such as KfW and the EU and under the preparation of the proposed Project. This sub-
component will finance studies on strategy development, including a review of the water code. 
Options for public-private partnerships (PPP) to improve utility performance on a pilot basis and 
in selected cities, will be developed during project preparation through two studies: the first 
funded by the CDSP providing a diagnostic of Regideso, and the second proposed for funding by 
PPIAF which will provide an action plan for the implementation of Private Sector Participation 
in the DRC water sector. These studies will also determine the specific cities where such PPP 
arrangements could be contemplated from public and private perspectives. The options for 
Private Sector Participation (PSP) will be selected during many workshops with the main 
stakeholders (Government, NGOs, civil society, private sector, etc.). In addition, communication 
programs will be implemented in order to: (i) guarantee a better understanding of the 
improvements intended by the reform by civil society and the main stakeholders; (ii) promote a 
dialogue with key stakeholders to achieve consensus-building needed for the reform; and (iii) 
enable the social environment to facilitate payment for water use. In coordination with the 
Ministry of Environment (and specifically its National Sanitation Department), the project will 
also finance studies aiming at defining a clear strategy in sanitation in selected cities under the 
proposed project (except in Kinshasa where such a study was financed under the EMRP).  
 
Page  3
(b) 
Capacity Building to the Ministry of Energy and Regideso. The project will include 
capacity building support to: (i) the Ministry of Energy (the line Ministry in charge of water) in 
regulating and monitoring the management contract and devising an appropriate tariff policy; 
and (ii) Regideso to strengthen its capacity in technical, commercial and financial operations.  
 
(c) 
Improving governance. Focus will be placed on improving external accountability of the 
national water utility, including exploring the possibility of setting up a specific committee 
(gathering va
rious stakeholders) to oversee and monitor Regideso’s degree of compliance with 
performance targets established for transparency and accountability purposes. Communication 
programs will be implemented to improve the water supply services by focusing on the integrity 
and credibility of institutions in charge of delivering these services. This sub-component will 
also aim to improve transparency of the overall reform, especially those aspects related to the 
payments for water use, which currently affects the water utility business. Specific attention will 
be paid to contract(s) to be entered with private operator(s) (in which a detailed procurement 
process will be spelled out and a committee will be set up to oversee this contract).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Urban areas to be determined by project preparation studies.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity in addressing safeguards issues will be further assessed, 
and the preparati
on
unit  will receive needed guidance from the Bank’s safeguards specialists on 
the project team. An Environmental and Social Specialist will be part of the project executing 
agency which has gained experience in this area through other IDA funded projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not anticipated to cause any irreversible damage to the environment, or to 
forcibly displace beneficiaries from their land. However, infrastructure upgrading and civil 
works like rehabilitating and constructing water treatment plants and improving distribution 
network have the propensity to generate potential site specific environmental and social impacts. 
As the sites and networks to be rehabilitated are not identified at this stage, the borrower will 
prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will be 
disclosed in the selected urban areas and the Bank’s InfoShop prior to project appraisal.  During 
implementation, the screening checklist of the ESMF will determine if a sub-project specific 
Environmental Analysis (EA) or Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is required, and will 
be prepared accordingly.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The water infrastructure sub-projects are not expected to lead to new land acquisition or 
significant restriction of access to sources of livelihood. However, there is a possibility that a 
participating city will request assistance in expanding its distribution network which might lead 
to involuntary resettlement and/or land acquisition. Therefore the borrower will prepare a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which will be disclosed as a free-standing document 
along with the ESMF, prior to project appraisal. During implementation, a land acquisition 
assessment will be carried out for each sub-project to determine whether land will be acquired or 
people displaced, and whether a sub-project specific Resettlement Action Pl
an (RAP) is required.  
The screening checklist of the ESMF will also be used to determine if a sub-project specific RAP 
is required, and will be prepared accordingly.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Draft terms of reference for the ESMF, RPF and Social Assessment will be finalized by the 
end of March 2006. The assessments will be completed and disclosed before project 
appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Franck Bousquet 
02/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
02/28/2006 
Comments:   
