Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1673 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/22/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Republic of 
Project ID: P095251 
Project Name: Agricultural Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Remi Kini 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P096485 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 23, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income 
generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to help increase the income, and to 
improve the living standards of the rural population by promoting strongly the diversification 
and growth of economic activities in rural areas.  In order to achieve this objective, the proposed 
project will support the Government's efforts in several priority areas identified in the rural 
development strategy, the Agriculture Policy Note and in the TSS.  More specifically, the project 
aims to: (i) strengthen the Government's capacity in sector management including programming, 
policy analysis, performance-enhancing regulations, and provision of other public goods 
necessary for sustained investment and growth in the agricultural sector.; (ii) rehabilitate the 
agricultural production capacity of producers by developing and disseminating productivity-
enhancing technologies in crops, horticulture, fisheries, livestock, and agro-processing; (iii) 
improve producers access to markets through the rehabilitation and expansion of rural 
infrastructure; and (iv) develop tools for sustainable fisheries management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
3. 
The proposed project will be implemented over four years.  The proposed project consists 
of the following four components:  
 
(i) 
Capacity-building for improved agricultural sector management. Activities undertaken 
will include: (a) formulating and implementing  the regional agricultural development programs 
in order to exploit the comparative advantage of each targeted region of the country'; (b) 
promoting the creation of producer organizations and support such organizations to take 
advantages of new economic opportunities in production, processing and/or marketing; (c) 
facilitating access to agricultural inputs and livestock and fisheries technologies and farmer 
advisory services, including technology development and dissemination; and (d) supporting the 
establishment of a Private Sector Development Facility to mobilize private sector initiatives, 
including post harvest value adding initiative and promote supply chain development that will 
benefit smallholder farmers.  
 
(ii) 
Market-oriented diversification of production and market development and access.  
Activities will include (a) rehabilitating rural and feeder roads and waterways; (b) supporting the 
development of collection and storage centers for agricultural and fisheries products; (c) 
supporting the development of food conditioning and processing units, including fish processing 
technologies; (d) developing and/or improving market infrastructure, including market 
infrastructure for small-scale fisheries; (e) supporting the department responsible for agricultural 
marketing to improve its market information collection and dissemination systems to benefit 
marketing activities of producers; and (f) establishing food safety standards and guidelines 
environmental protection.  
 
(iii) 
Sustainable management of fisheries (GEF co-funding).  Using the ecosystem approach 
that recognizes explicitly the interdependence between human well-being and the health of 
marine and freshwater ecosystems, and the need to maintain the productivity of fisheries, the 
activities will focus on developing the tools for ensuring the sustainable management of fisheries 
resources.  These tools aim at (a) controlling the pollution and degradation of aquatic 
ecosystems; (b) minimizing waste and maintaining the reproductive capacity of the fisheries by 
controlling fishing capacity (input-based and output-based capacity); (c) eliminating or 
minimizing conflicts resulting from the multiple use of the marine ecosystems; (d) conserving 
critical coastal, marine and freshwater ecosystems; and (e) protecting endangered species.  This 
component will develop four main tools for sustainable fisheries management:  
 
??? 
A regulatory framework: preparing implementation decrees of the Marine fisheries Law, 
and of the Freshwater Fisheries Law, and establishing an effective monitoring, control and 
surveillance system;  
 
??? 
Designing and implementing management plans for freshwater and marine fisheries;  
 
??? 
Designing and implementing a public-private (Government and oil industry) plan for the 
prevention of marine pollution; and;  
 
??? 
Establishing or expanding one or two area(s) for conservation and sustainableuse of 
biological diversity of coastal, marine and/or inland water ecosystems.  
Page  3
(iv) 
Project coordination and M&E.  Activities will include: (a) data collection/analysis and 
establishment of baseline against which project performance will be assessed, (b) preparation 
and implementation of annual work plans, (c) preparation of periodic progress and 
implementation reports, (d) monitoring and evaluation of project activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented throughout the Republic of Congo.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of the Republic of Congo is familiar with the Banks Safeguard Policies, based 
on experience with other Bank funded projects in different sectors: (i) the Support to Basic 
Education Project , (ii) the Emergency Rehabilitation, Reconstruction Project; and (iii) the 
Emergency Recovery and Community Support Project. A grant from the Government of Japan 
(PHRD) is being requested that will ensure the completion of the required safeguards work and 
instruments, and the timely preparation of all safeguard documents. In particular, the 
Government, intends to apply part of these funds towards eligible payments to meet the cost of 
preparing the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) and the Pest Management Plan (PMP). The Ministry of Forest 
Economics and Environment will oversee the preparation of the safeguards work and associated 
documents, and will monitor the implementation of the recommended mitigation measures 
during project implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) has been triggered because of the potential 
adverse impacts of infrastructure development (i.e., rural roads, and other market infrastructure.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project sites and specific investment plans are not yet defined.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The Pest Management (OP 4.09) has been triggered because of the intensification of 
agricultural production may lead to increased use of pesticide.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The BP 4.12 may be triggered because of the rural roads, and other market infrastructures to 
be realized during the implementation of the project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The project sites are not yet defined.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
The proposed operation may trigger at least three safeguard policies: (i) Environmental 
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) because of the potential adverse impacts of infrastructure development 
(i.e., rural roads, and other market infrastructure), (ii) Pest Management (OP 4.09) because the 
intensification of agricultural production may lead to increased use of pesticide; and (iii) 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific 
studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. The Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared, approved and disclosed in the Republic of 
Congo by the Government and sent to the Bank for disclosure at the InfoShop by November 
2006. The safeguards responsibility for the proposed project will be transferred to the Sector 
Unit (i.e., AFTS3) with review and clearance by the Sector Manager.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Remi Kini 
11/22/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/22/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francois G. Le Gall 
11/22/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
