Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  52775 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/28/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P092724 
Project Name: DRC - Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery Support 
Task Team Leader: Nicolas Ahouissoussi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 8, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 23, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (48%);Agricultural extension and research (40%);Animal production 
(7%);Irrigation and drainage (5%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (47%);Other rural development (45%);Rural 
markets (5%);Rural non-farm income generation (3%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the proposed Project are to (i) increase agricultural productivity 
(crop, livestock and fisheries production) - in a sustainable manner and (ii) improve farmers 
access to domestic markets.  
 
The development objectives would be monitored through the following key performance 
indicators (KPIs): (i) increased use by farmers of improved technologies including planting 
materials and other modern agricultural inputs; (ii) increased production of targeted crops, 
fisheries, and livestock; (iii) number and length of rehabilitated and newly constructed rural 
roads or inland waterways and other rural infrastructure; (iv) increased public and private sector 
service delivery.  These KPIs will be firmed up during Project preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve the Projects development objectives, the proposed will support four components: (i) 
Rural Infrastructure Development; (ii) Agricultural Productivity Enhancing, (iii) Capacity 
Building; and (iv) Project Implementation Support.  
Page  2
Component I: Rural Infrastructure Development will provide funding for two main types of 
infrastructure development (i) roads and (ii) market infrastructure.  The rehabilitation of road 
networks is critical to open up markets and foster agricultural production. Given the lack of 
significant national road networks, this rehabilitation and construction process should focus, in 
the short-term, on rural road networks and related civil works within and among the targeted 
provinces of this Project.  This proposed Project will engage in interconnecting the 
constructed/rehabilitated routes as a logical next step as well as address the issue of road 
maintenance.  Finally, to begin to explore opportunities for market-oriented growth, logistical 
support facilities will also need to be developed.  This sub-component will therefore support 
construction and/or repairs to grain/produce storage facilities and physical market places in 
targeted areas.  
 
Component II: Agricultural Productivity Enhancing aims at disseminating improved crop and 
animal husbandry practices to smallholders.  Activities undertaken will (a) support/strengthen 
adaptive research for technology development and dissemination activities, including farmer 
advisory services; and (b) support access to agricultural inputs and livestock and fisheries 
technologies and services, for example through seed multiplication and animal breeding 
activities.  It is envisioned that a scaling-up of the seed multiplication scheme under the EMRRP 
will be undertaken.In addition, both this and the capacity building sub-components will provide 
support for basic tool and equipment acquisition. During project preparation this will be further 
identified.  
 
Component III: Capacity Building aims at revamping agricultural institutions and equipping 
them with material and human resources congruent with the importance of the overall economy; 
this component will basically support the Ministry of Agriculture and producer organizations by: 
(a) beefing up the departments in charge of programming and execution of public expenditures, 
and research; (b) strengthening the department in charge of monitoring and evaluation by 
developing/strengthening information and M&E systems to help monitor the sector activities;  
(c) assistance will also be provided to undertake a staffing and functional review of the ministry 
that would lead to recommendations for a comprehensive human resource development plan and 
possible restructuring of the ministry; and (d) support to strengthening producer and community 
organizations' capacities for planning, budgeting, and management and basic information 
systems of these organizations.  
 
Component IV: Project Implementation Support aims at ensuring compliance with legal and 
fiduciary Project requirements. The component will support activities that address financial 
management, accounting, audits, project development, implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation, project management, information system, design and supervision of works, and 
operation logistics. During Project preparation, alternative implementation arrangements will be 
considered, including using the existing EMRRP (BCECO).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented throughout the Democratic Republic of Congo.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo is familiar with the Bank's Safeguard 
Policies, based on experience with other Bank funded projects in different sectors. The most 
recent are: the HIV/AIDS Project, and the Multisector Emergency Reconstruction & 
Rehabilitation Project. A Project Preparation Funds from the World Bank is being requested that 
will ensure the completion of the required safeguards work and instruments, and the timely 
preparation of all safeguard documents. In particular, the Government therefore, intends to use 
part of these funds towards eligible payments to meet the cost of preparing the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the 
Pest Management Plan (PMP), if required. The Ministry of Agriculture will oversee the 
preparation of the safeguards work and associated documents, and will monitor the 
implementation of the recommended mitigation measures during project implementation.  
 
The proposed operation may trigger at least three safeguard policies: (i)the Environmental 
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) because of the potential adverse impacts of infrastructure development 
(i.e., rural roads, and other market infrastructure), (ii) Pest Management (OP 4.09) because the 
intensification of agricultural production may lead to increased use of pesticide; and (iii) 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) has been triggered because of the potential 
adverse impacts of infrastructure development (i.e., rural roads, and other market infrastructure)   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project sites and specific investment plans are not yet defined.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project sites and specific investment plans are not yet defined.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The Pest Management (OP 4.09) has been triggered because of the intensification of 
agricultural production may lead to increased use of pesticide.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
This safeguard policy will be determined during the preparation process due to the fact that 
the project implementation areas are not yet definied as well as the specific investment plans.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
This safeguard policy will be determined during the preparation process due to the fact that 
the project implementation areas are not yet definied as well as the specific investment plans.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The BP 4.12 may be triggered because of the rural roads, and other market infrastructures to 
be realized during the implementation of the project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The specific investment plans are not yet definied.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The project sites are not yet defined.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
The project sites are not yet defined.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) and the Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared, approved and 
disclosed in the Democratic Republic of Congo by the Government and sent to the Bank for 
disclosure at the Info Shop by May, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nicolas Ahouissoussi 
07/27/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/27/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francois G. Le Gall 
07/27/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
