Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2804 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P104497 
Project Name: Emergency Urban and Social Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Xavier Devictor 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Payment systems, securities clearance and settlement (30%);Health (20%);Roads 
and highways (20%);Sanitation (20%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to help DRC face urgent post-elections challenges by: (i) 
providing resources to maintain macro-economic stability and fund critical expenditures in the 
immediate future; and (ii) addressing urgent rehabilitation and social needs in Kinshasa, which is 
key to political and social stability.  This is expected to help create an environment in which 
reforms can be sustained and to prevent political and economic regression which may otherwise 
result in social instability, civil unrest and possibly reversion to conflict.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will include five components as follows:  
 
Two components aimed at supporting the new Government in maintaining macro-economic 
stability and in funding critical expenditures in the crucial period between the time of its 
appointment and the moment where traditional budget support can be provided.  In line with 
OP8.00, these components finance targeted expenditures, which were selected on the basis of 
their expected impact and the possibility to adequately manage the corresponding fiduciary risks.  
 
Page  2
Component 1 (US$45 million): Support of primary education through finance of selected 
recurrent expenditures.  This component would finance selected recurrent, non-salary 
expenditure throughout the country for an amount of about US$8 million per quarter between 
Project effectiveness and the completion of the 2007-08 school year (at which point these costs 
would be financed by the Government's own resources, possibly with support of already 
identified donor resource).  This is expected to test and launch an effort that will eventually 
result in a reduction of school fees paid by the parents.  
 
Component 2 (US$50 million): Completion of the domestic debt settlement.  This component 
would finance the completion of a Bank-supported process for settling the debt accrued by the 
Government to its domestic suppliers during the years of war and instability.  This is expected to 
contribute to improving the investment climate (by signaling the new authorities' commitment to 
doing business in a responsible manner) and to injecting resources likely to increase the available 
working capital for private sector activities.  
 
Three components aimed at addressing urgent rehabilitation and social needs in the city of 
Kinshasa.  Activities financed under this component were selected on the basis of the provincial 
PRSP for Kinshasa and through extensive consultations.  The selection was based on three 
criteria: (i) their expected impact on living conditions in DRC's capital city; (ii) the likelihood 
that they could be implemented relatively rapidly (i.e. relatively simple design, existence or easy 
availability of technical studies where necessary, successful experience in implementing similar 
activities under earlier Bank-financed operations); and (iii) their complementarity with other 
Bank- or donor-funded operations (to avoid overlaps).  
 
Component 3 (US$42 million): Rehabilitation of priority urban roads in Kinshasa.  This 
component would finance the in-depth rehabilitation of about 50km of access roads to poor 
neighborhoods.  This is expected to restore or significantly improve accessibility by vehicle to 
parts of the city where an estimated 1.4 million people live.  
 
Component 4 (US$25 million): Water and sanitation in peri-urban areas of Kinshasa.  This 
component would finance the expansion of the distribution network from the recently-
rehabilitated water treatment plant of Lukaya (in the Western part of Kinshasa) and poor 
neighborhoods.  This is expected to provide access to clean water to about 270,000 people who 
currently rely on improper sources of supply.  
 
Component 5 (US$13 million): Malaria reduction and prevention in Kinshasa.  This component 
would finance the distribution of 2 long-lasting insecticidal nets per household in Kinshasa 
(about 2 million in total), as a means to reducing malaria-related infant mortality.  Available 
studies suggest that this could prevent an estimated 30,000 deaths among under-five children 
over the life of the Project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be carried out throughout the Democratic Republic of Congo. Components 1 
and 2 will benefit entities across the entire country, while Components 3, 4, and 5 will be 
implemented in Kinshasa.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's capacity for environmental and social management remains a challenge. An 
environmental consulting firm will therefore work in close coordination with the project 
implementing agency to manage and oversee this process, while providing institutional 
strengthening and on-the-job training services throughout the life of the project. The consulting 
firm would also work closely with the implementing agency to develop procedures to improve 
subproject quality and sustainability through compliance with Safeguards, while at the same 
time, being time and cost-efficient, so as to facilitate subproject planning, approval and 
implementation.  
 
Experience under some earlier Bank-financed projects has been overall satisfactory with the 
Borrower taking the necessary steps to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Activities financed under Component 3 and 4 are expected to include some rehabilitation 
activities.  Activities under Component 3 are expected to focus on the repair of existing 
infrastructure (rather than new construction).  Activities under Component 4 are expected to 
include the construction of a new water distribution network. Accordingly, an Environmental and 
Social Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Activities financed under Component 3 and 4 may require the resettlement/compensation of 
limited groups of people. Accordingly, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/30/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An ESSAF has been prepared.  An ESMF and RPF will be prepared within 6 months of 
effectiveness.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Xavier Devictor 
03/05/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/05/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
03/05/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
