Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/08/2007 
Report No.:  AC2744
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Republic of 
Project ID:  P101981 
Project Name:  CG-TRANSPARENCY & GOVERN. SUPPL 
Task Team Leader:  Antonius Verheijen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Other accountability/anti-corruption (P);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.60
5.60 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to enhance governance, transparency and effectiveness in public sector 
financial management, including the oil sector, through capacity building and financing 
selected investments in IT systems.  
 
Expected outcomes include (i) greater predictability of oil sector revenues and enhanced 
transparency in the management of the National Oil Company (SNPC); (ii) enhanced 
levels of accountability in public management through the establishment of effective anti-
corruption structures; and (iii) improved effectiveness in budget management, through 
streamlined budget procedures, strengthened public investment planning and 
implementation systems, a reformed public procurement system, and rationalized public 
sector wage bill management.   
 
3. Project Description 
In view of the Bank's over-arching objective to support the Government in meeting the 
conditions under the HIPC Action Plan, the following structure for the project has been 
agreed with the Government:  
 
Page  2
a. 
Enhancing transparency in Oil sector governance, which would ensure continuity 
in the oil revenue audit and certification process, but also support important new 
initiatives, such as the adherence of the Government to the EITI initiative.  
 
b. 
Strengthening public sector governance component with the following four sub-
components:  
 
.
Supporting the Government in its efforts to reduce corruption, mainly by 
providing assistance to the Government Commission on anti-Corruption and the 
independent anti-corruption 'observatory'. This includes funding part of the operational 
cost of the observatory, as well as relevant studies and monitoring activities, and support 
to the government in the implementation of the anti-corruption action plan;  
 
.
Implementing Public financial management reform, including the reform of 
budget management processes, organizational reform and restructuring of the Ministries 
of Finance and Public Administration and the development of training capacity at the 
new training center of the Ministry of Finance;  
 
.
Computerization of the public financial management process, including modules 
related to the budget design and execution process, rationalization of personnel and wage 
databases and a procurement tracking system. This element of the project is based on 
detailed design work that has already been undertaken under the first phase of the 
PRCTG.  
 
.
Public Investment Planning and procurement reform, which includes both 
capacity building and support to reform design and implementation  
 
c. 
Support to Project Management and monitoring of Governance reform, which 
includes enhancing capacity in the existing implementation unit.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Brazzaville  
 
The project will include support for IT system development, the reinforcement of 
existing LAN and a wireless data transmission system between customs posts. None of 
these will necessitate major rehabilitation of buildings   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No safeguard policies were triggered   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N.A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The existing PIU has proven capacity in project implementation according to Bank 
procedures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N.A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonius Verheijen 
02/07/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/07/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
02/08/2007 
Comments:   
