Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2622 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/30/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P100620 
Project Name: Forest and Environment Sector Project 
Task Team Leader: Laurent Debroux 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 14, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 10, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (60%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Biodiversity 
(S);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Indigenous peoples (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The higher level objective to which the project will contribute is: to improve the livelihoods of 
forest-dependent people, to increase forest?s contribution to shared growth, and to protect the 
natural resource-base and the environment  
 
The project?s specific development objective is: to enable public institutions and civil society to 
implement, enforce and monitor sector governance reforms and the innovations of the forest 
code.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve the PDO, the proposed project would include 4 components aimed at helping 
implement reforms on key areas of governance. These components would combine institutional 
capacity building, technical assistance, and support to local initiatives. Given the resources 
available and the limited capacities, the project design will have to be selective, and to focus on 
Page  2
critical functions and reforms. The likely sub-components and areas of intervention of the project 
are listed below:  
 
Component 1 ? Sustainable Forest Management  
 
?
Review and monitoring of forest management plans  
 
?
Tax collection enhancement  
 
?
Third-party forest monitoring, log tracking system  
 
Component 2 ? Local Livelihoods and Community Development  
 
?
Monitoring of poverty-oriented reforms (cahier des charges, sharing of revenues)  
 
?
Support to community forests and community reserves  
 
?
Support for indigenous peoples? equal access to innovations of the code  
 
?
Support to small scale family (timber/non-timber based) enterprises  
 
?
Fuel-wood management in savannas and highlands  
 
Component 3 ? Biodiversity and Environmental Services  
 
?
Promotion of environmental services and innovative forest uses  
 
?
Biodiversity conservation, protected areas  
 
?
Monitoring of the program?s socio-environmental management plan  
 
Component 4 ? Transversal Supports  
 
?
Participatory multi-purpose land use planning/Local consultations  
 
?
Outreach, vulgarization of the forest code, and consultations on decrees  
 
?
Administrative and financial management, planning and monitoring-evaluation  
 
?
Rehabilitation of forest/ICCN field offices and teams in selected areas  
 
The project would support a national sector-wide program. A draft Forest and Nature 
Conservation Sector Program (PNFoCo) was prepared by the Ministry of Environment and the 
Institute for Nature Conservation in 2003. This framework document will be finalized in a 
participatory manner in parallel with the preparation of the IDA project.  
 
The project will be articulated with other donors? interventions, and will contribute to donors? 
harmonization. A donor thematic group is animated by FAO and the European Commission, and 
a
multi-donor partnership agreement will be developed.  Measures will be taken to make sure 
that donors will adopt and apply Bank?s safeguard requirements where and as needed.  
 
The proposed operation would constitute the central piece of a package of Bank assistance to 
the sector, which includes a Forest sector review completed in partnership with research centers 
and national and international NGOs, support to governance reforms through the Transitional 
Support for Economic Recovery (TSERO), a GEF grant for national parks ($7 million), and a 
possible a Bio-Carbon Purchase Agreement for a carbon sink/afforestation program ($4 million). 
It would also complement a Bank-administered multi-donor trust fund for forest governance.  
 
This project would be implemented through the Ministry of Environment and ICCN, with the 
view to promote ownership by the technical institutions, and with an emphasis on enhancing 
their own administrative and financial management capacity. As much as possible, planning, 
administration, and monitoring-evaluation would follow and improve the country systems.  
 
Page  3
Institutional support will be a key dimension of the project. However, the way this support is 
delivered will have to adjust to the overall collapse of institutions in the country. Also, the 
current level of salary and incentive framework for civil servants is discouraging. The project 
will coordinate with other reconstruction strategies and other sector projects to address these 
issues. Most equipment, training, and technical assistance would be combined in packages 
focusing on specific missions of the institutions and/or on outcomes expected from the project 
(as opposed to capacity building being an end in itself, and being isolated from other outcomes 
of the project).  
 
Activities related to community development and local livelihoods (especially components 2) 
would be subcontracted or entrusted to specialized implementing agencies, such as NGOs, FAO 
or others. Experience will be drawn from Community Driven Development operations in the 
region.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented throughout the Democratic Republic of Congo. The project 
however will not be able to cover the entire country with the same intensity. While some 
activities are nationwide by nature, others will focus on selected/pilot areas. These regions will 
be determined during project preparation or through the annual planning process during project 
implementation.   
 
E.  Borrow
er’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo is familiar with the Bank?s Safeguard 
Policies, based on experience with other Bank funded projects in different sectors. An IDA 
Project Preparation Facility is being requested that will ensure the timely completion of the 
required safeguards work. In particular, the Government intends to use part of these funds to 
meet the cost of the Sector-wide Strategic Socio-Environmental Impact Assessment, the Socio-
Environmental Management Plan (SEMP), the Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP), the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and the Process Framework (PF) (the PF is justified by 
the fact that within the forest, there might be protected areas where the project might operate to 
promote biodiversity protection as specified in component 3). These costs include expertise, 
consultations and workshops. The Ministry of Environment will oversee the preparation of these 
safeguards works and associated documents, and will monitor the implementation of the 
recommended mitigation measures during project implementation. Monitoring the 
implementation of the safeguards instruments will be a specific activity of the project, and the 
project will help strengthen the Ministry of Environment?s capacity in that area.  
 
The proposed operation triggers the following safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment 
(OP 4.01), Forests (OP 4.36), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Indigenous People (OP 4.10), 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). The SSEIA 
would cover both the IDA project and the multi-donor trust fund. The project will not directly or 
indirectly finance industrial logging or promote its expansion in the DRC. The project will not 
entail any physical resettlement, and will not restrict the rights of indigenous peoples as 
compared to the situation at start of the project. On the contrary it will include a component 
aimed at ensuring indigenous peoples? equal access to the benefits of the new code. Should, 
Page  4
unexpectedly, people be displaced or restricted from accessing their land during implementation, 
RAPs will be prepared where and as needed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) has been triggered because the project will 
have an impact on the environment.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The Natural Habitats (BP 4.04) has been triggered because the project will help manage and 
protect natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The Forests (BP 4.36) has been triggered because the project will help manage forests 
sustainably.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The Physical Cultural Resources (BP 4.10) has been triggered because the team wants to 
ensure the project does not have any negative impact on physical cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The Indigenous Peoples (BP 4.10) has been triggered because the project will take place in 
areas inhabited by indigenous people, and will aim to secure indigenous people's traditional 
rights.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Involuntary Resettlement (BP 4.12) has been triggered because the project will concern 
protected areas where some economic/commercial activities may be restricted, and because the 
task team wants to ensure that the project does not entail any physical resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/02/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Strategic Sector-wide Socio-Environmental Impact Assessment (SSEIA), Socio-
Environmental Management Plan (SEMP), Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP), 
and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and Process Framework (PF) will be prepared in 
a
participatory manner, approved, and disclosed in the Democratic Republic of Congo by the 
Government and sent to the Bank for disclosure prior to appraisal at the Info Shop.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Debroux 
11/29/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francois G. Le Gall 
11/29/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
