Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/19/2006 
Report No.:  AC1885
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P086294 
Project Name:  Education Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Susan Opper 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.70
3.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to prevent further deterioration in the 
delivery of essential services for primary education and prepare ground for a sustainable 
development and financing of the education sector that will facilitate donor coordination 
and future transition to a sector wide program.  
 
To achieve its objectives, the Project will provide support for:  
 
(i) reducing primary school fees and providing free access to textbooks to increase 
equity in the supply of primary education services;  
 
(ii) building quality through monitoring learning achievement and improving the 
statutes for teachers;  
 
(iii) restoring access to primary education of at least minimal quality, especially in areas 
affected by the conflict of the last decade; and  
 
(iv) providing technical assistance and material support to build the systems capacity of 
government and prepare policies which update and re-structure the legal governance, 
financing, and administration of the sector.  
 
Higher Level Objectives : 
 
Page  2
Consolidate process of post-conflict recovery : The Project is fully consistent with the 
Transitional Support Strategy (TSS, February 2004) and the Poverty Reduction Strategy 
(PRSP August 2005 draft) to mitigate acute erosion of social capital in the DRC. The 
TSS recommends revitalizing education to consolidate overall recovery and transition. 
The very process of investing in the social sectors is stabilizing, as rebuilt schools and 
textbooks in classrooms assure the population of concrete results on the ground. The 
Project will also provide building blocks for Government to devise a medium term 
education sector development program and expenditure framework (MTEF). This is 
consistent with the new Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, under preparation in FY06), 
that will be the context in which the proposed Project will operate. The new CAS is 
framed in the perspectives of the PRSP and reflects the goals of the World Bank Africa 
Action Plan (AAP), emphasizing good governance, capacity building and results on the 
ground. These policy documents consider progress toward the MDGs as an important 
indicator of overall progress in development.  
 
Outcome Indicators : 
 
•
growth in primary enrollment rate from GER 64 percent in 2005 to 80 percent in 2011  
 
•
increase in primary education completion rate from 29% in 2005 to 50% in 2011  
 
•
reform of teacher career structure (training, deployment, salary, incentive structure) 
approved  
 
•
education sector plan (including medium term financing strategy) with indicators 
agreed with donors.   
 
3. Project Description 
Strategic Approach: The Project fits within the strategic framework of Government 
policy commitments (Constitution, PRSP, Letter of Education Sector Policy, ministerial 
decrees in 2004-2005) especially in regard to eliminating primary school fees as a 
prerequisite for progress toward the MDGs. The design of the Project incorporates 
lessons from (i) recent World Bank operations in conflict-affected countries in various 
regions of the world; (ii) current Bank operations in the DRC including the Emergency 
Multi-sector Rehabilitation and Construction Project and budget support operations; (iii) 
fee abolition efforts and education sector strategies to reach the education MDGs in low-
income countries; and (iv) international research on effective approaches for stimulating 
demand from the poor (free textbooks and lower school fees) and to improve quality 
(support for textbooks, teachers and management).  
 
The Project has four components, as follows:  
 
Component 1: Increase Access and Equity at Primary Level  
 
(Estimated costs, including contingencies: US$87.4 million)  
 
•
Sub-Component 1a: Rehabilitate primary school infrastructure (US$27.8 million). 
The sub-component will provide support to rehabilitate primary school infrastructure and 
establish a sustainable national strategy for school rehabilitation through (i) studies and 
technical work on norms for low-cost construction, community participation, governance, 
Page  3
financial and technical management and maintenance; (ii) rehabilitation of about 1572 
primary school classrooms (approximately 262 schools) and the director’s office and 
latrines; equipment (desks, storage closets for textbooks); and (iii) capacity building for 
the Infrastructure Division of the Ministry of Primary, Secondary and Professional 
Education (MEPSP) and the provincial education authorities and school personnel.  
 
•
Sub-Component 1b: Rehabilitate the National Pedagogical University (US$3.8 
million): This large university (UPN), located in Kinshasa, is the only high level 
institution in the country that is exclusively focused on training teachers and tertiary level 
teacher educators, and pedagogical research. The University provides critical resources to 
support education sector reforms, but is constrained by lack of facilities and equipment. 
The Project will provide support to rehabilitate UPN (classroom blocks, latrines, and 
offices; as well as equipment and pedagogical materials including desks and laboratory 
equipment) through the carrying out of works and the provision of goods.  
 
•
Sub-Component 1c: Improve Equity of Access to Primary Education (US$51.5 
million): This provides support to the Government’s strategy to eliminate primary school 
fees by substituting for a portion of the primary school teachers’ salaries(teachers’ 
bonuses) taking into account that this should translate into reduction of primary school 
fees paid by parents. The largest fee that households have been paying is the top-up of 
teachers’ salaries (frais de motivation). Project support will apply to primary teachers 
only, in keeping with the focus on the MDGs. The Project grants for teachers’ bonuses 
will be channeled through the country’s existing mechanism for paying teacher salaries.  
 
•
Sub-Component 1d: Strengthen Safeguards in the Teacher Pay System (US$2.6 
million). The Service de Controle et de la Paie des Enseignants (SECOPE) at MEPSP is 
the agent designated to assist the Budget Ministry for payment of teachers’ salaries and to 
transfer central Government block grants to schools to subsidize operating costs. The 
SECOPE database is a vital planning and management tool for the education sector, yet 
the database is maintained on out-of-stock hardware (computers) and software (COBOL). 
This sub-component will strengthen safeguards in the Government’s teacher pay system 
through: (i) international technical assistance on database planning and management; (ii) 
goods (upgraded computers, software, and internet connections for the SECOPE central 
and 11 Provincial offices) and (iii) training in the use of the upgraded resources to 
manage and monitor the system; (iv) information and communications to publicize the 
policy on eliminating primary school fees; (v) training for parent groups on their roles in 
monitoring the fee-free policy; (vi) transportation costs of inter-ministerial audits 
(ministries of Budget, Finance and EPSP); and (vii) consultancy services for two Public 
Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS) on the flow of public resources to schools for 
payment of teachers’ salaries.  
 
Component 2: Improve Quality of Primary Education  
 
(Estimated costs, including contingencies: US$28.7 million)  
 
•
Sub-Component 2a: Provide Textbooks (US$25.2 million) includes support for (i) 
supply to all public schools and government supported private schools of textbooks for 
Page  4
grades 1 to 4 in mathematics and reading, in a ratio of 1 textbook for 2 students, and 1 
textbook and the corresponding teacher’s guide per teacher. This will represent a total of 
about 10 million textbooks and 390,000 teachers’ guides; (ii) training of all teachers and 
school directors in the use of textbooks; (iii) production and distribution to primary 
schools of 150,000 manuals in the care and management of textbooks; (iv) development 
of a database in the MEPSP to track textbook stocks in the schools; (v) a study visit to 
two African countries with good experience in developing databases to track textbook 
stocks; (vi) training of Curriculum and Learning Materials Division staff of the MEPSP 
in evaluation of textbook content and in definition of textbook pedagogical and technical 
specifications; and (vii) a book sector study to provide background information for the 
formulation of a national textbook policy.  
 
•
Sub-Component 2b: Build Capacity to Assess Learning Achievement (US$3.5 
million). This sub-component will improve capacity to institutionalize assessments of 
learning achievement and research on learning and retention in school in order to 
establish a culture of monitoring the quality of education in the DRC. The sub-component 
aims to establish a partnership between the UPN and the Inspectorate who will administer 
the assessments. The Project will support (i) international technical assistance to train 
UPN professional staff in research on learning achievement, statistical sampling, 
diagnostic learning assessment tools and assessment design, including for the preparation 
of the survey to be carried out in primary education; (ii) establishing capacity within UPN 
to provide baseline information on learning achievements in primary schools; (iii) 
carrying out two rounds of assessments in a sample of primary schools, by the Inspectors 
in partnership with UPN; and (iv) supplies and related costs to disseminate results.  
 
Component 3: Strengthen Institutional and Financial Capacity of the Education Sector  
 
(Estimated costs, including contingencies: US$6.5 million)  
 
The objective of this Component is to contribute to revising the legal and institutional 
framework of the education system, and to reinforce institutional capacities for planning, 
budget formulation, and program execution. Key aspects include the career structure of 
teachers, teacher training, and development of coherent, technically sound and results-
oriented strategies for education sector development which are based on realistic 
financing plans and budgets.  
 
•
Sub-Component 3a Support Policy Reform for Teacher Career Structure (US$0.9 
million): This sub-component will support the preparation of policies on pre-service and 
in-service teacher training which will be adopted by Government by the end of the 
Project. The new training policies will be formulated in tandem and linked with the 
Government’s redefinition of the career structure of teachers within the ongoing civil 
service reform. Expected results of this sub-component are: (i) a new statute on teachers, 
formulated and adopted within the civil service reform; (ii) a plan to modernize the 
system of pre-service teacher training; and (iii) a strategy and action plan for in-service 
teacher training with the view to providing certification in line with the new statute and 
guidelines on teacher qualifications. The Project will support: (i) the analysis of existing 
resources and reform options for pre-service teacher education; (ii) evaluation of existing 
in-service teacher training experiences and options for scaling up; (iii) feasibility studies 
Page  5
for reform, including two study tours by National Commission members (see below) in 
other African countries; (iv) workshops and seminars with education sector stakeholders 
to share evaluations and discuss reform options; (v) assistance to a National Commission 
to be created to review the career structure and reward system for teachers and draft the 
policy document on the proposed reform; (vi) information and communication activities 
to help build national consensus on reform proposals; and (vii) training and some 
equipment for the National Commission.  
 
•
Sub-Component 3b Support Preparation of a Sector-wide Education Strategy 
(US$5.6 million): This sub-component will provide support to the preparation of a sector-
wide education strategy including an appropriate legal framework and financing plans, 
through technical assistance (i) in legal affairs, to update the loi cadre to define the roles 
and responsibilities of the State at all levels, the religious organizations, rural and urban 
communities and parents in financing and managing schools; (ii) in literacy and higher 
education, to fill gaps in the education sector strategy, especially in regard to formulating 
a
national strategy on literacy, a reform program for higher education, and programs to 
operationalize the pro-poor objectives of the PRSP with realistic timeframes and budgets 
vis-Ã -vis other priorities in the education sector; (iii) in medium term expenditure 
framework (MTEF) design, financial modeling techniques, and the definition, design and 
development of strategy and financing plans; and (iv) in developing, implementing and 
evaluating pilot programs in literacy. The sub-component will also support: (v) creation 
of a high level National Commission to oversee the expected results; (vi) training for the 
relevant technical units of the ministries involved, to improve data collection and 
analysis, feasibility studies, and use of computer-assisted budgeting and modeling; (vii) 
provision of computer equipment and software, and related equipment for the National 
Commission and inter-ministerial and technical committees working on the legal 
framework, sector strategy and financing plans; (vi) study tours; and (vii) technical 
workshops and national consultation seminars to build support for the policy reforms and 
disseminate results. At the end of the Project, this sub-component will have contributed 
to the formulation and approval of an education sector strategy and an MTEF (initial 
MTEF plus three subsequent updates).  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management  
 
(Estimated costs, including contingencies: US$10.0 million; All IDA)  
 
The Project will strengthen project management and coordination of the Steering 
Committee comprised of the Ministry of Primary, Secondary and Professional Education, 
the Ministry of Higher Education and Universities, and the Ministry of Social Affairs 
with an increment in resources required to operate a Project Management and 
Coordination Unit (PMCU). The Project will also provide financing to contract technical 
resources for the PMCU, including in financial management; and resources for the 
PMCU to contract out specific parts of procurement management directly associated with 
Project activities (including civil works and large scale procurement of equipment and 
goods including textbooks). The PMCU is the ministries’ interlocutor for all the project’s 
implementing agencies, the consultants and firms contracted to carry out the various 
technical assistance tasks and studies described in the Project components, and is the 
main contact point for the Bank.  
Page  6
PPF: (US$1.0 million)  
 
An IDA-approved Project Preparation Facility (PPF) is under implementation to 
complete activities required for readiness for Project implementation. BCECO is 
handling all procurement and financial management for the PPF under a Grant 
Agreement with IDA, and a service contract with the above-mentioned Steering 
Committee.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project covers the entire country. All public and public-subsidized primary schools 
will be targeted for the Project's support for reduction of school fees and the distribution 
of textbooks (Components 1 and 2 of the Project). The same is true for the classroom 
rehabilitation, although it will especially target areas which were most affected by the 
conflict (two-thirds of the 1572 classrooms rehabilitated by the Project will be in such 
areas).  
 
No major environmental or adverse social impacts are expected. The rehabilitation 
conducted under the Project will be small-scale activities and developments, executed on 
existing sites. Capacity building of the implementing agents is expected to have positive 
impact on the physical environment. The Project's support to eliminate primary school 
fees is expected to have social impact that can be measured in terms of growth in 
enrollment rates in the poorest households, and especially among girls.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no potentially large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.   
Page  7
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is not likely to generate adverse environmental effects or involuntary 
resettlement.  
 
A
significant expected social impact is an increase in enrollments from reducing 
primary school fees. Should the intended benefits not be communicated adequately or 
implementation left unchecked, there is a risk that fees would still be charged even while 
teachers' salaries are raised. This could damage the long term prospects for Government 
to realize its policy on eliminating primary school fees. The Project will finance publicity 
campaigns on the Government's fee-free policy and monitoring/ assessment of public 
expenditures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
All activities supported by the Project funds must avoid or minimize negative 
environmental impacts by exploring viable alternative designs. Screening mechanisms, 
outlined in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), are being 
integrated into the Project Procedures Manual and Technical Guidelines. It is anticipated 
that if there are adverse impacts, these will be highly localized, temporary in nature, and 
easily mitigated through the application of sensible site selection criteria for the 
rehabilitations, good construction practices and diligent management practices in the 
operational phase. The ESMF provides specific guidance on managing environmental 
aspects such as work place debris, including removal of asbestos.  
 
As part of the selection requirements, all proposals for rehabilitation are required to 
include a brief description of the existing environment at the project area, any known 
environmental sensitivities, and any sites affected with known archeological, 
paleontological, historical, cultural, religious or unique natural values. The contracted 
agents, assisted by the Bureau Central de Coordination (BCECO) and Ministry 
technicians, will expand on the environmental information collected through reference to 
existing reports and studies (if available), through discussions with community members 
or through new data collection if necessary. Rehabilitation proposals which do not 
provide adequate environmental data cannot be considered for financing until they meet 
these requirements. Assessments will include screening for possible involuntary 
resettlement, using the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) prepared for the Project.  
 
Assessment of the social impacts related to the objective to reduce primary school fees 
will be conducted ex post. The Project will support technical and financial audits to track 
expenditures, and social audits. There must be satisfactory results from these audits in 
order for subsequent transfers to be made.   
 
Page  8
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The majority of Project activities -- including all the rehabilitation -- financed by the 
Project will be implemented by BCECO through a service contract with the PMCU. 
BCECO has ongoing and relevant experience, working with the Ministry of the 
Environment, managing environmental safeguards through other IDA projects. This 
includes the EMRRP. The EMRRP has an approved ESMF and RAP. The Education 
Project's ESMF and RAP apply the principles of EMRRP's documents, and were 
disclosed separately by the Environment Minister.  
 
Overall responsibility for the implementation of the safeguard guidelines will be with 
the PMCU, the operational arm of the Project Steering Committee. The PMCU will 
ensure that the safeguards guidelines are followed and that Project staff have the required 
skills and receive appropriate training to ensure that the procedures and screening process 
are followed as prescribed, and that no activities restricted under these guidelines are 
funded. The PMCU will incorporate necessary changes to the guidelines and procedures 
based on recommendations from monitoring exercises and in agreement with the World 
Bank.  
 
During Project execution, it will benefit from existing human resources at the Ministry 
of Environment and BCECO to assist in screening for environmental and social risks, and 
to help train and build capacity of the Education Project's implementing agents to follow 
the agreed measures for environmental and social safeguards. Technicians at the Ministry 
of Primary, Secondary and Professional Education (MEPSP) and the Ministry of Higher 
Education will be trained in environmental assessment and mitigation, and will assist in 
incorporating environmental measures into project activities before submission to the 
PMCU for decision on the rehabilitation activities. Decisions on the allocation of funds 
for rehabilitation of primary schools will be made by the Education Project Steering 
Committee. 
 
Standard environmental and social screening forms were developed during Project 
preparations (documented in ESMF and RAP), for use during Project execution. Also, to 
avoid certain adverse impacts on the environment and people, the Project Procedures 
Manual will specify a range of activities which are not eligible for Project support. For 
example, the Project will not support new land acquisitions or the expansion of existing 
settlements in protected areas or areas proposed for protection. Where settlements already 
exist, proposals for funding must be in compliance with national land management 
regulations, and provisions in protected area management plans. No track upgrading or 
road rehabilitation of any kind will be allowed inside natural habitats and existing or 
proposed protected areas. No project support will be provided in areas with activities 
involving involuntary resettlement. Activities that will have adverse impacts on social 
groups within the community and/or in neighboring communities cannot be funded.   
 
Whereas the Operational Directive 4.20 on Indigenous Peoples was not triggered, the 
Project has taken the precautionary measure, through the design of the Project itself, to 
include this aspect in the screening form and the monitoring and evaluation framework, 
Page  9
including external assessments. The same is true of OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural 
Property.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The stakeholders include school authorities and parent groups, education authorities at 
national and provincial levels, civil society associations including religious groups who 
manage 70% of the public primary schools, Parliament and municipal authorities, and 
UPN administrators and staff. The national counterpart team (under the Steering 
Committee) preparing the Education Project is ensuring wide circulation of the ESMF 
and RAP as part of the disclosure process in the DRC. The Project Preparation Fund 
(PPF) also provides financing for the national preparation team and BCECO to consult 
populations potentially affected by the Project, in order to fine tune the procedures 
outlined in the ESMF, RAP and consultation strategy for incorporation into the Project 
Procedures Manual.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/09/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/12/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/09/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/12/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  10
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susan Opper 
01/10/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
01/12/2006 
Comments:   
