Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2484 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Costa Rica 
Project ID: P101718 
Project Name: Costa Rica Telecom Sector Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader: Juan Navas-Sabater 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Other public sector 
governance (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.50
0.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The government's strategic objective for the sector is to ensure that the widest range of quality 
modern telecommunications and ICT services are universally accessible and affordable 
throughout the country, especially for the poorest Costa Ricans who are at risk of being left 
behind, as a key contribution to Costa Rica's competitiveness and poverty alleviation objectives.  
 
The project's development objective is to contribute to this goal through the modernization of 
the legal, regulatory and institutional framework for the sector, the introduction of fair 
competition and private participation in the sector, the modernization of ICE, as well as the 
promotion of investment in rural and isolated poor areas and vulnerable groups.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project has four main interrelated components aimed at achieving the project 
development objective.  
 
Page  2
The first component ($1 to $1.5 million) is aimed at supporting the Ministry in developing the 
legal and regulatory framework for a modern telecommunications sector. This component will 
also support developing the institutional capacity of the Ministry itself, through the creation of a 
telecommunications policy unit, to provide policy guidance to the regulatory authority, 
particularly with regards to the market opening and universal service programs.  
 
The second component ($0.5 to $1 million) will include targeted support for the incumbent, 
ICE, in its strategic repositioning and transformation into a modern operator, capable of 
performing well and contributing to the development of a healthy competitive environment.  
 
The third component ($5 to $5.5 million) will be aimed at institutional strengthening of the 
regulatory authority, and the creation within it of a specialized entity (SUTEL) in charge of 
telecommunications regulation. This will include support in improving the efficiency of 
spectrum use and related regulations, as well specialized equipment for radio spectrum 
management and monitoring. In addition, this component will also provide support to SUTEL in 
the implementation of a market opening strategy, through the competitive selection and licensing 
of new operators.  
 
Finally, the fourth component ($7 to $7.5 million) will be aimed at guaranteeing that the 
benefits of competition reach rural areas and low-income users, through the design of the 
universal service fund and implementation of universal service projects. The majority of the 
investments through this component will be dedicated to competitively leveraging investment to 
the deployment of broadband services for vulnerable groups and disadvantaged regions, based on 
poverty indicators, among others, and for specific social needs, such as for schools, hospitals and 
other public social programs.  
 
The implementing agencies of the project will be the Ministry of Environment and Energy, as 
well as ARESEP.  It is expected that most of the project management overhead would constitute 
an in-kind contribution by the GoCR. However, some support to project management may be 
provided through capacity building activities for both the Ministry and ARESEP. In addition, it 
may be necessary to support the implementing agencies with the recruitment of procurement 
and/or financial management specialists to assist on project implementation issues.  
 
Estimated project costs, excluding private sector contribution for universal service, are between 
$13.5 to $15.5 million to be funded as follows:  
 
Source 
Amount in $  
 
IBRD 13.00  
 
Borrower/ Recipient 0.50   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Costa Rica - countrywide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower institutional capacity will be assessed during project preparation.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While environmental impact from the investments in rural telecom infrastructure financed 
through this project is expected to be minimal, indirect impacts could emerge from ancillary 
infrastructure (access roads into environmentally sensitive areas).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The sub-projects to be financed under the universal service component have the potential to 
impact natural habitats, given the potential need for deployment of ancillary infrastructure into 
sensitive regions.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The sub-projects to be financed under the universal service component have the potential to 
impact physical cultural resources, throught the potential need for deployment of ancillary 
infrastructure.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/01/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Preparation of stand-alone EA report required prior to appraisal will consist of an 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) applicable to universal service fund 
investments. The EMF will focus on developing guidelines for the environmental assessment 
of universal service sub-projects, to address any envionmental concerns that may emerge 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
from the need to deploy ancillary infrastructure. The EMF will include adequate screening 
criteria to identify any natural habitats which would potentially be impacted, and ensure that 
the infrastructure, access road, etc in question would be either re-sited away from the 
identified natural habitat(s) to avoid impact, or else adequate mitigation measures would be 
developed in accordance with the policy. The EMF will also include adequate screening 
criteria to identify any known archeological or other culturally significant sites, and llocate 
the infrastructure away from these areas. In addition, the envirnmental guidelines for 
construction will incorporate "chance find" procedures in case of accidental discovery of 
culturally significant materials during construction.  
 
Work on the EMF will start immediately.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Navas-Sabater 
10/27/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
11/16/2006 
Comments:   
