Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC3032
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cote d'Ivoire 
Project ID:  P082817 
Project Name:  Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maurizia Tovo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (60%);Central government administration 
(20%);Vocational training (20%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project seeks to improve economic opportunities and access to social services for 
conflict-affected communities and individuals.  This will enhance and consolidate peace.   
 
3. Project Description 
Components proposed for financing  
 
1. 
Component A:  Economic (Re)integration (US$ 40 million): will finance 
activities to facilitate the economic (re)integration (RE) of ex-combatants, youth 
associated with armed groups and youth-at-risk. Assistance would be offered in different 
forms, including the following: information, counseling and referral services; access to 
vocational training, apprenticeship schemes and educational opportunities; technical 
assistance and/or grants in cash or kind (such as provision of seeds and tools) to establish 
agricultural and non-farm income-generating activities; research of employment 
opportunities; labor-intensive public works. Social reintegration assistance seeks to foster 
reconciliation between ex-combatants and civilians in their communities of settlement.  
 
Page  2
2. 
Component B: Support to the Identification Process (US$ 20 million): will 
contribute to cover the costs of the process of updating, modernizing and securing the 
register of civil status, providing birth certificates, and issuing identification cards. The 
proposed approach is to support the work of several national bodies that have a key role 
to play by providing capacity building, facilitating day-to-day operations, adapted 
equipment and IT solutions and funding specialized services.  This component will work 
in a complementary fashion with the support planned by the European Commission to 
ensure a rational and coherent approach and a strategic use of the resources available.  
 
3. 
Component C: Community rehabilitation (US$ 40 million): This component will 
help meet the short- to medium-term needs of returning refugees/IDPs and the 
communities most affected by the conflict by using a CDD approach. Its activities are 
meant to complement those financed by the restructured projects in the Bank portfolio, 
and will be closely coordinated with such projects as arrears are cleared and portfolio 
projects are re-launched. Through sub-project grants, the RC component will support the 
following activities: (a) reconstruction, rehabilitation and re-equipment of community 
level infrastructure, (b) restoration of social capital and social cohesion, and (c) capacity 
building for effective sub-project development and management.  Implementation 
arrangements of the RC component draw extensively from best practices and lessons 
learned from similar interventions in Sierra Leone, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Rwanda, as well 
as the cumulated experience of CDD-type operations. In addition, two pilot operations in 
the center, north and west financed by grants from the World Bank Post Conflict Fund 
have made it possible to test and refine the proposed mechanisms.  
 
4.
Component D: Institution Building and Project Administration (US$ 20 million): 
will support project implementation by financing: (a) most of the operating costs of the 
National Program for Economic Reintegration and Community Rehabilitation (PNRRC) 
and a fiduciary management agency; (b) targeted capacity-building and technical 
assistance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented throughout Côte d'Ivoire.  However, areas most affected 
by the conflict will be especially targeted for Component A and C.  These are primarily 
the towns, villages and rural areas around Bouake (center), Korhogo (North), Man and 
Guiglo (West). Criteria to be used to determine priority areas of implementation include: 
(a) degree of concentration of displaced persons and returnees; (b) degree of 
concentration of ex-combatants, youth associated with armed groups and youth-at-risk; 
(c) socio-economic impact of the conflict on the area.  No national park or reserve will be 
included or otherwise affected by the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large scale or significant irreversible impacts are anticipated under this project.  
 
Under the economic reintegration component, activities are designed to develop the 
financial self-sufficiency of ex-combatants, youth associated with armed groups and 
youth-at-risk through training, counseling, and tailored assistance to be able to take 
advantage of local economic opportunities and labor demand.  The only relatively large-
scale environmental impact envisaged is an improvement in hygienic conditions in the 
urban areas in which beneficiaries will be organized to help municipal governments in 
street cleaning. Relevant environmental safeguards related to waste disposal will be 
adhered to, and in any case all employment opportunities supported by the project will 
undergo an environmental screening.  
 
Under the community rehabilitation component, micro-projects identified by the 
communities will need to adhere to relevant environmental safeguards related to erosion, 
standing water, waste disposal, etc.  Infrastructure works will consist in the rehabilitation 
of damaged or destroyed structures. This activity will not lead to any land acquisition, or 
loss of assets or sources of assets.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the nature of the activities (which focus on rebuilding social capital through 
community driven projects and support targeted populations in their longer-term socio-
economic reintegration), no long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Activities financed under the project will be screened using a standardized approach 
based on an adaptation of the tools developed by the Multi-Country Demobilization and 
Reintegration Program (MDRP) in collaboration with ASPEN.  In particular, the 
scre
ening form for beneficiaries’ IGAs and community sub-projects will be customized 
for Côte d'Ivoire, and applied by all implementing partners under the project. A separate 
Environment and Social Management Framework will be produced to guide project 
activities, and cross-referenced in the Project Implementation Manual within six months 
of the effectiveness date.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the ex-combatants, youth associated with armed grups and 
youth-at-risk themselves, the communities to which they will return and other 
communities affected by the conflict, local NGOs and CBOs, service providers (e.g., 
training institutes, master artisans), and municipal and local authorities.  The National 
Program for Economic Reintegration and Community Rehabilitation (PNRRC), which 
will be in charge of day-to-day implementation of components A and C, will be 
responsible for ensuring the design, dissemination and adequate use of the environmental 
and social screening tool  required at all levels of stakeholders consultations. A separate 
Environment and Social Management Framework will be produced to guide project 
activities, and cross-referenced in the Project Implementation Manual.  
 
The process envisaged is based on environmental and social screening checklists, and 
involves three steps:  
 
1.
an initial checklist will be used for a pre-screening to exclude (a) activities 
expected to have an harmful environmental or social impact, and (b) activities that have 
no environmental or social implications whatsoever;  
 
2.
an additional checklist will be used for detailed screening of sub-projects;  
 
3.
standard technical guidelines and/or mitigation measures by area of potential sub-
project (e.g., construction and rehabilitation of buildings, water supply and sanitation, 
etc.) will guide project staff in assessing possible social and environmental impacts and 
identifying appropriate measures.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/24/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maurizia Tovo 
06/25/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
06/25/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
06/25/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/26/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
06/26/2007 
Comments:   
