Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC2284
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P093767 
Project Name:  TRADE AND TRANSPORT INTEGRATION 
Task Team Leader:  Gerald Paul Ollivier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 30, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Ports, waterways and shipping (80%);Other domestic and international trade 
(10%);Railways (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.70 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
25.30 
 
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 13.50
38.80 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective is to develop trade along Corridor Vc by improving 
the capacity, efficiency and quality of services on the southern end of Corridor Vc with 
particular focus on the port of Ploce and on coordination aspects among all corridor 
participants. The project seeks to achieve this objective through: (i) increased throughput 
capacity of the port and railway infrastructure; (ii) efficient operation of the corridor 
including the Port of Ploce; (iii) high quality of services; (iv) competitive alternative to 
other corridors; and, (v) increased private sector involvement to address these priorities, 
reduce commercial risks and secure financing for port cargo handling equipment.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project cost and components. The total project cost is estimated at Euro 91 million, with 
Euro 58.8 million from a World Bank loan (US$70.7 million equivalent), Euro 11.2 
million from EBRD, Euro 21 million from the Government,and Euro 0.06 million from 
PPA. The project includes three components: (i) Port Infrastructure Development of 
Ploce; (ii) Trade and Transport Integration; and (iii) Project Implementation. In parallel, 
Page  2
the Government will finance upgrades for the Croatian Railways (HZ) in Ploce, defined 
during preparation but not included under this project.  
 
Component 1: (total cost with contingencies - Euro 76.7 million). The Port 
Infrastructure Development  component includes the following subcomponents: (i) 
construction of a new bulk cargo terminal with an initial capacity of 4 million tons; (ii) 
construction of a container/multipurpose terminal with an initial capacity of 66,000 TEU; 
and (iii) construction/rehabilitation of the supporting port infrastructure (road, rail, water, 
wastewater and power supply) within the port area including a new entrance facility.  The 
third sub-component represents only 13 percent of base costs and connects the new 
terminals with the existing utility infrastructure.  
 
Component 2: (total cost with contingencies - Euro 2.0 million). The Trade and 
Transport Integration Component  includes the development and rollout of a modern 
electronic port community system, integrating all members of the port community 
(shipping lines, shipping agent, stevedoring companies, banks, rail, road transport, border 
agencies) into a seamless information system enabling accurate and timely exchange of 
information and automated processing, where appropriate. This component builds on the 
detailed analysis on procedures and information flows being prepared under the Project 
Preparation Facility.  It includes: (i) necessary hardware (e.g. servers, computers); (ii) 
networking cost; (iii) software; (iv) extensive training of users and administrators; (v) 
technical services; and (vi) security features.  The system will facilitate integration of 
information flows along the corridor Vc by defining document exchange interfaces based 
on international standards.  These interfaces will facilitate systematic performance 
measurement across the transport chain.  
 
Component 3: (total cost with contingencies - Euro2.9 million). The Project 
Implementation Component  includes the services required to support the successful 
implementation of the project.  This covers in particular: (i) technical assistance to PPA 
to implement its business plan and establish the concession for new terminals; (ii) 
technical services required for the supervision of project components; (iii) audit services 
for the project and PPA; (iv) training on project management, procurement and financial 
management; (v) procurement support; and (vi) incremental implementation costs.  
 
In addition, the project includes repayment of the Project Preparation Facility (Euro 1.6 
million) and financial costs, such as front end fees, commitment charges and interest 
during construction (Euro 7.8 million).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project comes in response to the restructuring of heavy industries in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina (BiH), which is leading to strong traffic growth on the Pan-European 
Corridor Vc, which connects the port of Ploce, in Croatia, to major BiH cities and 
industrial centers (Mostar, Sarajevo, Zenica, Zvornik), both by road and rail. The corridor 
has a comparative advantage to serve these markets, providing the shortest and lowest 
cost land route to the Sea compared to its main competitors. Besides good maritime 
Page  3
conditions and a natural bay, there is an exceptionally good lowland railway connection 
towards the inland. The Port of Ploce, located on the Adriatic coast at mid-distance of 
Split and Dubrovnik, is the gateway of the corridor.  It is the second port after Rijeka in 
terms of national significance. Its further development is a stated Government policy and 
strategy. About 80 percent of the traffic transits to/from BiH. The port site is well 
protected by the peninsula of Peljesac and offers large available areas for existing and 
forthcoming activities.  
 
The Corridor and the port of Ploce border the Neretva Valley, a significant wetland on 
the Eastern Adriatic Coast.  This wetland is protected under the Ramsar Convention on 
Wetlands (http://www.ramsar.org/w.n.neretva_workshop2.htm) and is included in the 
Important Bird Areas Program by BirdLife International. As such any project in its 
vicinity requires careful analysis, planning, and design of suitable environmental 
management plans, as was done for this project.  
 
The project includes the construction of two new port terminals, a 
Container/Multipurpose Terminal (CT) and a Bulk Cargo Terminal (BCT) with 
supporting port infrastructure (road, rail, water, wastewater and power supply) within the 
port area.  The new terminals will be located in an undeveloped and unused area of the 
port, with meager vegetation growing on material dredged from the sea. In terms of 
environmental protection, this area does not have either local or regional importance. It is 
located more than one kilometer away from the city compared to where cargo is presently 
handled - already more than one kilometer away from the city of Ploce.  The relocation of 
the terminals will result in substantial reduction of current nuisances from both noise and 
dust, even prior to additional mitigation measures included in the Project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anders O. Halldin (ECSIE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The overall impact of this Project implementation will be an improvement of the present 
environmental situation. Most bulk handling will be relocated two kilometers away from 
the city of Ploce instead of one kilometer away as it is now thereby reducing noise and 
dust impact. In addition, proposed measures under the Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) will benefit the environment as well as the inhabitants of Ploce. These measures 
consist of: (a) treatment of polluted storm water in regard to suspended solids, oil, grease, 
etc.; (b) reduction of dust from handling of bulk material through installation of a 
sprinkling system and use of polymers to bind the finest dust particles, and the use of 
covered conveyor belts for the transport of bulk material to the storage area; (c) 
installation of reception facilities for hazardous waste, wastewater from arriving vessels, 
and bilge water; and (d) treatment of sanitary wastewater generated inside the Port in a 
two-stage treatment plant including a biological step.  
 
The largest potential impact on sea water and marine communities will come as a result 
of the dredging necessary to provide ship access to the new terminals. The total amount 
of dredging masses is estimated at about 1.1 million ton, all within the existing port area. 
As a result the basic Project is classified as a Category A project in accordance with OP 
4.01.  
 
Based on the Environmental Assessments, the dredging operations are not expected to 
have any significant negative impact on the aquatic life, which is very limited and nearly 
non-existing in the area for dredging.  The dredging masses will be deposited onshore 
between the two new terminals, and on an additional area which will be reclaimed from 
the sea.  That area will be constructed as a confined and sealed area before the dredging 
masses are deposited.  Water draining from the dredging masses will be discharged into 
the sea. In order to prevent the possibility that such a discharge would create problems 
with emissions of different types of pollutants, as well as turbidity caused by suspended 
solids, the drainage water will first be treated in a settling pond and, before being 
discharged to the sea, filtered through a geo-membrane placed inside the wall of the 
confined and reclaimed area, to ensure that the eventual turbidity effect is minimized and 
that suspended solids stay inside the confined area. In order to prevent negative impacts 
on fish migration and spawning periods, the dredging operations will be limited to 
periods without impact on spawning seasons and fish migration.  
 
Obtained information about the content of different contaminants in the dredging 
masses shows that, even in case of off-shore disposal, there should not be any 
environmental concerns, as all obtained values are below international restrictions for off-
shore disposal.  Obtained results are presented in Annex 10 of PAD.  
 
Other aspects are not triggering safeguard issues: (i) all land necessary for establishing 
the new terminals, as well as the additional sub-component 1 (iii) is within the existing 
port area, so there is no need to acquire additional land or resettle inhabitants (OP 4.12 
Page  5
does not apply accordingly); (ii) the area was never populated or used for settlement and 
it is not expected that anything of cultural value could be found (OP 11.03 is not 
triggered).  A chance find clause will nonetheless be added to construction contracts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to result in any substantial indirect and long term impacts.  
Aside from dredging, the main potential impacts that were analyzed include: (a) impact 
on the adjacent RAMSAR site Neretva Valley; and (b) impact of additional traffic in the 
port and along the corridor.  
 
The Neretva Delta, as part of the Neretva Valley, is located just about 150 meters from 
the planned location of the new bulk terminal. The Neretva Valley, an area on the Eastern 
Adriatic Coast including a significant wetland, is protected under the RAMSAR 
Convention on Wetlands. The Valley is also included in the Important Bird Areas 
Program by Bird Life International.  The RAMSAR site is proposed to become a Natural 
Park, but no decision on that has been taken up to now.  During initial consultation, 
NGOs interested in the protection of the Neretva Valley raised several issues of concern.  
These led to a reduction of the dredging quantities to avoid any dredging in the 
RAMSAR site. In addition, the berth for the BCT has been moved to the early entrance of 
the Vlaska Channel, thereby also reducing the need for dredging within the channel. The 
RAMSAR Secretariat was informed on March 6, 2006, and provided the links to PPA's 
website, where the EAs as well as the EMPs are made available.  
 
The EA concludes that the impact of the Project on the RAMSAR site is expected to be 
very limited. While the Neretva Valley has become famous for its bird sanctuaries, these 
sanctuaries are located in different places 12-16 km away from the Port, with no impact 
on those during construction or operation. There are two other areas of significance closer 
to the Port: a fish and ornithological reserve (Usce Neretve) located two kilometers South 
of the port; and the Lake Parila area located in the vicinity of the proposed bulk terminal 
proposed as a bird reserve. No impact is expected on Usce Neretve. Impacts on the Lake 
Parila area is likely to be temporary and short term and associated with construction such 
as noise, heavy vehicle traffic, or dust. Proper mitigation measures were integrated in the 
project design to avoid any significant impact on the RAMSAR site during later port 
operations. Monitoring of current noise and dust emission related to the existing location 
shows that all monitored results are within Croatian regulations. The RAMSAR 
Secretariat was informed on March 6, 2006, and provided the links to PPA's website, 
where the EAs as well as the EMPs are made available.  
 
Special attention will be paid during supervision to ensure that the construction and 
operation of the new terminals do not have any significant negative impact on the habitats 
in the protected area.  
 
Another aspect which was reviewed is the foreseen traffic expansion and the impact of 
this additional activity within the port and on the corridor. Even after construction of 
those terminals, Ploce will remain a mid-size port by international standards and traffic 
Page  6
will remain within very reasonable limits. Container traffic will translate on average in 
about 150 trucks per day, while bulk traffic will represent about 20 to 30 pairs of trains 
per day.  These levels of traffic are relatively modest by international standards, 
particularly since new connecting infrastructure is being constructed outside this project 
(e.g., motorway to Split).  
 
The environmental management plans include mitigation measures to reduce several 
environmental nuisances currently generated by the existing port activities such as noise, 
dust and water supply, and to properly address earlier NGO concerns. Noise levels and 
air quality for the new terminals were simulated and will not impact populated areas in 
Ploce. These measures consist of  (a) treatment of polluted storm water in regard to 
suspended solids, oil, grease, etc.; (b) reduction of dust from handling of bulk material 
through installation of a sprinkling system and use of polymers to bind the finest dust 
particles, and the use of covered conveyor belts for the transport of bulk material to the 
storage area; (c) installation of reception facilities for hazardous waste, wastewater from 
arriving vessels, and bilge  water; and (d) treatment of sanitary wastewater generated 
inside the Port.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The berth for the bulk cargo terminal was moved to avoid any physical impact on the 
RAMSAR site.  Five alternative locations were studied during the preparation, and the 
final location chosen is the one with least impact on both the aquatic life and the 
RAMSAR site. The type of vessels to be accommodated by the new bulk terminal was 
scaled back significantly to ensure that dredging materials could be deposited on shore 
with no dredging taking place in the RAMSAR site.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The PPA commissioned the preparation of an EA for the CT in 2003. In 2004, the 
Ministry of Environment (MoE) launched on that basis the statutory procedure for 
issuance of a location permit, with proper public consultation. By law such process 
requires the consultant to observe all relevant Croatian laws, by-laws, and regulations, as 
well as applicable international agreements signed by the Republic of Croatia. This EA 
was approved by the corresponding MoE Committee in March 2005, before preparation 
of this Project started. After further review of the EA, coverage of some aspects was 
expanded to meet World Bank OP 4.01 requirements. The Final EA was issued to the 
InfoShop in February 2006.  Similarly the EA for the BCT has been finalized, presented 
to NGOs and issued to the InfoShop.  
 
An Overarching EA is being conducted to address the cumulative impacts of the port 
expansion and will be disclosed in Infoshop and in Croatia.  
 
Port supporting infrastructure (component 1 (iii)) are of category B nature and have 
been reviewed through a limited environmental analysis included in Annex 10 of the 
PAD.  
Page  7
The Ploce Port Authority (PPA) has its own environmental department fully capable to 
implement the EMPs and ensure that all indicators in accordance with the Monitoring 
Programs are followed up accordingly.  Furthermore, the Government through its MOE 
and its Ministry of Culture closely follows up on the implementation of EMPs.  When the 
MOE issues a location permit, all environmental mitigation measures are listed, and have 
to be addressed in the final design prior to issuance of the needed construction permit. 
The MOE will monitor the implementation through its Regional Environmental 
Department.  
 
Separate EMPs for both terminals have been prepared, and a separate EMP for the 
additional activities mentioned above is under preparation and will be provided prior to 
negotiations.  The EMPs outlines all the parameters to be monitored to control quality of 
wastewater, storm water, drainage water from dredging masses, noise, air pollution, 
management of both construction waste and waste generated by arriving ships, during 
both construction and operation, as well as amount of dredging masses.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As mentioned above, the EA for the CT was prepared before the Bank became involved 
in the Project, and its preparation has followed the Croatian legislation, which does not 
have an EA screening system similar to Bank's OP 4.01.  However, main stakeholders 
were involved in the review and approval process, to which the public were also invited, 
as required by the Government's review procedure.  
 
Concerning the EA for the BCT, stakeholders representing different governmental 
organizations, NGOs and the public were involved in discussion of the TOR for the EA 
before the work was started as well as during its preparation.  As part of the preparation 
of the BCT EA, public meetings were held in June and October 2005, and comments 
received were fully incorporated in the Draft Final Report.  On March 16, 2006, a new 
public meeting was organized, with the public having access to the EA Report both in 
English and Croatian two weeks ahead of the meeting.During the last meeting no new 
issues were brought forward.  The meetings were all announced in both local and 
regional press, and people and NGOs which were known having a special interest in the 
Project were personally contacted and informed about the meetings.  During the 
Government's review of the EA, an additional public meeting will be announced, but it is 
not expected that any new issues will be brought up during that meeting, which have not 
already been covered and presented in the EAs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2006 
 
Page  8
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/27/2006  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  9
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gerald Paul Ollivier 
05/26/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anders O. Halldin 
05/26/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
05/26/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
05/26/2006 
Comments:   
