Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2007 
Report No.:  AC2794
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P098948 
Project Name:  Inland Waters Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sudipto Sarkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
131.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6.60
6.60 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to improve water supply services, wastewater services, and 
flood protection measures in municipalities selected from the inland part of Croatia.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have two components:  
 
Component 1. Technical Assistance (Cost Euro 5 million) comprises three sub-
components:  
 
Sub-component 1a - EU Accession Support which will finance institutional 
strengthening in Hrvatske Vode (HV) and Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Water 
Management (MOAFWM) to implement the Water Management Strategy and prepare 
projects (feasibility studies and other documentation needed for location and construction 
permits, including preliminary design, final design, environmental assessments, and 
bidding documents) that could be funded by the EU and/or other sources.  
 
Sub-component 1b - Project Implementation Support which will be implemented by HV 
and will finance consulting services for preparation of Project Reports and annual audit 
reports.  The component will also finance consultancy services to allow HV to comply 
Page  2
with the Bank's fiduciary (financial management and procurement) and safeguard 
requirements (environment and land acquisition)and to prepare Set 3 of the Bank 
financed investment program (sub-component 2a described below).  
 
Sub-component 1c - Institutional Strengthening of Utilities which will be implemented 
by the utilities that participate in the project.  This sub-component will finance specific 
consulting services for: construction supervision, preparation of feasibility studies and 
bidding documents, institutional measures to increase operating efficiency and improve 
customer service; sub-project progress reporting, and customer surveys.  
 
Component 2. Investments (Cost: Euro 100 million) will finance the following two sub-
components:  
 
Sub-component 2a - Utility Investments will finance three sets of proposed utility 
investments undertaken by the local utilities, with assistance from HV.  
 
The first set of investment (cost Euro 22 million) is for: (i) Virovitica to increase 
sewerage coverage; (ii) Northern Baranja (Beli Manastir) to improve water supply 
coverage; and (iii) Ogulin to increase sewerage coverage and treat wastewater. The 
current ISDS addresses this first set of investments.  
 
The second set of investments (cost Euro 42 milion) for which feasibility studies are 
currently being developed is for: i)Davor-Nova Gradiska and Slavonska-Podravina to 
improve water supply coverage; (ii) Nasice to increase sewerage coverage and construct a 
wastewater treatment plant; and (iii)Southern Baranja region to increase sewerage 
coverage.  
 
The third set of investments (Cost Euro 26 million) that has been recently identified 
(feasibility studies will be developed soon) is for: (i) Vukovar to increase the sewerage 
coverage; (ii) Ilok to increase the sewerage coverage; (iii) Ivankovo to increase the 
sewerage coverage and construct a wastewater treatment plant; (iv) Otok and Komletinci 
to increase the sewerage coverage and construct a wastewater treatment plant; and (v) 
Cerna to increase the sewerage coverage and construct a wastewater treatment plant.   
 
Sub-component 2b - Flood Protection (Cost: Euro 10 million) will support the 
implementation of flood protection measures in the central Sava River basin and will 
include financing of projects for the rehabilitation and expansion of dikes, canals, and 
channels to increase flood management coverage in the central Posavina area, which 
includes part of the Lonjsko Pole retention area (Lonjsko Polje is a Ramsar wetland area 
within the Sava River basin).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project investments will improve water supply and wastewater services, 
and flood protection measures in areas located in the inland part of Croatia. The locations 
of the first set of proposed infrastructure investments are in the cities of Ogulin, 
Page  3
Virovitica and Beli Manastir (Northern Baranja).  Further, the flood protection measures 
will be carried out in the central Posavina area and will include part of the Ramsar 
wetland area of Lonjsko Polje. The first set of utility investments and the flood protection 
measures in central Sava River basin are addressed in this ISDS. The second set of 
investments will be in the Southern Baranja region, and the towns of Nasice, Davor-Nova 
Gradiska, and Slavonska Podravina. The locations of the third set of infrastructure 
investment are Vukovar, Ilok, Ivankovo, Otok and Komletinci, and Cerna.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental category of financial intermediary (FI) will be applicable for this 
project with sub-projects belonging to environmental categories A and B. The safeguards 
that are applicable for the project are:  
 
OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment  
 
OP/BP4.04 on Natural Habitats  
 
OP/BP 4.36 on Forests  
 
OP/BP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement  
 
OP/BP7.50 on International Waterways  
 
OP/BP 4.01: The project will not result in any large scale, significant, and irreversible 
impacts.  Overall, the project is expected to have positive environmental impacts that 
will: (i) provide good quality water service through infrastructure development; (ii) 
reduce threats to the environment and human health through the construction of sewerage 
networks and wastewater treatment plants; and (iii) a decrease in flood related damages 
due to the Sava river floods in Croatia and in downstream riparian countries.  
 
Page  4
The environmental impact of the project is expected from the investments supporting 
specific improvement works to municipal infrastructure in urban areas (Component 2). 
These investments include specific utility investments to increase water supply and 
wastewater coverage in designated inland areas and flood protection investments to 
increase flood management coverage in the Lonjsko Pole retention area. The specific 
range of physical investments financed under the project include: (i) construction of 
sewerage network and wastewater treatment plants; (ii) construction and rehabilitation of 
water supply facilities; and (iii) rehabilitation and expansion of dikes, canals, and 
channels. The possible environmental impacts are mainly envisaged during the 
construction stage but mitigation and monitoring activities will be integrated in the 
construction contracts. The project Environmental Framework briefly described the 
environmental impacts of the project identifying potential effects on air, groundwater, 
soil and natural habitats during the construction and execution of the physical 
infrastructure works. Special attention will be required on possible effects on the natural 
habitats during civil works.  
 
Four EMPs including appropriate site-specific assessment information for the Beli 
Manastir, Virovitica, Ogulin (sewer network rehabilitation) and Flood Protection 
investments for the first year set of utility investments have been developed and publicly 
disclosed by HV on March 9, 2007. These documents recommend preventive actions and 
mitigation measures to address possible environmental impacts related to these 
investments specifically.  In the Ogulin case, a full environmental impact assessment has 
been prepared for tertiary treated water to be injected into karstic formations. However, a 
feasibility study will evaluate the sustainability of such treatment option investment 
including strict discharge wastewater standards  before the Bank agrees to finance the 
wastewater treatment scheme and a revised EA summary will be disclosed based on the 
conclusions of the feasibility study. The associated EMP will be revised accordingly and 
attached to the civil works contracts and include guidance to provide consistent technical 
standards on proper construction procedures.  
 
OP/BP 4.12: Since the proposed construction activities might involve land acquisition a 
Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared by HV and disclosed locally.  
 
OP/BP 4.04: The policy on Natural Habitats is triggered in the context of the flood 
control investments in the Ramsar site of Lonjsko Polje. However, these rehabilitation 
works will not destroy critical habitats within the park area and any distrubance to natural 
habitats during construction of civil works will be subject to review and approval of park 
specialists responsible for biodiversity protection while careful supervision will be 
carried out by the contractor.  
 
OP 7.50: The notification of neighboring countries is required due to the preparation of 
feasibility studies for investments and some financing of wastewater treatment plants 
with possible new discharges in the Danube Basin. The notification letter to the riparians 
is being prepared and is expected to be sent by the Government to the International 
Comission for protection of the Danube River (ICPDR) by the end of March, 2007. In 
such notification letter the comments from the riparians will be sought by mid-May, 
Page  5
2007. Through a memo to the RVP, the team will inform management about the status of 
the notification.  
 
OP/BP 4.36: The policy on Forest will apply for the Lonjsko Pole site due to the 
increased flooding that will affect trees in the wetlands and flood plain. The EMP of the 
proposed flood protection investments has addressed this issue by outlining the impact of 
the project and presenting a mitigation plan.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social implications of the physical investments to be 
supported under the project are described in the Environmental Framework (EF) and 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) developed by the HV during the project 
preparation. The investments supported are intended to improve water supply services, 
wastewater services, and flood protection measures in the inland part of Croatia in areas 
included in the Sava and Dava/Danube river basins. No significant indirect or long term 
impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
At this stage of the project, feasibility studies and other technical documents are available 
only for the first set of utility investments and the flood protection measures. For the 
second and third set of investments these documents will be carry out during the first year 
of project implementation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Measures have been taken to fully comply with the Bank's safeguard policies.  
 
HV has prepared an Environmental Framework (EF) that describes the process to be 
followed to address environmental impacts related to the project.  The EF has been 
publicly disclosed and is comprehensive and addresses measures to be taken to address 
the Bank's safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, and 
Forests.  
 
Through the Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for the first set of investments, 
the potential environmental impact on air, groundwater, soil, and natural habitats during 
the construction phase have been identified along with mitigation measures.  These EMPs 
have also been placed in the public domain through HV's web-site 
(www.voda.hr/hr/index.htm).  In Ogulin's case, for a previous study, a full environmental 
impact assessment was prepared for a tertiary level wastewater treatment through 
membrane technology. A summary of this assessment has been made available in the 
public domain.  Under the Inland Waters Project, the sustainability of the proposed 
membrane technology will be evaluated.  As needed, for the investments to be supported 
by the Bank, the environmental impact assessment will be updated along with the EMP.  
As the construction of a wastewater treatment plant in Ogulin corresponds to a category 
Page  6
A
project, public consultation and disclosure practices will be followed in line with 
Bank's procedures.  Through the sub-project appraisal process, the team will also ensure 
that appropriate discharge standards (for nitrogen and fecal coliform) are used for the 
Ogulin wastewater treatment plant as there are drinking water sources downstream of the 
city.  
 
To addresss the Bank's safeguard policy on International Waterways, the Government is 
in the process of sending a letter to the International Commission for the Protection of the 
Danube River (ICPDR).  Through the letter, expected to be sent before March 31, 2007, 
the Government will inform the commission about the project and request it notify 
riparians and seek comments, if any. Update on April 30, 2007:  The Government issued 
the leter to the ICPDR  on April 3, 2007.  To date, no comments have been received by 
the Croatian authorities. 
 
Since the  proposed construction activities might involve land acquisition a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared by HV and disclosed locally.  
 
HV will implement the project and the agency has adequate technical capacity - through 
staff trained on environmental issues and who are located in Zagreb and the regional 
offices - to ensure that the Bank's safeguard policies are met.  The agency has 
successfully implemented other Bank projects and demonstrated its capacity to 
satisfactorily meet the Bank's safeguard requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and 
Water Management; Hrvatske Vode; participating utilities and the municipalities; local 
non-governmental organization; and the population that will benefit from the project.  
 
The Environmental Framework has been disclosed to and discussed with the public and 
stakeholders on February 9, 2007 in Zagreb. This framework, along with the munutes of 
the public consultation, is available on the web-site of HV and in the Bank's Infoshop 
(submitted on March 5, 2007).  A Croatian version of the framework is also available in 
HV's website (submitted on March 2, 2007).  
 
On February 6, 2007, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was disclosed publicly 
through the website of HV.  The RPF has been submitted to the Bank's Infoshop on 
February 8, 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/05/2007 
 
Page  7
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/06/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Page  8
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sudipto Sarkar 
03/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
03/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
03/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/22/2007 
Comments:  Cleared with the caveat that notification under OP 7.50 is pending and expected to be 
resolved shortly; an amended ISDS should be prepared thereafter reflecting compliance with the 
policy. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
03/20/2007 
Comments:   
