Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2274 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Croatia 
Project ID: P086669 
Project Name: Sustainable Health System Project 
Task Team Leader: Shiyan Chao 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 5, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
4.00
4.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project is to support the government???s health reform agenda.  The overarching 
project development objective is to help prepare the health system for Croatia???s accession to 
the EU.  Specificly, the objective is to reduce the gap between the performance of the Croatian 
health system and those of the EU member countries, both in terms of its outcomes and its 
efficiency, reduce health outcome gaps between social groups, and to ensure the fiscal 
sustainability of the health system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support four priority themes under the National Health Strategy.  It will have 
two phases. In the first phase, the project will provide technical Assistance in following areas 
and during the second phase, some investment programs will be provided based on the results 
from the first phase.  
 
1.
Change the financing system from input- to performance-based payments.  The 
Government???s health sector reform strategy has the objective of increasing the efficiency and 
financial sustainability of the system by changing the incentives to providers.  
Page  2
2. 
Restructure the delivery system to better meet the current needs of the Croatian 
population.  The Government???s health sector reform strategy has the objective of restructuring 
the current delivery system to make it more efficient, but also to build capacity in services and 
geographic areas where the delivery system has gaps.  
 
3.
Strengthen the capacity of the health system to govern effectively.  The Government???s 
health sector reform strategy has the objective of making the operations of health providers more 
transparent and accountable.  
 
4.
Increase of the health system focus on prevention.  The Government???s health sector 
reform strategy has the objective of improving the health status of the Croatian population and, 
particularly, addressing the most critical issue of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) by the most 
effective means.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented throughout Croatia.  More specifically, the policy activities will 
be centered in Zagreb, the location of most national-level health system stakeholders (MoHSW, 
HZZO, Public Health Institute).  When the project supports investments in the health system 
based on a restructuring plan and the implementation of a public health campaign, these 
activities are likely to be implemented throughout the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity, including related to safeguard policies, will be assessed 
during preparation, especially as the project aims to use country systems to the extent possible.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Karin Shepardson (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project is likely to support capital investments and particularly rehabilitation works in 
health facilities.  This will raise potential environmental risks associated with the 
noise/dust/waste of construction; and medical waste.  As the project is expected to be prepared 
and implemented taking a programmatic approach with the maximum use of country systems, 
the institutional capacity of the MoHSW to address the environment safeguards will be assessed 
during preparation; and an Environmental Mitigation Plan, acceptable to the Bank, would be 
included as a component of the Project Operations Manual.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/10/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The timing will be discussed with the Regional Safeguards Coordintor.  At the moment, the 
team proposes that the institutional capacity assessment for adequately addressing the 
environmental safeguards will be concluded during preparation and prior to appraisal.  There 
will not be any rehabilitation works during the first phase of the project, therefore, it is 
proposed that an acceptable EMP component of the Operations Manual be required prior to 
the approval of Annual Development Plan that includes Works in the second phase of the 
project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shiyan Chao 
05/01/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
05/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
05/15/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
