Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3105 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Croatia 
Project ID: P102365 
Project Name: Rijeka Gateway II 
Task Team Leader: Gerald Paul Ollivier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (60%);Roads and highways (20%);General 
transportation sector (10%);Other domestic and international trade (10%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Regional integration (P);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective is to increase Rijeka?s competitiveness as a city-port, by responding 
sustainably to renewed demand for container flows through the port of Rijeka, while facilitating 
an urban renewal of selected parts of the port, through public-private partnerships. Specific 
objectives include: (i) to develop the Rijeka Port into a major, financially self-sustained, regional 
container port; (ii) to ensure that rail, road and logistical corridor connections are upgraded 
through parallel projects to match the port increased capacity; and (iii) to contribute to the urban 
revival of Rijeka through redevelopment of about thirteen hectares of port land for urban 
purposes. The project will build on the partnerships and achievements of the first Rijeka 
Gateway Project, engaging a broad spectrum of stakeholders.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total proposed Project cost is tentatively estimated at Euro 111 million, without financing 
costs, supported by a loan of Euro 74  million (US$100 million equivalent). It would cover a Port 
Development component with the Port of Rijeka Authority (PRA) and a Port-City Interface 
Component with PRA, in cooperation with the City of Rijeka. The project would also follow up 
Page  2
on corridor development aspects, although those would be funded through other government 
projects. The proposed project includes two components:  
 
Component 1: (preliminary cost ? about Euro 97 million). The Port Development component 
would support the highest priorities identified in the final Masterplan update, supported by PRA 
and the Government: (i) construction of new port terminals; (ii) design, technical studies and 
supervision services required for the construction of new terminals; (iii) transaction advisory 
services for concession arrangements; (iii) internal road within the port area; (iv) information 
flow integration; (v) technical studies required for coordination of road and rail corridor 
development;  (v) project implementation and supervision cost.  
 
Component 2: (preliminary cost ? about Euro 14 million). The City-Port Interface component 
would tentatively include the following subcomponents for PRA: (i) technical assistance to PRA 
and the City of Rijeka to set up a proper institutional mechanism to manage effectively the 
concession for the Delta and Port of Baross; (ii) technical assistance to attract private investment 
in the real estate development; (iii) consultation of citizens on proposed development; (iv) 
construction of a road to the passenger terminal; and (v) financing for infrastructure costs (roads, 
waterfront, utilities, additional landfill along Southern Delta coastline, site clearance) within the 
Delta and Port of Baross areas and for port-city competitiveness, including design, technical 
studies and supervision services required for the construction.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project investments are targeting the area of Rijeka Port (Croatia), situated in the northern 
part of Bay of Kvarner an innlet of the Adriatic Sea. The Port of Rijeka is an old industrial 
facility which stretches over several kilometers along the waterfront in the middle of the city. It 
has a favorable location on the coast of a protected, up to 60 m deep bay, that offers all the 
prerequisites for a safe port and the acceptance of the largest and most modern ships. Compared 
to the ports of the North Sea and the Baltic Sea, the main advantage is the shortest sea route 
between Central Europe and the Far East.  
 
Under the proposed project and as part of the process of port operations modernization, the 
PRA plans to relocate a number of port activities currently located in the "Delta" and "Port of 
Baross" areas within the port complex.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower, (PRA) is currently implementing satisfactory the first Rijeka Gateway Project, 
and developed sufficent capacity to carry out sound environmental monitoring and safeguard 
compliance for proper implementation of the infrustructure investments proposed under the 
project. The PIU capacity will be strengthen through regular Bank supervision missions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In accordance with the World Bank OP/BP 4.01, the project is classified as category A for 
environmental assessment purposes given the proposed port-related infrastructure investments 
planed to be financed under the project including construction of (i) new port terminals, (ii) 
roads, within the port area (internal road and connection road to the passenger terminal, and (iii) 
other infrastructure investments related to waterfront, site clearances, additional landfill along 
Southern Delta coastline). For Category A projects, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
is an integral part of project preparation, including disclosure and public consultations, and an 
EIA Report developed before project appraisal. The Client (PRA) will carry-out an EIA with 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) focusing on the planned activities in the Rijeka Port as 
proposed under this project, which will include an analysis of alternatives as well as a review of 
the available EIAs for connecting roads covered under parallel projects (e.g., since the 
construction of D403 with public funding is already likely to take place, the EIA will analyze the 
impact of the connection of D403 with the port). Meaningful public consultation is 
recommended early on, including discussion of the alternatives mentioned above. Public 
consultation was carried out for the Urban Plan, which covers the port area, but there will be 
public consultations also on the Detailed Design Guidelines for the Delta/Port of Baross.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The applicability of this safeguard policy will be analyzed during the project preparation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Direct impacts on cultural heritage are not expected during project implementation since 
proposed infrastructure investments under this project will not target any protected building in 
the port area. However, the OP/BP 4.11 policy on Physical Cultural Resources is triggered 
because of two warehouses located within the port area that are protected (based on a decision 
made by the Ministry of Culture in 2002) and could therefore be affected during the proposed 
construction works. The EMP to be developed by the Borrower will incorporate the appropriate 
mitigation measures on cultural properties.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project is likely to involve the relocation of port facilities such as warehouses, storage 
and some buildings, which belong to the Port Authority and is currently used by the 
concessionaire, from the existing Delta/Port of Baross area to the new terminal on the reclaimed 
land to be constructed under the project. It might also involve the closure of the existing waste 
water treatment plant, subject to the results of a  feasibility study, and decision to include or not 
this component in the project. No resettlement of persons, other businesses than port activities by 
the concessionaire or residential dwellings is foreseen as a result of this project.  
 
All components (including road to passenger terminal or internal road) presently outlined in 
the proposed project are within the maritime domain managed by the port authority. While a 
concession is in place until 2012 for the Delta/Port of Baross area, discussions are on-going to 
consider terminating the concession for that area earlier, against provision of alternative port 
space (the new terminals being proposed).   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The proposed infrastructure investments are limited to the immediate basin of Rijeka, which 
is shielded by the Istrian Peninsula and by currents from neighboring states. Project team 
consulted LEGEN about the applicability of OP/BP 7.50 on International Waters. The team 
agreed that investments envisaged under RGII will not adversely affect the quality of any 
riparian’s waters and therefore will fall under the exception to the notification requirement under 
para 7a of this OP. A memo to the ECA RVP justifying the reasons for this exception will be 
prepared before appraisal.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
-
Preparation and disclosure of project EIA including EMP;  
 
-
Preparation and disclosure of Land Aquisition Framework or Resettlement Policy 
Framework if OP4.12 is triggered;  
 
-
two public consultations, one during ToR preparation for EA and second when the draft 
EA is available (before appraisal);  
 
-
Safeguard Consultation Meeting before QER.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gerald Paul Ollivier 
08/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
08/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
08/30/2007 
Comments:  Approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
