Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2171 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/29/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Croatia 
Project ID: P098948 
Project Name: Inland Waters Project 
Task Team Leader: Sudipto Sarkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 21, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 7, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
47.70 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
2.30
2.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project will be to improve water supply and wastewater services, and flood 
protection measures, in the inland part of Croatia.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project proposes to have three components with the following initial estimates on the cost 
and financing of each component:  
 
Component 
   Cost 
Financing 
 
 
(US$m) (US$m) 
 
 
Bank Non-Bank  
 
1.
Water Supply and Wastewater 
 
25.0 
23.8 
1.2  
 
2.
Flood Management 
 
 
22.5 
21.4 
1.1  
 
3.
Technical Assistance 
 
 
 2.5 
 2.5 
0.0  
 
Total 
    50.0 
47.7 
2.3 
 
 
Page  2
Component 1: Water Supply and Wastewater.  This component will finance: (a) preparation of 
priority projects; and (b) investments that have been identified through (a).  Relevance to EU 
directives, population served, and environmental benefits will be the criteria used to select 
projects for preparation.  The project preparation will be financed by the Bank loan. It is 
expected that the investments required for the prepared projects will be more than what can be 
financed by the Bank loan and the Government intends to utilize EU grants for investments as 
well.  The table above does not show the EU grant amounts as more discussions need to take 
place between the Government and the EU on this matter.  Under this component, investments in 
water supply improvements (source protection, water treatment, and distribution) and wastewater 
collection and treatment (sewerage collectors and network, pumping stations, wastewater 
treatment plants) will be financed.  Further, the project will support the institutional 
strengthening of utilities that will implement the project.  
 
Component 2: Flood Management.  Under this component, flood protection measures mainly in 
the Sava and Drava River Basins will be supported.  This will include preparation and financing 
of projects for the rehabilitation and expansion of dykes, canals, and channels to increase flood 
management coverage.  Projects will be selected based on population affected, the value of the 
assets protected from flood damage, and environmental benefits.  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance.  Under this component, the project will support the 
Government to implement the Water Management Master Plan, the Water Act, and the Act on 
Financing Water Management.  This will include developing a regulatory framework for 
operations of local utilities (tariff methodology, benchmarking financial and technical 
performance).  The project will also strengthen HV so that it is able to prepare and implement 
projects that will receive EU funds.  
 
The Borrower of the Bank loan will be HV, with the Ministry of Finance providing the 
sovereign guarantee.  The proposed Bank financing is 100% for Technical Assistance costs and 
95% for costs related to Works and Goods.  HV will have the overall responsibility for 
implementing the project and it will utilize the Bank loan proceeds for components 2 and 3.  
 
For component 1, HV will on-lend the proceeds of the Bank loan to the municipalities.  The on-
lending conditions will be determined during project preparation but it is likely that the 
Financing Gap method  
–
used by the EU – will be used in fixing the level of financial assistance 
to municipalities.  The approach is as follows:  
 
•
Determine the incremental project cost (C) for 20 years discounted at 6% (investment cost 
plus operation cost minus residual value  
 
•
Determine the incremental project revenues (R) for 20 years discounted at 6%.Revenues 
assume that households will pay maximum socially affordable level for water and wastewater 
charges (3.5% of household income) and industries will pay full costs (operating costs, including 
depreciation; and investment costs).  
 
•
The financing gap (C-R) is the amount to be covered by non-municipal sources such as the 
Bank loan, EU grants, or State budget.   
 
Page  3
Sub-Borrower (which will be municipal utilities for the water and wastewater component) and 
Sub-Project eligibility criteria will be agreed between the Government and the Bank.  
Investments that meet the criteria will be eligible for financing under the project.  This 
programmatic approach brings flexibility in project implementation and enables EU grants, 
where available, to co-finance with the Bank loan.  The first year investment program will be 
agreed at appraisal and HV has initiated the process to start the associated feasibility studies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project sites will be located mainly in the Sava and Drava River Basins.  Specific 
investments in these river basins are now being identified by HV.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has implemented three Bank projects recently and has demonstrated that it has 
adequate institutional capacity to satisfactorily address issues related to Bank’s safeguard 
policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Category: FI.  It is planned that sub-projects implemented in year 1 will be 
limited to those of EA category ‘B’, will be identified in advance, and EA reports will be 
prepared. However, subsequent sub-projects will be identified and prepared during the course of 
the project.  As the project will mainly finance construction and rehabilitation of modest size 
water supply and wastewater facilities, and rehabilitation of dykes, canals and channels, sub-
projects will most likely fall in EA Category B. However, it is possible that some sub-projects 
could fall in category A due to their size or local risk factors.  Thus for safeguards purposes the 
project is regarded as an Financial Intermediary (FI), with potential category A and B sub-
projects, with the Croatian Waters acting as the FI entity.  
 
Environmental Assessment.  An EA/EMP will be required for the year 1 sub-projects, 
together with an Environmental Framework that will be applicable for the duration of the project.  
The Environmental Framework will cover the environmental procedures to be followed by 
Croatian Waters for both EA Categories A and B sub-projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Although no significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitat is expected, the 
safeguard team advised that this OP is triggered because of the potential for the project to be 
implemented in areas of critical natural habitat.  The project will include measures to develop the 
capacity of institutions at the national and local level for effective environmental planning and 
management.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Once more is known about the location of the investments, the team will need to determine 
whether or not this safeguard is triggered.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Policy Framework is being prepared.  Although some of the projects may necessitate land 
acquisition, the plots of land required are small.  Thus, the decision has been made to explicitly 
exclude sites that would entail the physical resettlement of people.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The project will not finance any dam construction directly; however it is possible that water 
supply or flood protection investments are associated with existing dams.  Once more is known 
about the investments, the team will determine whether or not this OP is triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project will finance investments that may impact the water quality or quantity of the 
Sava and Drava Rivers.  As both the Sava and Drava are international rivers, under OP 7.50, the 
Government will need to notify riparian countries to these rivers, and the Danube River Basin 
Commission, and Sava River Basin Commission about the project.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/14/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Before Appraisal, the Resettlement Policy Framework will be agreed upon with the 
Government.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sudipto Sarkar 
03/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
03/29/2006 
Comments:   
