Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3094 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/24/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Djibouti 
Project ID: P102842 
Project Name: Avian Influenza and Human Pandemic Preparedness 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Philippe Tre 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (50%);Animal production (25%);Agricultural extension and research 
(25%) 
Theme: Other communicable diseases (P);Other rural development (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Avian and Human Influenza Facility 
2.11
2.11 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the Grant is to contain and prevent the emergence of Highly Pathogenic 
Avian Influenza (HPAI) in domestic poultry, and to prepare for, control and respond to an 
influenza pandemic and other infectious disease emergencies in humans.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Animal Health and Veterinary Services  
 
This component will provide support for the strengthening of veterinary services through 
assistance for:  
 
1.Disease control and management capacity: this sub-component will support the following 
activities: (a) culling of infected and at-risk poultry; (b) compensation to farmers and producing 
companies; (c) disposal of carcasses and potentially infective materials in a biosecure and 
environmentally acceptable manner; (d) enhanced bio-security at poultry farms and associated 
premises, through bio-containment and bio-exclusion training and community awareness 
programs; (e) vaccination of poultry and use of good quality and non anti-viral HPAI vaccines 
produced according to OIE standards and implemented according to FAO/OIE guidelines. The 
Page  2
sub-component would also provide basic bio-security equipment such as sprayers, protective 
equipment.  
 
2. Improved Laboratory services capacity: The diagnostic capacity of public veterinary services 
will be improved through the upgrading of the existing veterinary laboratory in Djibouti city and 
training for laboratory technicians. This subcomponent will provide support for rapid testing 
capacity and acquisition of modern laboratory equipment.  
 
3. Improved regulatory and legal framework of veterinary services: this sub-component will 
support reviews of existing regulation and policies to address key policies issues to ensure that 
the recommended disease control, prevention and eradication measures are implemented in a 
uniform way and in accordance with OIE standards and guidelines. It will also provide support 
for key diagnostic and assessment studies, including national poultry census and sector 
restructuring options.  
 
4. Strengthened animal disease surveillance and diagnostic capacity building through: (a) 
provision of technical assistance, and training to field and quarantine staff; (b) improvement of 
animal health information flow among relevant agencies; (c) rapid detection, reporting and 
follow-up of reported cases; (d) routine serological surveys and epidemio-surveillance at 
migratory birds habitats and backyard levels; (e) the establishment of public and community-
based animal disease surveillance and early warning networks to support a robust emergency 
reporting and feedback system against notifiable diseases. The sub-component would also 
support training for animal health workers, and treatment of infected animals and reporting 
procedures.  
 
5. Improved human resources through support for two-year curriculum training for new 
veterinary technicians  
 
Component 2: Public Health Services  
 
This component seeks to prevent the emergence of a human pandemic through the rapid 
identification and effective management of human cases. It will provide support for:  
 
1. Improved diagnostic capacity and effective management of human cases: this sub-component 
will finance the procurement and distribution of medicine, personal protective equipment for at-
risk population and medical staff. Anti-viral drugs will not be eligible for support. The sub-
component will also provide support for the acquisition of modern equipment for laboratory 
diagnostic as well as provision of laboratory consumables, specimen collection kits and 
transports costs associated with sending the specimens to the WHO collaborating center.  
 
2. Improved surveillance, investigation and response capacity: this sub-component will support 
establishment and training of rapid response teams as well as operating costs associated with 
surveillance, investigation, and response activities, including vehicle purchase and necessary 
logistics  
 
Page  3
3. Technical training for health staff: this activity will support: (a) training for medical staff on 
social distancing measures, treatment guidelines, protocols and procedures for managing medical 
waste  and hospital infection control guidelines, including strategies to increase hospital bed 
availability; (b) training for health field workers on surveillance measures, case detection and 
reporting, clinical and virological surveillance criteria and reporting protocols/systems for 
influenza-like symptoms and fevers of unknown origin; (c) practical training of laboratory 
technicians on the application of special quality control and bio-safety guidelines.  
 
Component 3: Communication and public awareness  
 
This component would provide support for information and communication activities to 
increase the attention and commitment of government, private sector and civil society and to 
raise awareness of the general population about the risk and potential impact of the pandemic. 
Specific activities would include: (a) the development of a communications strategy to advocate, 
inform and seek a rapid-reporting and rapid-response behavior from society; (b) information 
sharing and training workshops for public sector advocacy, media and journalists, local NGOs, 
civil society and technical staff in Ministries of Health and Agriculture; (c) broadcast media 
production and dissemination; (d) establishment and operation of an avian influenza hotline; (e) 
information baseline and research studies as well as media monitoring and evaluation activities; 
(e) production of educational toolkits for community training, education and mobilization.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This project will be implemented nationwide in Djibouti.  
 
For specific components, certain provinces are targeted where reference and regional 
laboratories exist (for strengthening of animal disease surveillance capacity).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The counterpart will need capacity building regarding safeguards policies, and quality control 
assistance.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The safeguard issues which pertain to the Project are (i) selection and implementation of 
culling methods; (ii) selection and implementation of disposal methods for culled poultry and 
associated waste; (ii) safe disposal of medical waste; and (iv) mitigating the negative economic 
impacts of disease-inducted death and/or mandated culling of poultry on small-scale and 
backyard poultry producers.  
 
Overall, the Project would assist the government entities to develop a strategy for managing 
future emerging and re-emerging diseases outbreaks. As such the project will improve 
environmental and social safeguards in following areas: (i) mainstreaming environmental 
safeguards into protocols and procedures for the culling and disposal of animals during an 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
outbreak, in particular by adopting OIE standards in these areas, and improving bio-medical-
waste management systems in health facilities and laboratories; (ii) financing safe culling and 
disposal options; and (iii) development of policies on compensation for poultry farmers affected 
by future outbreaks.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
It is very likely that chemicals will be used for the culling of birds. The procurement of any 
pesticide will be contingent on an assessment of the nature and degree of associated risks, taking 
into account the proposed use and the intended users. The Project will require that any pesticides 
it finances be manufactured, packaged, labeled, handled, stored, disposed of, and applied 
according to standards acceptable to the Bank. The Bank does not finance formulated products 
that fall in WHO classes IA and IB, or formulations of products in Class II, if (a) the country 
lacks restrictions on their distribution and use; or (b) they are likely to be used by, or be 
accessible to, lay personnel, farmers, or others without training, equipment, and facilities to 
handle, store, and apply these products properly.  
 
Whatever medical waste is generated in health care facilities and waste from the animal 
health component will be managed using existing guidelines in the countries. The country project 
will also support updating these guidelines, training of health care workers to manage medicinal 
waste following these guidelines and the purchase of equipment for the proper handling and 
disposal of medical waste in selected facilities. This provision would be included in the project 
operational manual (or equivalent).   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/31/2007 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since the project supports investments for the culling and disposal of carcasses and 
laboratory wastes, a short Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared. The 
EMP will cover the selection of appropriate culling methods, clean-up of animal wastes of 
infected and culled poultry; selection and management of disposal facilities. The scope of 
this EMP will be specified during the initial period of Project implementation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Philippe Tre 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
 
Comments:  Note: The SD team member was Tigaust Fisseha. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
