Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/16/2006 
Report No.:  AC2026
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Dominican Republic 
Project ID:  P090010 
Project Name:  DO Social Sectors Investment Program 
Task Team Leader:  Samuel C. Carlson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (73%);Central government administration (27%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Child health (P);Education for all (P);Social risk 
mitigation (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Improve coverage, targeting and effectiveness of public social protection programs, to 
provide short-term poverty relief and encourage the poor to build human capital and 
capacity to lift themselves out of poverty.  
 
Through the provision to poor households of national identity documents and direct 
monetary transfers conditioned upon investments in their human capital, the project 
would contribute to both short-term and long-term poverty reduction.  In addition, it 
would improve social equity and coverage of basic social services.  The focus would be 
on inclusion and empowerment of most vulnerable groups: over 1 million extremely poor 
Dominicans unable to afford minimum food requirements, and over 400,000 
undocumented Dominicans excluded from social services and economic opportunities.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component One, Strengthening Social Protection Services (estimated US$12.8 M), 
would aim to build the capacity of the Social Cabinet, the Solidarity (CCT) Program, 
SIUBEN, and social program monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Page  2
Sub-Component 1, Institutional Development of the Solidarity CCT program and 
SIUBEN targeting instrument (US$10.1 million), would aim to support the Solidarity 
Program’s growth into an effective conditional cash transfer program.  “Effectiveness” 
would be measured in terms of: improvements in targeting, coverage andpayment 
systems; efficacy of conditionalities to incentivize poor families to invest in their 
childrens’ human capital; and capacities of participating institutions to manage, monitor 
and evaluate the program.  
 
Sub-Component 2, Social Cabinet Institutional Strengthening (US$2.7 million),would 
increase the capacity of the Social Cabinet to play an effective role in the country’s 
strategy to reduce poverty and to foster investments in human capitalamong poor 
households, and in particular to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation framework for 
increased transparency and impact assessment of all major social protection programs, 
particularly of CCT programs.  
 
Component Two, Provision of National Identity Documents (US$18.0 M), would aim to 
improve access of poor households to basic social services and economic opportunities.  
Specific objectives for this component are:  Specific objectives for this component are:  
(i) all 195,000 family members of 200,000 households currently enrolled in the Solidarity 
CCT program would obtain their birth certificates or identity cards (this is a 
conditionality of the CCT program itself, thus requiring a supply-side response); and (ii) 
all 170,000 family members of 92,000 households deemed eligible for enrollment in the 
Solidarity CCT program, but excluded for lack of documentation by the head of 
household, would obtain their birth certificates or identity cards.  
 
Sub-Component 1: National Civil Registry Support (US$ 6.1 M), would provide both 
results-based disbursement (US$2.0 M) and infrastructure support (US$3.0 M) to 
improve efficiency and results in the issuance of identity documents, as well as financing 
for temporary contracting of para-legals to work in the Attorney General’s Office and the 
Supreme Court to expedite administrative approvals of identity document applications.  
 
Sub-Component 2: Targeted Legal Aid Campaigns (US$10.1 M), would help 
undocumented households already identified through the SIUBEN household surveys to 
obtain their national identity documents.  
 
Sub-Component 3: Information, Education and Communication Campaigns (US$1.7 
M), would emphasize the importance of obtaining national identification documents and 
clearly explain the steps required to do so.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide.  The project proposes to provide financing in the amount of US$ 3 million 
for minor civil works/rehabilitation of existing civil registry offices.Approximately 50 
civil registry offices in urban areas of the Dominican Republic (out of a total of 150) 
would be rehabilitated, so that they can receive computers, digital thumb-printing 
machines and other information and communication technologies as part of a 
government- financed modernization program.  Civil registry offices are relatively small 
buildings, with 4 "spaces" (reception area, secretarial area, storage/archive area and office 
of civil registrar).  Typically, they are the "cumulative" size of a large school classroom, 
Page  3
divided into four areas.  Rehabilitation of the storage/archive area is needed to provide a 
secure, dust-free, electrically-stable environment for the technology to be installed.  If 
these storage/archive areas are not sufficiently large to install this equipment and provide 
space for civil registry records, minor expansions of these spaces would be required.  
These works would take place on existing plots of land occupied by the civil registry 
offices.  
 
Accordingly, no adverse environmental impacts are foreseen.  
 
No safeguards are triggered.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Josefina Stubbs (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samuel C. Carlson 
03/03/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr David Seth Warren 
03/07/2006 
Comments:  David S. Warren was Acting Sector Manager. 
