Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3040 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/26/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Dominican Republic 
Project ID: P089866 
Project Name: DO Electricity Distribution Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Lucio Monari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 6, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
116.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
116.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objectives of the proposed project are to (i) reduce distribution losses and increase cash 
recovery of the country?s three major distribution companies, and (ii) improve the quality of 
power supply to consumers.  The project would support the critical element of the Government?s 
strategy to achieve financial sustainability of the sector, and will contribute to achieve the CAS 
objectives of stabilizing the economy and improving the competitiveness of the DR. The 
following performance indicators have been selected:  (i) Increase in the Cash Recovery Index of 
the distribution companies, and (ii) increase in the quality of power supply   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
As part of their annual business plans, the three distribution companies formulate an annual 
investment program, in recent years for a total of about US$75 million .  A large part of this 
investment is dedicated to reduce losses and increase collection from customers (see Annex 2 for 
the program for 2008 and 2009), while maintaining and rehabilitating equipment and 
infrastructure. Investments include upgrading networks through the installation or replacement of 
medium and low voltage range transformers at the primary and secondary feeders, distribution 
Page  2
lines and transformers, secondary main services meters and metering devices at consumers? 
wiring.  Efficient lighting, such as compact fluorescent lamp (CFL), would also be included to 
mitigate the impact of tariff payment on poorer consumers.  
 
Specifically, the proposed project would finance remote meter reading equipment and related 
infrastructure at the premises of large industrial, commercial and residential consumers, 
particularly in EdeSur concession, where their concentration is very significant. The payback 
period of these investments is very short: monitoring continuously the consumption of these 
large customers would allow the distribution companies to detect anomalies and intervene in real 
time.  
 
For other consumers (excluding the PRA), geographical areas within each distribution 
concession would be selected under criteria such as potential for CRI improvement, acceptability 
for agreeing on a Pacto Social, high return on investment, and scope for improving the quality of 
power supply.  The base line indicators of the CRI and the reliability of power supply would be 
defined and monitored before project start-up and during project implementation.  The 
investment in system rehabilitation along with its installation would be procured as turn key 
contracts to ensure transparency and timely completion.  The design of the Social Management 
Plans leading to the finalization of the Social Agreements will start before the implementation of 
the investments to ensure their social sustainability.  
 
Alternatives:  
 
An alternative to the proposed operation would be the immediate sale of the distribution 
companies to experienced operators who would make the necessary investments.  This 
alternative is not viable due to the recent history of failure of the privatization of the Dominican 
Republic distribution companies.  At this time, this approach is not considered politically 
feasible by the Government.  The option of sub-concession contracting by the distribution 
companies for investment and management of small geographical areas to private investors was 
also reviewed by the Government and the Bank.  It was found interesting but also creating future 
impediments to other forms of private sector participation, such as management contracts, and 
others arrangements, that could be implemented in the near future.  
 
Another alternative could consist of financing distribution equipment to be installed by the 
distribution companies throughout their concession areas.  While this option would provide more 
flexibility to the management on investment decisions, it would also be more difficult to monitor 
their direct results.  It would also require a good implementation capacity by the distribution 
companies to avoid delay.  The proposed approach has also the advantage of allowing for a 
modular implementation of the investment program, area by area.  This would allow proceeding 
with the subprojects while the financing of all elements of the required rehabilitation network is 
in place.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will cover the entire country. Nonetheless, the rehabilitation works would take place 
in selected areas of the distribution networks to be determined during project implementation. 
These areas will be chosen guided by criteria to de defined during project preparation.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Dominican Republic has weak enforcement capabilities of its environmental regulations. The 
GODR is well aware of this situation and has, with the concourse of the CNE (supported with a 
Bank operation) requested and obtained support to strengthen this area. A MOU has been signed 
and is being implemented. The overall environmental control approach adopted by SEMARN is 
briefly defined as: environmental licensing is required classified according to the expected 
environmental impact OF THE INTERVENTION; license, when required, defines an 
environmental management plan that the licensee agrees to implement; as recorded in the license 
the licensee has to provide periodic progress reports on the implementation of the agreed 
environmental plan; these reports ought to include an audit report, prepared by certified 
independent environmental auditors registered with the Ministry of Environment, SEMARN. 
Environmental control is managed through private sector participation. SEMARN with the 
support of the Bank is training a cadre of 40 to 60 professional in environmental auditing for 
international certification.    But SEMARN has not yet the require capability, as the new 
procedures and training will take place during late 2007 and mid 2008.  
 
Electric distribution projects are classified as interventions that do not require environmental 
license (as found in many countries).  
 
The new country environmental framework, as described, will be applicable to the project. 
Given the low environmental impact of the proposed project activities, distribution of electricity 
requires no licensing in the existing GODR legislation. The handling of PCB and PCB 
contaminated equipment ?the main environmental concern in this project- is regulated through a 
well defined and concerted environmental procedure. Strict adherence to the PCB environmental 
standard is mandatory.  
 
The existing distribution companies and SEMARN have agreed to: (i) jointly adopt guidelines 
for environmental good practices; (ii) the distribution companies will enact the guidelines 
through their Board of Directors as Corporate Guidelines for immediate application; (iii) 
SEMARN will formally opt for a Certification of not requiring additional environmental 
supporting documentation to grant the corresponding environmental licenses; and (iv) the 
disposal of discharged equipment will follow the existing regulation which has been incorporated 
in the agreed environmental guidelines.  
 
The distribution companies have developed environmental management offices staffed with 
well trained personnel and adequate logistic support. These offices are charge with the 
responsibility of proper disposition of PCB contaminated products, are well aware of the 
procedures, have created the required infrastructure, have trained technical personnel to screen 
oils for PCB content, and are familiar with the final disposition drill (to hired an international 
company for the collection treatment and destruction of oils of metals contaminated with PCB.) 
No serious institutional constraint was detected. The electric distribution companies are capable 
of managing the PCB safely and environmentally adequately.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Walter Vergara (LCSEN) 
Page  4
Ms Elena Correa (SDV) 
Mr Alejandro M. Deeb (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project is expected to be largely beneficial to the environment, as improvements on 
continuity and reliability of service provision will reduce the need for individual energy sources, 
a
major source of air and noise pollution. The project will also produce waste that requires 
proper management to avoid serious contamination.  
 
Electricity distribution has been classified as a minimum environmental impact activity in 
many countries, including the Dominican Republic. Managing PCB contaminated oils and 
disposable old equipment (in 1980 the use of PCB was outlawed through the Montreal Protocol 
as a persistent pollutant) has received proper attention by the GODR. In consensus with the 
interested parties SEMARN adopted clear regulations that are being followed.  
 
Given the characteristics of the project, focused in rehabilitation of urban distribution lines 
with well known and defined environmental impacts, environmental guidelines will be used to 
provide directions on the planning and execution of the works, and will reiterate the special 
handling of PCB contaminated material. The development and adoption of environmental 
guidelines has been agreed by all key stakeholders. The contemplated works will be conducted 
by, or under the immediate supervision of, the distribution companies, and no major 
environmental impact should be expected if the agreed guidelines are implemented. Compliance 
will be exercised through environmental auditors to strengthen the approach already adopted by 
SRMARN.  
 
The project will define, in close collaboration with all parties, a simple and efficient 
procedure to obtain environment clearance based on the agreement to follow the Guidelines to 
developed and agreed between SEMARN and the electricity distribution companies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Dominican Republic has a rich cultural heritage and important historical landmarks and 
buildings that could be impacted if the proposed works do not incorporate special provision for 
dealing with such, probably few, cases. During project preparation surveys and analysis will be 
conducted to identify if this safeguard is trigger. Contingent guidelines would be prepared and 
discussed with project implementer to avoid the potential risk of negatively affecting the cultural 
assets of the country.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
No involuntary physical or economic desplacement is envisaged.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  5
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/11/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lucio Monari 
06/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/23/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Todd M. Johnson 
10/25/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
