Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2331
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Dominican Republic 
Project ID:  P054221 
Project Name:  DO (APL1) WAT.&SANI.TOUR.AREAS 
Task Team Leader:  Manuel G. Marino 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Pollution management 
and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
27.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6.50
6.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the first phase of the proposed APL (the Project, APL I) are: (i) 
strengthening and consolidating the policy framework of the water and sanitation sector 
in the Dominican Republic; (ii) improving and expanding access to sanitation and 
wastewater treatment and disposal services in the Puerto Plata region; (iii) improving the 
financial and operational performance of CORAAPLATA, the region?s water utility; and 
(iv) enhancing operational and commercial performance of other regional utilities and 
preparing them to participate in the second phase of the Program (APL II).   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will have the components described below:  
 
Component 1: Technical Assistance for Sector Development (estimated cost US$ 3.3 
million of which US$ 3.3 million Bank financing).  
 
Component 1 of the Project will support efforts to strengthen and consolidate the water 
and sanitation sector policy framework. The component will finance technical assistance 
for the development of the National Strategy for the sector, to strengthen the capacity of 
national policy and regulatory institutions and improve technical, commercial and 
Page  2
operational performance of water and sanitation utilities, including targeted training. 
Specifically, the component would finance:  
 
(a) National Strategy for the Water and Sanitation Sector: The Project will finance 
consultant services and training for the design of a National Strategy for the sector, as 
well as to identify key reforms needed. The strategic framework will define: (i) sector 
financing mechanisms; (ii) performance targets for the decentralized utilities; (iii) tariffs 
and subsidies policies; and (iv) mechanisms for the monitoring and evaluation of 
compliance. The framework will also propose a division of roles and responsibilities for 
implementing sector policies among active institutions and agencies.  The Project will 
also include support for the operation of the Water Sector Council to facilitate inter-
agency dialogue and coordination.  
 
(b) Institutional Modernization and Strengthening of Utilities: The component will 
finance consultant services and equipment for a first phase of a national institutional 
modernization and strengthening program to support the improvement of technical and 
management capacity in public utilities. Specifically, for utilities willing to enter into a 
?Performance and Financial Support Agreements?, the component will finance: (i) 
medium-term business plans; (ii) modernization of consumer cadastre; and (iii) leakage 
reduction campaigns. Support under this subcomponent would also include feasibility 
studies, designs and environmental impact assessments for works to be financed under 
APL II. The ?Performance and Financial Support Agreements? would outline the specific 
areas for financing and establish operational and commercial targets over the period of 
the APL I. Reaching these targets will in effect qualify utilities to receive financing for 
works and continued technical assistance under APL II.  
 
(c) Watershed Management Plans and Strategic Environmental Assessment: In the 
context of the preparation of the National Strategy for the water and sanitation sector, the 
Project will finance consultant services to develop two of its keystone elements: (i) 
criteria for the design of Watershed Management Plans aimed at improving regional 
environmental management capacity and protecting and reclaiming coastal watersheds 
(also called Proyectos de Directrices); and (ii) a Strategic Environmental Assessment 
(SEA) for the northern coast. Watershed management plans would eventually constitute 
the comprehensive planning basis for the future management of coastal watersheds. The 
ultimate goal is to develop management plans that, taking advantage of the recreational 
and economic potential of these watersheds, help protect and improve the quality of river 
and coastal areas.  
 
The SEA would assess north coast development alternatives and design strategies for 
environmental management compatible with the long-term regional economic 
development and preservation goals. The assessment also aims to incorporate a broader 
analysis of competitiveness of the regional tourism sector and related issues of 
environmental sustainability and management. In this regard, the SEA will evaluate the 
current and future development trends and plans, as well as alternatives for sustainable 
pollution control, including the possible construction of additional submarine outfalls for 
the disposal of wastewater discharges for the region. The SEA will provide a planning 
baseline and establish future goals and plans for the improvement of environmental 
quality, including land management objectives for the region.  
 
(d) Environmental Education and Public Participation Campaign: The Project will 
finance a national environmental education and public participation campaign with the 
Page  3
objective of both increasing the involvement of a broad cross-section of consumers in the 
sector reform process and raising the environmental and sector awareness of critical 
stakeholders and beneficiaries. The campaign will have the specific objectives of: (i) 
mitigating the potential social and political risks of the Project and the broader strategic 
reform program by providing accurate and timely information to relevant stakeholders; 
(ii) engage key governmental, institutional and civil society stakeholders in an informed 
dialogue around specific aspects of  the reform program; (iii) generate public support for 
the Project and the principal technical components; and (iv) cultivate a greater demand-
responsiveness and consumer awareness amongst utilities with the ultimate aim of 
improving performance. The campaign will be designed in detail during the first year of 
implementation and will have the additional objective of identifying successful 
mechanisms for civic education and participation that can be mainstreamed under APL II.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation and Expansion of Sanitation Services in Puerto Plata 
(estimated cost US$ 26.8 million, of which US$ 23.45 million Bank financed)  
 
This component will finance: (a) investments to rehabilitate and improve access to 
sanitation in the Puerto Plata region; (b) investments to rehabilitate the wastewater 
treatment plant in San Felipe de Puerto Plata and to study, design and construct 
submarine outfalls in San Felipe de Puerto Plata and Cabarete; and (c) technical 
assistance to improve performance and efficiency of CORAAPLATA, to supervise 
Project investments and to prepare detailed designs for this Project and for APL II.  
 
(a) 
Rehabilitation and Improved Access to Sanitation: A technical, environmental and 
financial feasibility study was conducted between 1998 and 2000 which identified a 
medium-term investment plan in the water and sanitation sector in the Puerto Plata 
region. Investments tentatively identified for this Project are based on this earlier 
investment program. Specifically, the proposed Project will finance the rehabilitation and 
expansion of priority sewerage networks and pumping stations in the area of Sosua and 
Montellano, and in intermediary locations such as Playa Dorada, La Union, and Bombita. 
These works are critical for the operation of CORAAPLATA and the sustainability of the 
services provided and for the ability of the utility to reach near full coverage for 
sanitation in urban areas. Through these investments the Project will finance expanded 
sewerage to benefit over 18,000  persons in these localities, and major elements of the 
wastewater collection and treatment systems, such as trunk sewers and pre-treatments 
facilities, all linked to facilities built under the LIL.  
 
(b) 
Wastewater Treatment and Disposal:  The Project will finance the rehabilitation 
of the wastewater treatment plant of San Felipe de Puerto Plata, a four basins lagoon that 
receives wastewaters from this city and small localities in its surroundings.  The project 
will also finance the feasibility studies, designs and construction of the submarine outfall 
to discharge treated wastewaters from this plant and from Cabarete?s treatment plant, as 
well as the interconnection of the Playa Dorada hotel complex to the San Felipe system.  
 
(c) 
Technical Assistance to CORAAPLATA: The Project will finance consultant 
services, training and equipment to support CORAAPLATA to improve its operational 
and commercial performance. Specifically, this component will finance the preparation of 
(i) a comprehensive strategic business plan; (ii) institutional strengthening and efficiency 
improvement programs to bring the utility to reasonable levels of management, 
operational efficiency and financial viability; (iii) a baseline-and-after Project analysis; 
and (iv) detailed project designs and feasibility studies.  As indicated above, among these 
Page  4
studies the Project will finance the feasibility studies needed to select the best option of 
treatment and disposal of wastewaters in San Felipe de Puerto Plata and in Cabarete, as 
well as detailed engineering designs for the construction of these outfalls.  
 
Given the interest expressed by both the Government and CORAAPLATA to further 
involve the private sector in the provision of the water and sanitation services, this 
potential involvement, modalities, scope and arrangements would be analyzed and 
discussed during the first year of Project implementation. Should CORAAPLATA 
management and the government decide to undertake a form of private sector 
participation; the Project will finance consultant services to assist CORAAPLATA in the 
design and processing of this transaction.  
 
Component 3:  Program Administration (estimated cost US$ 3.9 million, including US$ 
0.75 million Bank financing)  
 
Component 3 will finance costs associated with program management. Loan proceeds 
will be used to finance Project related audits, equipment, training and technical assistance 
to strengthen the SEEPYD and CORAAPLATA, as well as individual consultants, with 
qualifications and experience under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank, for the 
following purposes: (i) external advisory services on procurement; (ii) monitoring and 
evaluation; and (iii) specialized individual consultants to support the implementation of 
the Project, subject to prior approval of the Bank.  The Bank will not finance from loan 
proceeds the salaries and other recurrent costs for either SEEPYD or CORAAPLATA. 
These costs will be financed through Government and CORAAPPLATA resources, 
allocated to the Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented in the Greater Puerto Plata region, including the city of 
Puerto Plata and the neighboring areas of Sosua, Cabarete, Playa Dorada and Montellano. 
Watershed degradation is common in coastal areas of including Puerto Plata, as is illegal 
or unplanned occupation of the lower parts of most of these small river basins. In many 
cases, such as in the Greater Puerto Plata area, hotel centers gave rise to the development 
of uncontrolled peri-urban communities inhabited by low-income families, who provide 
formal and informal services to hotels and tourists. These communities lack basic water 
and sanitation services, something that directly affects the health and quality of life of 
their dwellers, but also contributes to the pollution of rivers and coastal areas. Water 
scarcity in coastal areas is also increasing in recent years, mainly because of poor 
management of water demand, high unaccounted for water consumption in urban areas, 
and watershed degradation (springs located at the upper basins constitute the main source 
of water supply to coastal localities, particularly in periods of drought).  
 
Although the Dominican Republic, and within it the province of Puerto Plata, has many 
areas of high environmental value, most works to be financed under the project will be 
located on public roads or on public land (as in the case of the expansions of sewerage 
networks and the rehabilitation of the San Felipe wastewater treatment plant) where no 
valuable vegetation, fauna or physical elements will be affected.  Similarly, no 
resettlement or land acquisition is foreseen under the project.  
Page  5
The coastal area in the province of Puerto Plata is well known for the tropical beaches 
and coral reefs, particularly those located in the vicinity of Sosua, which have been its 
main tourist attraction and, despite past aggressions they have suffered, still remain the 
basis for its most important engine for development. This coastal area is also 
characterized by its steep gradients, reaching significant depths (over 50 m) within the 
first kilometer.  Consistent with its objective of preserving the quality of coastal waters 
and its natural values, the project foresees the location of the submarine outfall for San 
Felipe in an area where no coral reefs are present (around the port of Puerto Plata), and 
only so after extensive and detailed studies prove that the proposed solution does not 
have negative environmental impacts (see below).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Gil-Diaz (LCSPE) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
The Project design is structured with two principal components. Component 1 will 
finance technical assistance for the development of a national water and sanitation sector 
strategy as well as targeted technical assistance to the principal Corporaciones de 
Acueductos y Alcantarillados (CORAAs) for business planning and operational 
improvements. Component 2 will finance both: (i) investments in the expansion of 
network sanitation in Puerto Plata region, rehabilitation and expansion of treatment 
facilities and appropriate wastewater disposal infrastructure; and (ii) a package of 
technical assistance for CORAAPLATA to facilitate operational and commercial 
improvements.  
 
Capital investments under component 2 of the proposed Project were originally 
analyzed and developed under the Proyecto de Agua Potable y Saneamiento en Centro 
Page  6
Tur?sticos (PASCT) and constitute a continuation of the investments supported under the 
previous LIL. Specifically, the investment program involves a combination of: (i) 
identified investments in the expansion of network sanitation in Sosua, La Union, 
Montellano and Cabarete; (ii) to be determined investments in treatment and disposal of 
wastewater in Puerto Plata and Cabarete. The expansion of network sanitation 
infrastructure will involve traditional and largely uncomplicated investments in pumping 
stations and primary and secondary networks. The expansion, rehabilitation and 
construction of wastewater treatment and disposal infrastructure will involve an 
undetermined combination of treatment and disposal levels and methodologies. These 
investments will require additional feasibility assessment under implementation to 
determine the specific designs. The anticipated environmental and social impacts of this 
revised investment program are considered to be largely positive with no foreseeable 
adverse impacts. Two subprojects have already been identified for project financing: (i) 
the installation of approximately 67 km of new sewerage lines and a pumping station in 
Sosua, and (ii) the installation of approximately 61 km of new sewage lines, four 
pumping stations, and associated infrastructure in Montellano. In both cases, the sewage 
collected would eventually be piped to an existing marine outfall in Sosua.  For these 
subprojects, site-specific EIA and EMP documents were submitted. These documents 
(presented together as Chapter III of the overall package) contain detailed descriptions of 
the two subprojects, and assert that all work will be carried out within existing rights-of-
way with no direct impacts on existing buildings or property. Any unforeseen impacts of 
such type will be addressed through the Project?s Resettlement Policy Framework.  
 
Based on the current Project design, the task team recommends that the Project trigger 
the Bank safeguard policies for Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01), Natural 
Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The team concurs with the previous Safeguards 
Categorization of ?A?. The remainder of this section outlines the proposed environmental 
assessment approach for the Project.  
 
Environmental Assessment  
 
The Project involves a mix of identified investments for the expansion of sanitation 
networks in Puerto Plata, Sosua, La Union, Montellano and Cabarete, interconnection 
with infrastructure built under the LIL, and unidentified investments for the treatment and 
disposal of wastewater in the Puerto Plata and Cabarete areas. The Government of 
Dominican Republic is in the process of obtaining the environmental licenses for the 
network expansion and interconnection investments, and has developed an 
Environmental Assessment package (including overall EA report, Environmental 
Management Framework, site-specific EIAs and EMPs for known subprojects in Sosua 
and Montellano, socioeconomic analysis of project area, generic Terms of Reference for 
possible future submarine outfall investments, and documentation of consultations) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework for this Category ?A? project. The overarching package 
has been appraised by the Bank during preparation in compliance with these above 
mentioned safeguard policies.  
 
Page  7
The project's key safeguard policy issues relate to the possible impacts of the civil 
works to be constructed under components (2) of the project entails the execution of 
enlargement and rehabilitation of the priority macro production systems, storage, 
distribution networks and pumping stations in the area of Puerto Plata, Sosua and 
Cabarete, and in intermediary locations such as Playa Dorada, Montellano, La Union, and 
Bombita.  
 
The project will also finance expanded sewerage, to benefit over 18,000  persons along 
the Sosua River, La Union, Montellano and Sabaneta de Cangrejo, and major elements of 
the wastewater collection and treatment systems, such as trunk sewers and pre-treatments 
facilities, as well as feasibility studies, detailed engineering design and the construction 
of the treatment plants and submarine outfalls in Cabarete and Puerto Plata.  
 
An Environmental Assessment was undertaken during project preparation including the 
preparation of the TORs of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) studies for the 
treatment plants and submarine outfalls in Cabarete and Puerto Plata; and TORs of the 
Environmental Impact Declaration (EID) for the B Category subprojects (San Felipe, 
Sos?a Playa Dorada y Montellano). The TORs of the B subprojects was approved by the 
Environmental Authority (SEMARENA).  
 
All subprojects will be screened for Safeguards issues related to their location, including 
potential for impacts on natural habitats, sensitive areas, local populations, applying the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The screening criteria 
include the classification of projects according to the type of project works and 
environmental sensitivity. This classification determines the level of social and 
environmental risk and the measures to mitigate them.  
 
The rest of the project?s components are institutional strengthening components and are 
not expected to have specific environmental implications.  
 
The project?s safeguard-related procedures must ensure that subprojects comply with 
national environmental laws and regulations as well as Bank environmental and social 
safeguard policies, that any cumulative impacts are addressed, that environmental and 
social impacts are managed through application of appropriate guidelines, that 
appropriate oversight mechanisms are established, that project benefits are extended in a 
culturally appropriate manner to indigenous populations who live within the areas (if 
required), that any land acquisition and resettlement of people is done in an acceptable 
manner, and that adequate procedures are in place for the protection of cultural property.  
These issues are addressed through the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework, and the Resettlement Framework, each of which is outlined below.  
 
Environmental Assessment  Policy [OP 4.01]  
 
In accordance with OP 4.01, an Environmental Assessment Report was undertaken by 
the SEEPyD which identify the potential impacts associated with the types of subprojects 
envisioned for the Project, and developing appropriate mitigation measures to offset those 
Page  8
impacts.  The Report includes the following analyses: (i) updated analysis of the 
institutional and legal context of environmental assessments for the water and sanitation 
sector; (ii) analysis of the environmental studies undertaken in regards to water and 
sanitation; (iii) environmental assessment of a list of sub-projects which are going to be 
financed by the project. The results of this EAR were used for the formulation of the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
 
Subprojects will be subject to the environmental and social screening, assessment, 
monitoring and supervision procedures set forth in the Safeguards annex.  
 
Natural Habitat Policy [OP 4.04]  
 
In accordance with OP 4.04, Terms of Reference of EIA for the Treatment Plant and 
Submarine Outfalls were prepared and disclosed to area stakeholders. These studies will 
be prepared during Project implementation and will need to comply with the 
Environmental Authority (Environmental License issue by SEMARENA) and the ESMF 
of the Project, and will be reviewed and approved by the Bank before construction starts.  
 
Cultural Property Policy [OPN 11.03]  
 
The cultural Property Policy is considered applicable because of the nature of the works 
supported by the Project. Although it is not considered that the project would affect 
culturally important sites, as part of the EIA and the DIA study this issue will be 
evaluated, and if found warranted, adequate mitigation measures such as ?chance 
finding? procedures for construction, will be incorporated in all the construction 
contracts.  
 
Resettlement Policy [OP 4.12]  
 
Water supply installations, sewerage, wastewater treatment plants and submarines 
outfalls may require land purchase for pumping stations and treatment installations as 
well as acquisition for rights-of-way for laying and maintenance of pipes. It is possible 
that some subprojects may require the resettlement of individual households. However, it 
is not expected that subprojects would require resettlement action plans to be developed.  
 
An Involuntary Resettlement Framework (IRF) was elaborated to ensure that any 
subprojects that might involve either land acquisition or resettlement of any people will 
comply with both national law and the Bank?s OP 4.12 Policy. As subprojects are 
considered for financing, a screening mechanism will identify those that require land 
acquisition and thus further consideration of resettlement issues. The framework 
describes the general context for the sector, the objectives and principles of any 
resettlement to be caused by the project, the legal context, the process for the preparation 
of a resettlement plan, the content of a plan, the process for its execution, the required 
institutional organization and, finally, the financing of the plan.  Any resettlement plan 
will be submitted to SEEPyD and the Bank for review and clearance.   
 
Page  9
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Small subprojects may not have any significant impact when evaluated individually, but 
when looked at in the context of the rehabilitation and construction of the treatment 
plants and submarine outfall can cause significant environmental impacts.  
 
Potential negative impacts generally associated with water supply, sewerage, and 
wastewater projects could be:  
 
-
Impacts due to construction practices, e.g. noise, dust.  
 
-
Degradation of sensitive environments due to discharge of wastewater.  
 
-
Degradation of neighborhoods or receiving water body quality from sewer 
overflows,  
 
-
Treatment works bypasses, or treatment process failures.  
 
-
Public health hazards in the vicinity of discharges.  
 
-
Odors, noise and emission of volatile organics from treatment processes.  
 
-
Sludge disposal issues.  
 
No accumulative impacts or long term impacts was identified   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Adverse impacts from the failure of the pumping stations will be mitigated by the 
standard practice of inclusion of emergency generators to guarantee their functionality 
during energy supply failures, as well as return valves to prevent the spilling of untreated 
sewage in the case of breakdowns. Standard engineering practices also foresee the 
installation of backup redundant pumps in all cases.  
 
In addition, in the case of emergencies, the standard document to be made available in 
the Dominican Republic for these cases will be the Manual for Attention to Emergencies 
and Disasters.  This document will be carried out by the corresponding contracting entity, 
in this case CORAPLAATA, who will cover the costs of development and dissemination 
in order to account for small adaptations to the Project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Dominican Republic has a legal and institutional framework to ensure an adequate 
environmental and social management in the water and sanitation sector. SEMARENA is 
the Environmental authority responsible of the Environmental License and Permission 
requested by the institution responsible of the projects execution.  
 
In the first phase of the Project, COORAAPLATA will be the institution in charge of 
the execution of subproject. COORAAPLATA has established an environmental 
division. Capacity improvement activities will be undertaken as part of the 
implementation of the project (Strengthening of Environmental and Social Management).  
Page  10
The Plan presented in the EAR identifies specific capacity building needs within the 
sector to ensure adequate environmental and social management of the Project. Costs for 
capacity building are included in Project costs.  
 
Each subproject will follow good practice environmental guidelines, the development of 
which will be supported by the Project.  The objective of these guidelines is to ensure 
compliance with all Bank policies, and to define the best environmental practices for each 
type of expected subproject and/or activity.  These guidelines will build upon existing 
government and/or World Bank documents, and will be developed before project 
implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Considered stakeholders include representatives from the PCU, CORAAPLATA and 
local government as well as representatives from the regional private sector, civil society, 
NGOs, leaders of community organizations and the press (print, radio, and TV).  
 
A
public consultation was held with these stakeholders on June 11, 2007 to review: (i) 
the proposed investment program; (ii) a draft environmental management framework 
which defines environmental screening, analysis, approvals and mitigation measures; (iii) 
terms of reference for the EIA to be carried out on those yet undefined investments in 
wastewater treatment and disposal; (iv) draft resettlement framework; and (v) terms of 
reference for social assessment to be carried out under implementation. Key findings and 
recommendations from the consultation included:  
 
1)
To involve the municipalities in a more specific way, through coordination under the 
environmental management of the project and other procedures associated with its 
implementation.  
 
2) Considering that many participants emphasized the importance of environmental 
education, it was agreed that CORAAPLATA and SEEPYD would involve key local 
groups (ie. neighborhood juntas, local NGOs, municipal representatives, representatives 
of the hotel associations) in all of the environmental activities during the planning, 
implementation, supervision and operation of the Project.   
 
3) The meeting pointed out the success of the pilot program, ?Environmental 
Management of the Cambelen Cuenca?, implemented by the Cluster Turistico PP, with 
the support of CORAAPLATA to complement the environmental education through a set 
of investments in works to mitigate the dumping of solid waste into the Cuenca. It was 
agreed that the environmental education activities in the Project would develop, in a 
complementary way, the possible replication or expansion of the program in the areas of 
intervention of the Project.  
 
4) It was agreed that SEEPYD would annually, through the Project and 
CORAAPLATA, convene a seminar at the regional level and invite the neighborhood 
juntas, local NGOs, municipal representatives, and representatives of the hotel 
associations to discuss the advances of the Project.  
 
Page  11
5) Considering that the participants emphasized the importance of identifying a defined 
solution for the management and disposal of solid waste at the regional level, it was 
agreed that the Strategic Environmental Assessment will analyze in more depth the issue 
of solid waste and propose an action plan and/or strategy for the development of a 
regional system to manage solid waste.  
 
A
report summarizing the results and key findings of the consultation has been prepared 
and included in the EA package available with SEEPYD and CORAAPLATA offices, 
and on respective websites for both organizations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/11/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/22/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/08/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
11/09/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/11/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/22/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/08/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
Yes 
Page  12
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel G. Marino 
11/07/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jose Gil-Diaz 
11/07/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez 
11/07/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez 
11/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/07/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna Wellenstein 
11/08/2007 
Comments:   
