Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/29/2006 
Report No.: 
 36633
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Dominican Republic 
Project ID:  P094888 
Project Name:  Institutional Strengthening TA 
Task Team Leader:  Alberto Leyton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 19, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 7, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSPS 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Export 
development and competitiveness (P);Trade facilitation and market access (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.80 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
1.20
1.20 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The ISTAL's development objective is to enhance and sustain the quality of the country's 
economic growth through a more modern, transparent and efficient State that is 
accountable to its citizenry and capable of spurring sustainable economic development 
through increased competitiveness.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed ISTAL comprises three components and six sub-components to be 
coordinated by the Technical Secretariat of the Presidency (STP) (which will be replaced 
by the future Ministry of Planning - Secretaria de Estado de Planificacion (SEP)) through 
the National Commission for State Modernization (CONARE) and implemented by the 
various agencies concerned. The proposed project will be implemented during a three-
year period.  
 
Component 1 - Implementing public sector management reforms to promote efficiency, 
accountability and transparency in public agencies.  
 
This component is geared to completing the development of key public sector 
management systems and supporting their implementation by increasing the demand for a 
Page  2
more efficient and accountable public sector and by enhancing the overall capacities of 
key agencies and providing them with adequate incentives for reform.  
 
Component 2 - Strengthening public services to enhance productivity and 
competitiveness.  
 
This component will support the Government in enhancing overall productivity and 
competitiveness by strengthening institutional capacities in critical trade-related public 
and private services that will help Dominican industries in the context of trade 
liberalization.  
 
Component 3: Project Management  
 
This component will finance the provision of technical assistance, equipment, training 
and operating costs necessary to establish, operate and strengthen the Project 
Coordinating Unit (PCU) within CONARE as well as the Project Executing Units (PEUs) 
in each of the participating agencies to enable them to effectively coordinate, monitor and 
evaluate the implementation of project activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Santo Dominigo, Dominican Republic.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No safeguard issues are expected to apply.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
N/A 
Page  4
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alberto Leyton 
06/29/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
06/29/2006 
Comments:   
