Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/01/2006 
Report No.:  AC1977
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Dominican Republic 
Project ID:  P096605 
Project Name:  Dominican Republic Youth Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Andrea Vermehren 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 16, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (50%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (30%);Other 
social services (20%) 
Theme:  Other human development (P);Other social protection and risk management 
(P);Social safety nets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
8.91 
 
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
10.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
6.00
24.91 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to support the Government of the Dominican 
Republic (GODR) in improving the employability of poor at-risk youth both through 
strengthening and expanding market-driven job training and 'second chance' education 
programs. It would build entry points for disadvantaged youth to complete their 
education, build their work experience, and integrate into the labor market in accordance 
with a "life-long learning" approach.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Consolidate and Expand the Youth and Employment Program (US$18 
million). This component finances the implementation of the Programa de Juventud y 
Empleo (PJE) which offers integral training opportunities for better labor market 
insertion of disadvantaged youth in urban and rural areas of the Dominican Republic. The 
program will reach approximately 28,000 youth ages 16-29 over a period of 4 years and 
Page  2
at a unit cost of approx. US$600 per beneficiary which compares favorably with similar 
programs in other countries.  
 
Component 2: Build capacity in the Secretaries of Labor (SET), Youth (SEJ), and 
INFOTEP to more effectively focus on at risk youth ($2 million).  The objective of this 
component is to improve the involved institution's capacity to reach disadvantaged out-
of-school youth through strengthened program coordination, implementation, and 
evaluation.  In this context it would support the envisioned gradual transition of the PJE 
to INFOTEP in order to foster the sustainability of the program's outcomes.  
 
Component 3: Strengthening and expanding 'Second Chance' education opportunities 
(US$5 million).  This component seeks to strengthen and expand the opportunities for 
poor Dominican youth to achieve their high school diplomas, with a special incentive for 
PJE participants through waiving the tuition fee.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide.  No construction will take place.  No safeguards are triggered.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Linda McGinnis (HDNCY) 
Mr Peter Anthony Holland (HDNCY) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Andrea Vermehren 
11/23/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Linda McGinnis 
11/23/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Peter Anthony Holland 
11/23/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
01/31/2006 
Comments:   
