Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1846 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pacific Islands 
Project ID: P098423 
Project Name: Sustainable Energy Finance Project 
Task Team Leader: Antonie De Wilde 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 31, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 9, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (50%);Micro- and SME finance (50%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 
AUSTRALIA: AUSTRALIAN AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 0.45 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
18.90 
 
NETHERLANDS: MIN. OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS / MIN. OF DEV. COOP.
0.15
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective is to improve the living conditions of rural households.  This will be 
achieved by reducing the cost for households, micro and small enterprises located in rural areas 
for their energy needs by switching to renewable energy options   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will (i) improve the living conditions of rural households.; (ii) improve the 
commercial viability of micro/small enterprises by providing more reliable and cheaper 
electricity, and (iii) increase the efficiency of energy use.  
 
The project will mitigate financial and technical barriers that make it difficult for the target 
groups to gain access to sustainable modern energy services.  Other key barriers for the 
Page  2
introduction of renewable energy in general, such as regulations, renewable resource assessment 
studies, strengthening of Utilities and Energy Offices are being mitigated by PIGGAREP.  
 
The renewable energy options to be supported under this project are Solar PV, pico hydro, 
which don’t require civil works, and locally produced bio fuels to beused in gensets. In 
exceptional circumstances other solutions might be financed.  
 
Component 1: Financial Innovation This component will develop innovative financial 
mechanism to facilitate the flow of commercial funds for renewable energy and energy 
efficiency investments.  
 
For households, there will be a scheme to pay for the high initial investment costs of renewable 
energy over a number of years, with the tenor of the loans longer than is customary for the 
region. The scheme will also share some of the perceived repayment risk with commercial 
institutions.  
 
For micro and small enterprises also there will also be a similar scheme to pay the high initial 
investment costs over time and share the repayment risks. Further, for pico-hydro systems, there 
will be a scheme to ensure that adequate funds are available for the potentially high maintenance 
and/or repair costs. There will also be financial instruments to overcome the relatively large 
equity and collateral constraints for investments in sustainable energy service activities  
 
For energy efficiency (EE) there will risk sharing and risk abatement measures to improve 
access to commercial finance for small electrical or engineering firms to fund energy audits, 
design and implementation of energy efficiency measures for clients. The capital outlay required 
will be shared between the EE Service provider and the client.  There will be a focus on cold 
storage and processing (especially related to fisheries), tourism facilities and transport.  
 
Component 2: Local knowledge development and mastering of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency technologies. This TA component will be based on a comprehensive communications 
plan to strengthen the understanding of the rural population of the opportunities of using 
renewable energy solutions.  Building on this, the project will require the clients/buyers of 
products offered under this project to pass/certify a computer based interactive-video training 
programs.  In addition, the project will work with vocational schools to train RE technicians in 
areas where no training in repair and maintenance of solar PV, Pico hydro, or biofuel is 
available. The RE technicians can then qualify to become a Certified Pacific RE technician. 
These technicians can be hired and/or employed by retail agencies and Financial Institutions for 
repair and maintenance work.  
 
Component 3:  Incentive/Output based participant monitoring. For all systems, borrowers will 
be requested to fill out bi-annually a short two page survey regarding their experience both 
technically, economically and socially of having access to modern energy services.  Investors 
will be rewarded for a fully completed survey acceptable to the local executive agency by 
making the equivalent of a monthly repayment of their loan. For EE Service providers 
monitoring will be an integral component of their performance based remuneration.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project activities will take place in the rural areas of PNG, Solomon Islands and Fiji. Other 
Island Nations might be added at a later stage.  For the purposes of this project, Rural means all 
areas outside the main capitals of these Pacific States.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Institutional Capacity of the Borrower is different for each of the countries.In PNG it is expected 
to work with PNG Sustainable Energy Limited.  The company which is executing a GEF- MSP 
on behalf of 
the GOPNG is well aware of the Bank’s safeguard policies. Senior personnel 
worked earlier with SMEC and PNG Power which have executed a number of Bank projects.  
However as the project anticipates that Safeguards assessments will be delegated to the Financial 
Intermediaries in this project, we expect to provide training and supervision in PNG and other 
countries to the participating financial instutions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
The environmental incident of possible inappropriate disposal of depleted batteries is an issue 
for which additional data will be collected.  In the case of PNG, in 2005 an extensive in-depth 
study on Battery Disposal was conducted. The study showed that a similar project (Teachers 
Solar Lighting project), will have no or minimal impact on overall battery disposal in that 
country. However the study provided input to follow proper battery disposal practices, which 
have been implemented in the project. Only sealed lead-acid batteries will be financed under the 
project.  It is expected, based on experience in the PNG project and the Battery disposal study 
which also covered Tonga, that battery life will be three to four years.  The project would 
contribute to an additional 1-2% of batteries to be disposed off in each of the countries. To 
prevent as much as possible inappropriate disposal of batteries the project will built in the project 
design an incentive scheme to encourage proper controlled battery disposal.  For example in the 
project in PNG the cost of a second battery is included in the financing package but can only be 
obtained when the first battery is returned.   The PAD will provide information on the number of 
batteries per unit, the frequency with which batteries are to be replaced, the proportion of 
batteries likely to be disposed under the project compared to total battery disposal in the country, 
and the proposed incentive scheme the project will apply to mitigate against improper disposal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/30/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
There are no additional studies required   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonie De Wilde 
09/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/18/2005 
Comments:  Approved. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
