Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2388 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/12/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ecuador 
Project ID: P099834 
Project Name: Ecuador Urban Transportation Project 
Task Team Leader: Jose A. Barbero 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 16, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (81%);Sub-national government administration 
(14%);Other social services (5%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Pollution management and environmental health (S);Improving labor 
markets (S);Injuries and non-communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
7.75 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
7.75 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main development objective of this project is to improve accessibility to and affordability of 
quality public transport in Ecuador and specifically for residents of Cuenca and Quito and 
thereby reduce poverty and improve the cities? competitiveness and economic growth. The 
project will give priority to mass transit and NMT with a focus on road safety and network 
integration. Mass transit upgrades will benefit primarily low-income residents and persons with 
physical disabilities. In Quito, the project will primarily benefit the 1.4 million daily users of the 
public transport system, especially the low-income population that relies heavily on public 
transportation. In Cuenca, in addition to the urban population, the project will benefit 0.11 
million residents living in the rural parishes surrounding the city. The alleviation of traffic 
congestion problems (either existing for Quito or approaching for Cuenca) and fleet renewal will 
reduce the environmental impacts of the transportation system, particularly air pollution.  
 
These objectives would be achieved by: (i) supporting the development and implementation of 
strategies at the city level aiming at the strengthening of transport sector management and 
Page  2
operation capabilities; (ii) establishing a reliable and sustainable operations centre for the 
integrated transport system to improve overall quality of the service; (iii) the project will help 
defining a city strategy to address land markets and land-use strategies, developing a higher-
density cost effective development policy in the vicinities of public transit facilities (stations, 
corridors) exploring taxes, rent control, overly restrictive zoning, development regulations; (iv) 
increasing the public transport service coverage and reliability especially in poor and peri-urban 
areas of the cities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is organized around four central components: improve connectivity and 
mass transit, improve general traffic circulation and safety, improve NMT, and strengthen urban 
transport institutions. The mechanism proposed for delivering on these components is a two 
phase APL: a US$35M APL1, included in the base case for FY07 with two Loan 
Agreements?one for each city?with national government guarantees, and a APL2 with a total 
amount that will be defined during project implementation and will be presented to the Board in 
FY09, subject to compliance with appropriate program triggers and CAS conditions. In Cuenca, 
APL1 intends to finance the Stage I of the ITS with: two integrated terminals; one direct trunk 
route connecting both terminals; a circular trunk route around the down town area linking the 
two terminals and feeder routes; and investment in the integrated traffic signalling system. In 
Quito, APL1 will finance improvements to the existing system, thorough a combination of 
physical investments and technical assistance to: modernize the system of operational controls; 
achieve system integration on the existing lines and between the metropolitan, inter parish and 
inter cantonal lines; and strengthen institutional control through improved municipal technical 
and managerial capacity. Potential synergies between activities in the two cities will be exploited 
wherever possible. Following are the components, preliminary identified costs, and their 
sequencing in the proposed APL program.  
 
In both cities, the project will have positive impacts on the overall urban form with negligible 
resettlement issues. Is expected that the projects will result in densification along the catchment 
areas of the corridors reflecting the attractiveness of the increased mobility provided and that 
some localized increases in commercial property values reflecting improved accessibility will 
occur. Since existing right of ways will be used, very little resettlement (if any) is expected to be 
required. It is recognized, however, that changes of scope do happen in projects of this nature 
and so the project budgets already contain provisions for any unforeseen circumstances.  
 
The project will help the municipalities define a city land-use strategy that includes higher-
density cost effective development in the vicinities of public transit facilities (stations, corridors, 
and terminals) exploring taxes, rent control, overly restrictive zoning and development 
regulations.  
 
Following are the components, preliminary identified costs, and their sequencing in the 
proposed APL program.  
 
Cuenca 
 
 
   Quito  
 
Component 1  
 
Improve connectivity and mass transit through busway-based investments. Construct transport 
infrastructure in Cuenca such as segregated lanes, stations, and terminals to improve 
accessibility, reduce travel time and operational costs, and improve air quality. A ?closed 
system? will allow interchange between trunk buses and feeders routes with the payment of a 
Page  3
single fare. Achieve integration of the BRT network and other services of the metropolitan area 
of Quito by financing the works required to integrate the system such as the integration terminals 
in Quitumbe and Carcel?n, and network connectivity between the Northern and the Ecov?a 
corridors in the La Y and Ofelia stations, and other access works in the Mar?n station. A ?closed 
system? will allow interchange between trunk buses and feeders routes with the payment of a 
single fare.  
 
US$ 28.00 million  
 
US$ 21.00 million 
US$ 7.00 million  
 
Component 2  
 
Improve general traffic circulation and safety through planning and campaigns. Assign priority 
for pedestrians, design and implement traffic safety educational campaigns and develop a 
comprehensive traffic circulation plan.  
 
This component will also finance the traffic signaling system for the city.  
 
US$ 6.50 million 
 
US$ 6.00 million 
US$ 0.50 million  
 
Component 3  
 
Improve NMT by improving the conditions for NMT circulation(i) Help design and contribute 
to the implementation of a bikeway network in the cities as both a feeder for the corridors and as 
an independent mode; (ii) Establish a safe, convenient, and efficient automobile, bicycle and 
pedestrian Traffic Circulation Plan for the Historical Centre.  
 
US$ 1.75 million 
 
US$ 1.50 million 
US$ 0.25 million  
 
Component 4  
 
Strengthen urban transport institutions by supporting the development of policy and 
institutional framework for managing, coordinating, planning and monitoring urban transport 
services.   
Develop a long-term strategy for sustainable transport development: efficient 
network design, bus priority measures and effective traffic engineering.  
 
Strengthen, by means of PPIAF support, the municipal capacity for regulating private transport 
service providers and increase service quality thorough more competitive licensing and awarding 
processes to private operators. A transparent, reliable, and stable regulatory framework will 
generate valuable new private investments in the fleet, the ticketing system, and in the bus 
terminals.  
 
Design and support the implementation of specific policy, regulatory and institutional reforms 
needed to establish an Operative Management Unit for the BRT corridors and other transit 
modes. The unit will handle the corridors? operation and oversee daily revenue collecting.  
 
Strengthen the planning, operation and license awarding of the city?s transport sector. 
?
 
Carry out an origin-destination survey for the entire city and develop a coherent travel 
forecasting model.  
 
Design a Freight Transport Management System for the Metropolitan District of Quito and its 
area of influence, with precise information on traffic and route structures, cargo types, freight 
volumes and destinations, licensing of cargo vehicles (both heavy and light?weight) and a 
comprehensive management system for regulation and operation.  
 
This component will also finance feasibility studies, project designs and other strategic 
activities for APL2. In Cuenca the project will finance the SIT II phase studies and in Quito the 
studies for the Valle de los Chillos and Quito-Tumbaco-Quinche corridors.  
 
US$ 6.50 million 
 
US$ 1.50 million 
US$ 5.00 million  
Page  4
TOTAL   US$ 42.75 million US$ 30.00 million 
US$ 12.75 million   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in consolidated urban areas where environmental effects on 
natural areas or fragile zones are not expected. Care should be taken, however, to minimize the 
effects of potential involuntary resettlement and physical and cultural damage to the affected 
communities. To address these potential effects, the Bank?s relevant safeguard policies should be 
triggered.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Ecuador has been enhancing its environmental management through the implementation of the 
Unified Environmental Management System (Sistema Unico de Manejo Ambiental - SUMA). 
The implementation of this system has not only provided the necessary procedures and 
instruments for environmental management but has also driven a decentralization process of the 
functions of the central environmental authority (which resides in the Ministry of the 
Environment) to the regional environmental authorities.  
 
In this way, after complying with a series of institutional environment capacity requirements, 
the Environmental Management Commissions (Comisi?n de Gesti?n Ambiental - CGA) of 
Cuenca and Quito were granted authority for environmental licensing in their jurisdictions. This 
in itself gives indication of local capacity in socio-environmental management which will further 
improve through developing institutional and management frameworks to comply with the 
safeguard requirements of the Bank.  
 
In 2002 the Municipal Government of Quito established the PMTS (Master Plan for Sustainable 
Transport) based on a long?term policy from the local government, to develop a sustainable 
transport system that is operationally efficient, socially supportive and environmentally 
responsible. This effort is supplemented by a broad environmental enhancement program based 
on the Environmental Management Master Plan and the development of programs and specific 
project activities for emissions control and air quality monitoring, presented in the Plan for the 
Air Quality Improvement of the Municipal District of Quito 2005 ? 2010.  
 
In this context, one of the main components of the municipal policy for urban mobility is the 
reduction of air pollution caused by road transport and motor vehicle operation. The activities are 
focused on specific areas, such as the reduction of the vehicle-kilometer traveled (VKT), 
prioritizing mass transportation over private vehicles; and the reduction of emissions per 
vehicle/km thorough fleet modernization and better fuel quality. The effective emissions 
reduction strategies can be summarized as follows:  
 
?
To continue with the conventional public transport service 
revamping?heavilycharacterized by individualized and competitive ownership of units?with a 
more rational and integrated system. The Metrobus-Q scheme aims to develop a transport system 
that is secure, affordable and sustainable based on high-capacity fuel-efficient units running on 
segregated busways.  
 
?
Identifying policy and regulatory issues for the integration of low-emission vehicles and 
new technologies. Adjustments to the regulatory framework have been also implemented 
incorporating retrofit and mandatory vehicle inspection and maintenance programs for the 
existing units.  
Page  5
?
Supporting the participation of private operators in the development of public transport 
projects  
 
?
The incorporation of NMT (bicycles, pedestrians) into the city?s transport planning  
 
Cuenca has established Cuencaire a municipal body responsible for monitoring air quality in 
the city and is currently investing in air quality monitoring equipment. The implementation of 
Cuenca?s integrated transport plan will be central to improving air quality in Cuenca through 
both improving the emissions profile of the public transport fleet through new vehicles and also 
by improving the operating conditions and therefore, reduce overall emissions.  
 
The project will also include road safety improvement strategies and interventions focused on 
road crash victims (injuries and fatalities). The project team has been working closely with 
technical authorities and the Police in the cities, defining the first guidelines for a road safety 
campaign and strategy. Road crash victim data gathering, analysis, and rationale capabilities will 
be developed as part of the institutional capacity strengthening.  
 
Following the local social and environmental procedures?well aligned with Bank?s policies and 
priorities?the municipalities have engaged in consultations with stakeholders to define social 
participation addressing other potential issues. Since the project will increase public transport 
service coverage and reliability especially in poor and peri-urban areas of the cities, project 
preparation will include wide local participation at the community level.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSEN) 
Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSFW) 
Ms Veronica Isabel Andino (LCSEO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Despite the fact that the social-environmental impacts are not significant, the works may 
indeed effect the natural environment or the communities located in the influence areas of the 
works. Therefore, adequate management of the social-environmental aspects will be required, 
especially during execution of the works. This will require complying with both national 
environmental legislation as well as the requirements of the Bank to assure environmental and 
social sustainability of the project overall.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Cuenca and Quito are listed as World Heritage Sites by UNESCO and therefore it is clear 
that the project will occur in urban areas of high historic value. Although it is not expected that 
works will directly impact any historic monument, it is recommended to activate this policy as a 
precautionary measure to have procedures well established in case works during construction do 
involve cultural property, especially in the case of fortuitous discoveries.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Dwellings are not expected to be affected by the project in
general, however specific works 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
could have this kind of impact. It is therefore recommended to activate this policy as a 
preventative measure so that policies are in place to cope with such cases.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/12/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/15/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
According with the current enviromental classification the required studies will be prepared 
and made available prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jose A. Barbero 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Elena Correa 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
