INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/10/2006                        Report No.: AC2077
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Ecuador                     |Project ID: P007077
Project Name: BC-RURAL ROADS
Task Team Leader: Emmanuel A. James
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 24, 2004  Estimated Board Date: March 16, 2006
Managing Unit: LCSFT                  Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Sub-nati onal government administration
(7%);Central government administration (3%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (P);Rural policies and
institutions (S);Participation and civic engagement (S);Small and medium enterprise
support (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):      20.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):        0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):        0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):        0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
BORROWER                                              18.80
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK                       20.00
38.80
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                 Simple []        Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)  Yes [ ]  No [ ]
2. Project Objectives
The main objectives of the project are to strengthen the capacity of Participating
Provincial Governments (PPG) to manage the rural road network, and to provide
improved access to markets and social services for residents of poor rural areas. More
specifically, the project would improve access and connectivity to the main economic
centers for the agriculture dependent and other populations of the mainly rural cantons of
the project provinces by: (i) improving the systems and procedures for road maintenance
and ensuring that the maintainable network in all project assisted provinces is maintained
satisfactorily; (ii) rehabilitation /improvement of selected rural roads and tracks; (iii)
strengthening institutional arrangements and improving the procedures for planning,
programming and budgeting (PPB); and (iv) developing appropriate environmental and
social assessment techniques for application by the PPG.
The achievement of the project objectives would be measured in terms of the (i) number
of microenterprises formed and operating effectively each year in terms of their road
maintenance performance; (ii) km of rural roads stabilized each year; (iii) design and



implementation of road maintenance plans; (iv) number of staff trained in road sector
planning and administration; and (v) number of rural communities and families served by
improved rural roads.
3. Project Description
This project will be ambitious in that it intends to address rural road improvement needs
in a comprehensive way and at probably the weakest institutional levels. It will in
particular accord a high priority to maintenance as this can be seen as both a provider of
employment and as a way to keep the 40% of the network that is stable (in good or fair
condition) from falling into further disrepair. The proposed project would assist the GOE
and the PPG in achieving their objectives by financing:
Component 1 - Road Rehabilitation, Selected Secondary Roads: This component consists
of a program aimed at linking rural communities, especially in underserved areas, to the
main and secondary road networks. Many rural population centers are viewed currently
as being virtually incapable of bringing their agricultural production to the market in an
efficient and competitive manner, especially during the rainy season. Provision of road
access is one of the key inputs required to help these communities market their
production, and for the delivery of social services. In accordance with the
recommendations of the respective PVPPs, the project would finance the road
rehabilitation of 608 km as well as 900 km of continuous maintenance through the work
of 18 microenterprises. Rehabilitation works would consist inter alia of the introduction
of more durable road surfaces, landslide removal, as well as the building of drainage and
erosion control structures.
Component 2 - Routine and Periodic Maintenance of Rural Roads: This component
consists of a program aimed at introducing a pilot routine and periodic maintenance
system, introducing innovative cost-effective schemes based on contracting out labor-
intensive works to microenterprises. The project will finance 794 km of periodic
maintenance and put in place arrangements for the continuous maintenance of about
1,065 km of roads in rural areas. It estimated that about 22 microenterprises will be
activated to execute key elements of the routine maintenance program which includes
both rehabilitation and maintenance works financed under the project.
Component 3 - Institutional Strengthening: This component will support the goals of: (i)
increasing the administrative capacity of participating and provincial governments as well
as national government entities involved in the administration of rural roads; (ii)
supporting the formation and training of microenterprises to undertake routine road
maintenance; (iii) promoting increased road safety; and (iv) incorporating a participatory
approach to social and environmental issues in the planning and implementation of road
works. Targeted technical assistance in these areas would improve the sustainability of
road improvements and possibly other PPG investments. In addition, the formation of the
microenterprises for road maintenance is in line with recent Bank poverty assessments for
Ecuador, which highlighted the role of labor-intensive programs as an important
contributing factor to poverty reduction;



4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed project will help to improve access in rural areas, especially in the coastal
zone and the central highlands(the Sierra). Although the rural population accounts for
roughly 37 percent of its total 12.4 million total population, the incidence of poverty is
nearly twice as high in rural areas (47 percent) as compared to urban districts (25
percent). Regionally, within the rural areas, 80% of the population in the Sierra region
live below the poverty line. Overall, 75% of the poor population and 30% of the
extremely poor inhabit the rural areas. This all translates into there being more poor
people in rural areas than in urban zones in Ecuador.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO)
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes       No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)              X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                      X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                      X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Given the modest nature of the typical proposed project road improvement, no major
environmental issues are expected to arise from its implementation. The project entails
the rehabilitation of existing rural roads and improving non-motorized tracks. Since these
are existing roads and no widening is considered, the risk of additional indirect negative
impacts linked with human activities (e. g. colonization and deforestation) is very low. In
sum, the project will consist of many small but similar road improvement sub-projects
that will be dispersed over a wide geographic area. It would be infeasible to carry out a
socio-environmental assessment for each one and hence a three phased approach was
adopted that consisted of (i) screening of project candidates using the methodology
(GCEASPV) defined by the QAT; (ii) carrying out specific environmental and social
analyses for a sample of roads in the first year program in order to confirm the scale of
the potential impacts and (iii) preparing a sectoral socio-environmental analysis (SEA)
that would establish a framework for setting the safeguard procedures for each road



candidate. Through the SEA, the socio-environmental policies were defined for the PCV
in particular but in a manner that could be applicable to the rural roads sector as a whole.
This definition of policies was made through a participatory process and by consensus
with the different actors involved with the PCV.
The specific environmental and social assessments (IA) were carried out for ten of the
roads, totaling 150 km in the first year program. The specific assessments were included
within the TOR for the detailed engineering of each road link. The TOR was reviewed
and approved by the environmental and social specialists who participated in project
preparation and carried out field inspections of each road link. The results of the
assessment showed that deficient designs and construction techniques in the past may
have resulted in modest environmental degradation (erosion, sediment load). These are
primarily related to the quarrying and borrow pit activities practiced in the past. The
proposed project will improve environmental conditions by introducing better road
design and construction techniques, and promoting the use of environmental and social
sustainability criteria in the rural roads sector. The IA includes steps to mitigate any
potential impacts identified, together with the respective budgets, responsibility, and
schedules of execution. Also, during project preparation, workshops on environmental
management best practices for rural roads were held in order to increase the awareness
and capacities of the PPG staff in this regard.
Based on the analyses completed and the scope of the road improvement, no involuntary
resettlement is expected. In terms of Cultural Property the SEA includes chance-find
procedures although, given the minor earthworks involved this policy is not expected to
be triggered. In terms of Natural Habitats and Forests policies, based on the SEA findings
and project scope, no adverse impacts are expected. However, in the remote eventuality,
the screening procedures to be followed under the project would help to ensure that
appropriate actions are taken to mitigate any negative impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None have been identified so far.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Basic procedures will be stipulated in each civil work contract to ensure that adequate
mitigatory action, typically related to the treatment of borrow pits and embankment
protection will be taken if needed.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the project as a whole, given its overall scope and that some roads are yet to be
identified, it was decided to develop a sectoral assessment approach. This SEA would



provide an analytical basis for the safeguards diagnosis, as well as policies, plans and
procedures for environmental and social management. The development of this tool was
coordinated with the Environmental Unit of MOP and of the Ministry of Environment
(ME). The ME has in principle agreed to accept the SEA as an adequate instrument to
obtain the project licensing, in terms of the laws for environmental management in the
country. This was an innovative approach for Ecuador and it represented the most
efficient and cost effective tool for defining safeguard policies for the project.
Another one of the fundamental aspects developed in the SEA was the definition of four
homogeneous zones for the purpose of facilitating and making more efficient the
environmental and social assessment of candidate sub-projects. The objective of this
zoning was: (i) to identify and map areas with similar socio-environmental risks on the
basis of indicators of biotic, physical and socio-economic characteristics; (ii) identify and
characterize the potential direct, and indirect socio-environmental impacts; and (iii) select
the policy and operational measures needed for the prevention or mitigation and control
of the potential impacts.
On the basis of these zones, the potential socio-environmental impacts and benefits were
identified as well as the respective measures to ensure adequate management in each
case. The subprojects that are expected to induce negative impacts, estimated so far to be
considerably less than 10 percent of the total road candidates, will still require the
preparation of specific EAs. On an as needed basis, there will also be: (i) additional
studies aimed at better delineating areas to be protected; (ii) a development of mitigation
measures to limit the indirect impact of road works on the environment; and (iii) a
definition of the necessary technical and design standards as well as implementation
procedures to minimize potential impacts.
The project's civil works are of a simple nature and will not cause significant impacts.
However, the sectoral EA includes a plan that contains the following specific products:
(a) institutional strengthening for the MOP and the PPG; (b) environmental management
plan by homogeneous zone; (c) strategic communication plan; (d) promotion and
dissemination plan; (e) community participation plan; and (f) follow up, supervision and
control arrangements. An appropriate budget has been included for these activities.
The SEA also recommended environmental mitigation measures for each one of the
defined homogenous zones in terms of risks, and by the threats of potential natural
disasters. It also tailored the procedures for the evaluation of rural road projects, based on
the methodology presented in the GCEASPV, for use by the MOP. Also, the project's
operational manual will require that appropriate environmental mitigating measures be
applied during project design and implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Based on the social organization of the community, all of the residents in the area,
including women and ethnic minorities, were consulted through the participatory



workshops that were held province-wide during project preparation for the selection of
roads for the project. Local government officials will participate in the screening of road
subprojects and in validating the design of selected projects to respond to local needs.
The results of the socio-environmental screenings were made public. Some of the steps
followed in this bottom-up planning cycle included:
In the preparatory activities for the workshops:
*    Local officials verified whether indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean peoples were
present in the influence area of the road.
At the parochial workshops:
*    The presence and ethnicity of indigenous people were noted.
*    Their native dialect was specified.
*    Separate or individual workshops were organized, consistent with the social
organization of the community.
*    Translators were provided at workshops for indigenous people, when needed.
*    An act of acceptance or rejection of a road candidate was signed with the
indigenous organizations.
At Cantonal workshops:
*    The grassroots organizations (organismos del primer grado) were invited.
First Provincial Workshop:
*    If distinct indigenous communities exist, an analysis was carried out to helpdefine
the communities' preferences.
Second provincial workshop:
The suggestions of grass roots and higher order organizations were included.
This participatory program and the planning process that included the participation of the
beneficiary indigenous population satisfy the requirements of the OP.4.20.
The project will use the following mechanisms to monitor and measure the environmental
impact of the project: (i) annual performance audits to examine the level of compliance
with national and local environmental guidelines and specifications; (ii) carrying out of
studies of the efficacy of environmental procedures and their application in the field; and
(iii) periodic updating of the sectoral screening approaches that were developed during
project preparation. This exercise will allow also the fine-tuning of environmental
procedures and implementation procedures.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                         03/08/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     01/01/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                      03/19/2004
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                         04/13/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     01/01/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                      04/21/2004
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to befilled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?  Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)  Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the  Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of  No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other  N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?  Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential  Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OPJBP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector  Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed  N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?



OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints  Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these  Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include  No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's  Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a  Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the  Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the   Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
D. Approvals
Signed and submitted by:                      Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:              Mr Emmanuel A. James  .
Environmental Specialist:      Mr Juan D. Quintero                         il J  -
Social Development Specialist  Ms Elena Correa   C.             (          - / Io '
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):
Approved by:                                     v
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Reidar Kvany 74  4   _ a..v
Comments:
Sector Manager:                Mr Jose Luis Irigoyei   J?f /7-D6
Comments:



