Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2510
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ecuador 
Project ID:  P086626 
Project Name:  Agricultural Competitiveness and Sustainable Rural Development 
(CADERS) 
Task Team Leader:  Garry Charlier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (50%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (50%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
4.00 
 LOCAL 
FARMER 
ORGANIZATIONS 
12.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
16.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to improve agricultural 
competitiveness through better-competing productive alliances, strengthened selected 
value chains, and increased institutional capacity of MAG.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Promotion of Productive Alliances (US$ 17.24 million)  
 
This component is designed to increase competitiveness and improve access to markets, 
especially for small producers.  It will assist them to innovate, add value, and overcome 
barriers particularly in the establishment or expansion of strategic alliances with other 
market actors, i.e. processors, exporters and wholesale or retail buyers.  This assistance is 
in the form of technical support and co-financing that will be made available on a 
competitive basis with additional capacity building offered for developing viable business 
plans.  
 
Page  2
Targeting:   The project actions under this component will target small producer groups 
that wish to participate in productive alliances, through training, technical assistance 
services and project funding.  This is in line with GOE?s focus of identifying financing 
and capacity constraints among small farmers as key deterrents to the equitable 
development of a more competitive agricultural sector.  In addition, the project will 
indirectly benefit larger farmers and other market actors that will increase its own 
competitiveness by participating in the alliances.  
 
Twelve potential provinces were selected to implement this component, most of them of 
the Andean part of the country: Loja; Azuay; Canar; Cotopaxi; Chimborazo; Tungurahua; 
Guayas; Manabi and Pichincha; Carchis; Imbabura and El Oro.  These pre-selected areas 
share a combination of desirable factors for a successful implementation of productive 
alliances, i.e. high density of small scale farmers, relatively well developed producer 
organization networks, good production conditions for improving marketable production, 
such as irrigation, and reasonable marketing structures (See Annex 11 for details on 
selection of provinces).  Incorporation of the provinces to the project will be gradual.  
Five of them (Loja, Chimborazo, Guayas, Manabi and Pichincha) will be incorporated 
into the project during the first implementation year and the rest will follow gradually as 
the learning process allows for expanding activities.  It is expected that operations will 
cover nine provinces out of the identified twelve potential provinces by the third 
implementation year.  
 
Taking into account the diversity of actors, regions, situations, and the project?s focus 
on support to opportunities, the intention is to establish a flexible alliance model that 
allows the project to adjust to the requirements of each particular business case.  
Alliances will be local in nature, and they will be identified in a bottom-up process and 
not through the pre-selection of products or supply chains.  Alliances are not limited to 
the agricultural sector and may include any economic activity conducted by rural poor 
people.  Expected examples of non-agricultural economic activities supported by the 
alliances are processing and other value-adding efforts, services (i.e. equipment leasing), 
tourism, handicrafts, or retail.  
 
Main outputs: It is expected that the project will assist to establish and operate 
successfully about 250 alliances and co-finance their business plans.  These alliances 
would involve some 10,000 family farmers (considering an average of 40 producers in 
each alliance).  As the alliances will be demand driven it is not possible to quantify the 
exact number of beneficiaries and alliances.  
 
Activities: To implement this component the project will provide training, and technical 
assistance to facilitate (i) the organization of farmer groups; (ii) their analysis of their 
particular business situation; (iii) their contacting of downstream business partners to 
establish productive alliances; and (iv) the preparation of business plans. These plans will 
identify the key constraints or particular opportunities to be addressed that will facilitate 
the group?s participation in an alliance.  Funding will then be provided by the project to 
co-finance the implementation of the business plans under the modality of matching 
grants, with CADERS financing up to a maximum of 60 percent of the cost of the 
Page  3
business plan, and producers co-financing the remaining 40 percent with their own 
savings or by mobilizing other financial sources (credit, supporting funds from NGOs, 
funding from partners in their alliance, etc.).  A competitive fund will be established for 
that purpose.  
 
Financing could, for example, be awarded to improve production capacity or develop 
marketing facilities, such as washing, grading or packing, that would permit farmers to 
sell a higher value product and in larger quantities.  Assistance can apply to training and 
even to the strengthening of the farmer group?s own capacity to operate effectively as a 
business unit. These improvements small farmers? capacities of will serve as an incentive 
for buyers to participate in the alliances; buyers would benefit from a delivery contract, 
sufficient volume, and consistent and acceptable quality.  
 
Implementation strategy and key inputs:  Implementation of this component will rely 
extensively on private sector actors such as second tier producer organizations, NGOs, 
trade agents and service providers.  These actors are active in Ecuador?s rural areas and 
will be excellent sources of technical and organizational assistance to the small producers 
groups to help them prepare their business plans and formalize agreements with business 
partners. To facilitate this, CADERS will give a technical assistance grant to producer 
groups for the preparation of their business plans. This will be done using a competitive 
mechanism. Thus, producer groups will be asked to submit a business plan profile with 
minimum information of the characteristics of the group, the business opportunities they 
would like to exploit and how, and the business partner with whom they intend to 
establish the alliance. These profiles will be assessed by a technical panel and the best 
ones will receive a grant of US$ 1,300 to allow the group to contract the technical 
assistance required for the preparation of the business plan. Groups will be free to decide 
who to contract to provide the service. The co-participation of producer organizations, 
NGOs, local governments and private service providers to support small producer groups 
to identify, develop and formalize the alliances will be promoted as one of the valuable 
lessons learned from the PROLOCAL project.  
 
As regards the funding of business plans, there will be a competitive selection process 
that will consider, inter alia, (i) the commitment of business partners to enter into the 
alliance with the small producers? groups; (ii) the profitability and sustainability of the 
activities proposed; (iii) the cost of the investments required; (iv) the counterpart funding 
by the group over and above the required 40 percent; (v) the marketing arrangements; (vi) 
the expected improvement in output quality, yields, production mix, and/or returns to 
labor; (vii) the number of small producers involved; and (viii) the environmental impact.  
The alliances/business plans to be supported should help intensify, add value, and/or 
diversify small farmers? production, and should clearly show that they contribute to 
improve economic competitiveness.  CADERS resources allocated to the alliances will be 
managed directly by the beneficiary groups on the basis of transparent procedures and 
accountability rules. After scrutiny by CADERS staff of the business plans submitted by 
the small farmers groups, to ensure compliance with eligibility norms and other minimum 
requirements, the plans will be assessed by an independent panel of experts. This panel 
Page  4
will select the best plans for co-financing by CADERS within the financial restrictions 
for the province established in the annual operational plan (AOP).  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Governance and Technology Development in Selected 
Value Chains   (US$ 14.69 million)  
 
This component will enhance the competitiveness of a selected group of sub-sectors at 
the national and/or regional level through (1) improved governance and institutional 
sustainability of the respective value chains, and (2) assistance to carry out technological 
innovations to address their strategic technological constraints. A financial facility will be 
established to support technological innovations that would include applied research, 
technology dissemination and farmer training.  This component will build on earlier 
progress made by the SICA and PROMSA projects.  
 
Targeting: This component is designed for sector-level investments that will have 
national or regional impact for organizations belonging to the selected value chains, from 
production to retail, but especially primary producers.   Initially, the project will assist the 
value chains in the following subsectors: rice, milk and dairy products, potatoes, 
vegetables, and fruits. At a later stage the selection can be modified to include other 
chains or eliminate those where the actors are not showing sufficient interest or progress 
is not sufficiently fast (see Annex 11 for selection of value chains).  The product groups 
were selected on the basis of factors such as strategic importance, diversification, number 
of small farmers involved, existence of infrastructure such as irrigation facilities, degree 
of organization among producers, etc.  In addition, these selected value chains have been 
supported by MAG via SICA through the creation of the Consultative Councils (CCs).  
However, the CCs institutional and operational capacities have declined significantly 
since the closure of the SICA project in 2004.  Both the CCs and the member 
organizations are primarily composed of private sector actors and are valid platforms for 
promoting collective actions for the selected value chains.  The project will support and 
make use of these private sector structures in order to improve institutional performance 
and technological innovation in the respective sub-sectors.  
 
Main outputs:   It is expected that under this component, (i) all assisted value chains will 
have strategic plans under implementation; (ii) the CCs will be strengthened and 
technical committees established and functioning; (iii) small scale producers will be more 
equitably represented in the CCs through the participation of their organizations; (iv) 
technology innovation plans will be approved and put in operation in all product groups 
selected; (v) contracts will be signed between CADERS and the CCs or other value chain 
coordination entities for the carrying out of the innovation plans; (vi) 250 of producers 
associations will have established their own para-fiscal mechanisms (fondos gremiales) to 
finance their operations; and (vii) 182 of technology development subprojects will be 
funded and have successfully introduced technological innovations.  
 
Activities: (i) Mapping of organizations and programs in the selected chains; (ii) 
training of project staff to update and harmonize approaches and methodologies to value 
chain development; (iii) capacity building of CCs; (iv) support to value chain governance 
entities to carry out priority studies; (iv) support to value chain governance entities to 
Page  5
prepare strategic plans and technology innovation proposals; (v) assessment of 
technology innovation proposals by independent technical panels; and (vi) co-financing 
of technical innovation proposals.  
 
Implementation strategy and key inputs: The project will improve the functioning and 
representation of CCs that are composed primarily of private sector actors and establish 
private sector-oriented technical committees to address specific competitiveness or equity 
issues across a sub-sector?s value chain.  The CCs are also expected to provide sufficient 
value added services and utility to justify the solicitation of enough funds from member 
organizations to ensure financial sustainability after the closure of the CADERS project.  
The technical committees for the CCs will make available training, technical assistance 
and consultancy services for capacity building purpose and to support the preparation of 
strategic plans and technology development proposals.  This will specifically include: (i) 
training to strengthen the management capacity of the CCs; (ii) undertaking studies to 
examine competitiveness issues within the chains and to identify technology and 
investment needs; (iii) identifying, discussing and participatively agreeing on long term 
strategic plans for improving competitiveness; (iv) supporting small producer 
associations in increasing their active participation in the CCs and strengthening their 
negotiating capacity; (v) designing and implementing para-fiscal funding mechanisms 
(fondos gremiales) to increase the financial sustainability of producers associations; (vi) 
implementing conflict resolution and price negotiations mechanisms; and (vii) identifying 
key technology innovations for improving competitiveness of the selected value chains 
and preparing the technology development proposals to be submitted to the project for 
co-financing.  
 
Organizational assistance at local level will be provided by CADERS staff, while 
technical assistance will be supplied by private providers.  The structure will revolve 
around a senior convening person (i.e. former Senior Minister) assisted by a dynamic 
junior person to facilitate the coalescing of these groups and their forward movement on 
common issues. It is envisioned that the senior convening person will strive to ensure that 
the CCs provide a real value to their members and will seek progressively greater 
alternative funding sources during the project to ensure their post-project sustainability.  
 
Co-financing of innovation and technology subprojects: The resources available under 
this financial facility will be allocated to the selected chains on the basis of their proposed 
technology development programs. These programs will be part of the strategic plans for 
the sub-sectors, and will be prepared in a participatory manner by the value chain 
members (mainly producer organizations in the sub-sector) with the necessary technical 
assistance. Selection criteria for activities to be financed under this facility include (i) 
being consistent with the value chains strategic priorities; (ii) having cross-cutting sub-
sectoral benefits; (iii) sustainability of investment; (iv) broad impact particularly on small 
producers; and (v) the amount of additional funding or resources the proposal can 
leverage in terms of co-financing.  Subproject funding will be a grant of up to 50 percent 
of the total program cash cost, with the remaining 50 percent being co-financed by 
beneficiary organizations.  
 
A
technical panel of qualified independent professionals will be established to evaluate 
the proposals submitted by the value chains.  The panels will have four members, two of 
Page  6
them will be technology and investment specialists and the other two will be experts in 
the specific value chain.  A standard methodology will be developed for the assessment 
of proposals.  
 
Management of the technology innovation programs will be the responsibility of CCs or 
other governance organizations of the chains that present and sponsor the proposals. 
Contracts will be signed for this purpose between CADERS and these organizations. 
Before the signing of these contracts, CADERS will assess the implementation capacity 
of the relevant organizations. The implementation of the programs will be in accordance 
with project rules and guidelines established in the Project Operational Manual (POM) 
and using transparent procurement and administrative-financial system. Implementation 
of the programs will be supervised by CADERS staff to assess financial and physical 
progress.  
 
Component 3: Support to the Planning and Development of Sector Policies and 
Information Systems (US$ 1.03 million)  
 
This component will provide support to MAG to widen and modernize its operations in 
key functions related to competitiveness.  The areas selected for support are: (a) the 
formulation and monitoring of sectoral policies, including the negotiation of commercial 
agreements; (b) the provision of accurate and timely agricultural statistics (structural, 
continuous production data, producer prices, market information, and industry 
consumption of agricultural products), building on the work done by SICA. The project 
will finance technical assistance, training and study tours.  In particular, the component 
will strengthen MAG?s provincial directorates capacity to produce statistical information.  
 
GOE has indicated the intention of creating the Center for Agricultural Policies (CEPA; 
Centro de Politica Agropecuarias). A multisectoral commission has been appointed to 
that effect, which is currently designing the functions of CEPA.  If CEPA is effectively 
created, and if it responds to the criteria of technical independence, quality and 
sustainability satisfactory to the Bank, its strengthening will be supported by Component 
3. Funds have been allocated for this purpose in the project?s cost tables. The other 
entities of MAG to be supported by this component are the Agricultural Information 
System, the Information Management Department of the Organizational Development 
Directorate and the Regional Sub-secretariats for the purpose of strengthening their 
information technology capacity. If the creation of CEPA does not materialize or does not 
meet the criteria required for Bank support, the funds budgeted for that purposes will be 
used to provide further support to these information related departments.  
 
[TO BE UPDATED DURING APPRAISAL]  
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$ 3.24 million)  
 
This component will support effective project management, monitoring and evaluation, 
and project information dissemination, and will ensure that effective fiduciary 
arrangements are in place during implementation.  It will finance management services, 
office equipment, and all administrative and operational expenditures necessary to ensure 
the effective implementation of project activities and management of resources.  
Page  7
Main outputs: (i) a Project Management Unit (PMU) established in MAG and 
facilitating effective project implementation, including a Monitoring and Evaluation 
(M&E) system and a Management Information System (MIS); (ii) AOPs, M&E Reports, 
Procurement Plans, Disbursement Plans, and audits prepared and submitted in a 
systematic manner throughout the life of the project; and (iii) coordination undertaken in 
a
systematic manner with other relevant projects and initiatives in the sector.  
 
Over time, it is expected that this component will lead to the establishment of a 
functional, transparent, accountable and efficient administrative and financial 
management system for the MAG?s externally funded operations.  [TO BE UPDATED 
DURING APPRAISAL]  
 
Activities:  The component will establish and operate the PMU at the central level and 
will support up to nine of field offices within MAG?s Provincial Directorates during 
implementation.  Operative planning, technical guidance, supervision, administrative and 
financial management and the general oversight of project implementation will be under 
the responsibility of the PMU with field units servicing as operational offices for mainly 
Component 1 activities.  
 
Specific objectives of the M&E system will include: (i) monitoring project 
implementation in relation to overall objectives, baseline situation, inputs and outputs; 
(ii) undertaking special evaluation studies (ex-ante, mid-term and ex-post evaluations); 
(iii) providing and receiving feedback from stakeholders and generating inputs for 
dissemination of project results and lessons learned; and (iv) preparing project reports 
and submitting them to project managers, MAG, the Bank and to the project steering 
committees periodically.  Progress in the fulfillment of the project objectives and 
outcomes will be monitored in accordance with MAG and Bank procedures and will be 
based on the Results Framework (Annex 3) as an essential tool that will facilitate results-
oriented project implementation and sound M&E.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Twelve potential provinces were selected to implement this component, most of them of 
the Andean part of the country: Loja, Azuay, Canar, Cotopaxi, Chimborazo, Tungurahua, 
Guayas, Manabi and Pichincha, Carchis, Imbabura and El Oro.  These pre-selected areas 
share a combination of desirable factors for a successful implementation of productive 
alliances, i.e. high density of small scale farmers, relatively well developed producer 
organization networks, good production conditions for improving marketable production, 
such as irrigation, and reasonable marketing structures.  Incorporation of the provinces to 
the project will be gradual.  Five of them (Loja, Chimborazo, Guayas, Manabi and 
Pichincha) will be incorporated into the project during the first implementation year and 
the rest will follow gradually as the learning process allows for expanding activities.  It is 
expected that operations will cover nine provinces out of the identified twelve potential 
provinces by the third implementation year.   
 
Page  8
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
O.P. 4.01 - Environmental Assessment  
 
Specific investment to enhance the competitiveness of participating rural alliances and 
selected value chains will be defined during the implementation phase; the project will 
support those activities that fall under Category B and as far as possible, under Category 
C. The project team has carried out an environmental analysis (EA) focused on the 
potential impacts of intensified and/or diversified production of value chains to be 
supported through the project.  The EA has also evaluated the applicability of the Natural 
Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Forest (OP 4.36) Policies, and 
provides recommendations on measures to mitigate the identified impacts through the 
following tools: i) an Environmental Management Plan for individual investments, 
including screening criteria to ensure that any negative impacts caused by the proposed 
activities to be financed by the project are avoided, minimized or mitigated appropriately, 
and procedures for follow-up design, approval, and supervision of mitigation measures; 
ii) Incorporation of environmental considerations and procedures in the business plans, 
information dissemination, technical assistance and training activities to be organized by 
the project; and iii) procedures to monitor the project?s environmental aspects, including: 
(i) land use, production and other environmental changes on beneficiary farms and 
alliances and (ii) the on-the-ground effectiveness of the project?s environmental criteria 
and procedures.  
 
O.P. 4.09- Pest Management  
 
Pest management issues in the EA have been mainly addressed in the context of 
technical assistance and training on agricultural intensification for beneficiaries and 
government agencies.  The project will avoid supporting projects that could imply 
substantial increase in pesticide use, as far as possible will provide opportunities to 
Page  9
develop appropriate pest management policies and procedures within the Ministry of 
Agriculture and by the direct beneficiaries of sub-projects.  The project environmental 
analysis prepared by the Ministry of Agriculture and environmental safeguard evaluation 
carried out by the Bank identified the potential to trigger the Bank's Pest management 
policy. The project therefore would use both the national legal framework and the World 
Bank listings and procedures on Integrated Pest Management (IPM), including IPM 
components. The Environmental Analysis included an analysis on pest management and 
specific procedures to deal with these aspects have been developed within a Pest 
Management Framework (PMF), which is described in Annex 10A of the PAD.  
 
O.P. 4.04 - Natural Habitats  
 
Based on the recommendations of the EA, most if not all the investments will take place 
in areas that have been traditionally dedicated to agriculture, thus expansion to natural 
habitats are not expected. The project will avoid developing any activity that would put 
under risk the integrity of critical ecosystems or that would promote the expansion of the 
agricultural frontier towards such ecosystems or inside the territory of state or privately 
owned protected areas. In case it is not possible to avoid the development of activities in 
buffer zones of protected areas, they will be designed in such a way that they will 
substantially contribute to reduce the pressure towards protected areas.  
 
OP 4.36- Forests:  
 
This Policy would be triggered in the case that agro-forestry activities are financed by 
the project. This aspect will be further analyzed during the preparation and 
implementation phases. The EA also provides procedures to assess impacts and 
mitigation measures for this type of activity.  
 
OP/BP4.10 Indigenous People:  
 
The proposed project triggers the Bank?s indigenous Peoples Policy OP/BP4.10 that 
requires an IPDP to ensure that indigenous peoples participate in and benefit in a 
culturally appropriate way.  As part of project preparation, an IPDP was prepared by the 
Government of Ecuador in collaboration with a Social Specialist from the World Bank.  
The proposed project will make the necessary efforts to implement the IPP, and on the 
basis of this Preliminary Social Evaluation of the project, MAG will ensure that 
indigenous people benefit from the project through (a) the support and promotion of 
indigenous people?s participation in the implementation and monitoring of the project; 
(b) the monitoring of actual participation and receipt of project benefits by such 
population, and (c) the support of culturally appropriate social control by such 
beneficiaries.  (See Annex 10 of the PAD for details).  
 
OP 4.11 Cultural Property.  
 
Most of the proposed productive rural alliances could benefit from and even help to 
protect or restore important archaeological, historical or other relevant cultural property, 
such as the traditional knowledge associated to cultivation practices. Conversely, those 
activities not designed to incorporate best practices in terms of protection to cultural 
property and environmental management, could damage fragile sites, objects of cultural 
interest or even negatively impact local livelihoods in term of access to natural resources. 
Page  10
To prevent any type of negative impact on cultural property, both the social and 
environmental assessments have included specific mitigation measures and in all cases, 
the project will avoid financing activities that do not incorporate such measures"   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The sustainability of agriculture is clearly tied to economic, social, and environmental 
factors. An analysis of these factors allows for a better understanding of the causes and 
effects of the impacts of agriculture on the environment.  The interactions and 
interrelations between the environment as a whole, the natural ecosystem, the agro-
ecosystem and agricultural systems are complex. While on the one hand, agriculture 
occupies semi-natural habitats, human manipulation, through improper agricultural 
practices and the inappropriate use of land, can adversely affect natural resources, and 
produce contamination of the basic natural elements: air, water, soil, and biodiversity (the 
fragmentation of habitats as well as the extinction of wildlife).  
 
With regards to indigenous people, the project is designed to avoid adverse impacts. It is 
expected to promote productive alliances to increase competitiveness and improve access 
to markets especially for small producers, and to strengthen governance and technology 
development in selected value chains. Therefore, the status of rural indigenous families 
would further improve as a result of project interventions.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Integrated pest management will be considered as a key element on improving 
agricultural practices given the benefit that it provides to the environment.  Its application 
will consists on monitoring pest populations, prevalence, and seasonality, as well as the 
cycles of crops, as information necessary for pest control.  The control agent can be 
chemical, natural or biological.  In the first case, short-duration natural and synthetic 
chemicals are applied, along with non-conventional methods to attract and trap the pests. 
Natural control methods could include the introduction of natural enemies.  
 
These methods will could be coupled with the following practices: i) prevent, control 
and avoid the burning of chaff, undergrowth, or vegetation as a way to eliminate wastes 
and recuperate cultivable soil; ii) train and equip farmers in composting techniques in 
order to reduce the emission of methane, a greenhouse gas; iii) improve and provide 
training in sustainable techniques for plowing the soil and growing crops; iv) preserve the 
quality of surface water and protect groundwater; v) control irrigation water quality, 
which requires community organization, and employ improved irrigation techniques; vi) 
void the loss of nutrients and inputs due to poor irrigation techniques; vii) avoid the 
presence of pollutants and toxic substances in irrigation water; viii) promote holistic or 
organic agricultural systems with specific cultivation methods; ix) conserve habitats of 
significant natural value.   
 
Page  11
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed the environmental assessment which includes not only 
assesses the potential impacts of the project activities, but includes project screening 
criteria, mitigation measures and monitoring mechanisms for the implementation of 
agreed environmental measures. These procedures will be incorporated to the project?s 
Operational Manual.  
 
A
full IPDP was also prepared and discussed by the government with technical 
assistance from the World Bank, to ensure the participation of indigenous peoples during 
project design and particularly during implementation, monitoring, and evaluation. The 
borrower?s capacity to address social issues appears to be adequate in terms of the Social 
Assessment. The project?s operational manual will include necessary arrangements for 
staffing and training of MAG personnel in accordance with the social criteria and 
procedures established.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA and proposed criteria and procedures to carry out the environmental analysis as 
well as the environmental analyses of the specific projects will be consulted via focal 
groups and in-depth interviews with stakeholders. Such stakeholders will be interviewed 
in order to understand their opinions, perceptions and thoughts about improved basic 
services through appropriate environmental practices. The overall EA and the specific 
environmental analyses of the projects financed with the loan will be made available in a 
website of the Ministry of Agriculture if available or through other mechanisms designed 
for public dissemination.  
 
The proposed project targets areas characterized by an important presence of indigenous 
population. The average indigenous population in these areas of intervention reaches 
11.36%. The greater presence of indigenous population is at the province of Chimborazo 
where the indigenous population account for 38% of the total provincial population, 
followed by the provinces of Cotopaxi with 24.1% and Tungurahua with 14.67% of its 
total population.  
 
The proposed project will support the Government?s own program and will build on 
prior consultations and specific studies carried out during project design. In addition, in 
August 2006, joint consultation have been carried out by MAG with representatives of 
the Consejo de Desarrollo de las Nacionalidades y Pueblos Indigenas (Codenpe), and 
MAG?s Institute for Peasant Training (INCCA) that supports integral development of 
small and vulnerable producers such as the Indigenous Nationalities  and Afro- 
Ecuadorians.  
 
The Ministry of Agriculture (MAG) will be the implementing agency of the project and 
as part its sectoral policies will emphasize the support of vulnerable farmers through the 
National Institute for Peasant Training (INCCA).  
 
Page  12
During the design stage the project the Government carried out preliminary 
consultations with potential beneficiaries, specifically with indigenous leaders, and with 
representatives of the national institution in charge of defining public policies for 
indigenous peoples: Codenpe. The main objective of consultations were three folds:  (i) 
to identify the indigenous population settled in the zones of intervention of the project, 
and to assess their expectations; (ii) to identify core demands and lesson learned; and (iii) 
to inform potential beneficiaries about the project activities and to define appropriate 
ways and forms to guarantee the participation of the indigenous population.  
 
Additionally, two main studies namely Alternatives to Support Vulnerable Groups  
 
(MAG/Caders, 2006) and the New Agro-business Opportunities (MAG/Caders 2006) 
were carried out to define the actions needed to support small farmers. The elaboration of 
these studies included assessment of priority projects and consultations with beneficiaries  
 
The social assessment shows that the program is well received by the majority of the 
population. Specific suggestions were given to eliminate the inefficiencies of rural 
development programs. A summary of the main findings from the assessments and 
consultations are:  
 
a)  Market and commercialization. Among indigenous communities there is a weak 
access to agro-services and market opportunities. Despite that indigenous peoples have a 
strong social capital; complaints highlighted the needs to strengthen their organizations to 
improve access markets and services.  
 
b)  Prior Interventions. The culture of paternalism, identified as a negative incentive, has 
been predominant in prior interventions. It was suggested to define a strategy that allows 
and reinforces participation.  
 
c) Rural Women. There is an increased feminization of rural areas among indigenous 
population. The male emigration is causing radical changes in the structure of the 
indigenous rural families. Consequently, among others, journeys for rural women have 
intensified. Although indigenous women can be contributors to improve local economies, 
there is need for establishing new economic strategies that will support women 
participation including human capital formation. It was suggested that accounting and 
administration tools need to be considered as part of training for rural business 
management.  
 
d). Communication and capacity building. There are demands to ensure access to 
technical knowledge and innovative experiences. It was suggested to define packages for 
technical training, ensuring participation of community members taking into account 
bilingual and cultural needs.  
 
Drawing from the lessons learned from these consultations specific actions have been 
included in the project design to ensure that: good examples of chain values where 
indigenous people are participating and where there are lesson learned, must be taken into 
Page  13
account by the project. I was also recommended improving the human capital through the 
following:  (i) define the mechanism for the project cycle that will enable indigenous 
farmers to access innovated technology, improving their position in the productive 
chains.  (ii) take into account the ancestral knowledge of the indigenous on farming 
product production and prioritizing technological packages to conserve environment 
resources. (iii) to define methodologies to ensure participatory productive  model 
allowing  communities  to be the protagonist of his own development in alliances with 
local Municipalities, ONGs, Universities, and other farmers and productive associations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/04/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/18/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/06/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/04/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/06/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
Page  14
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  15
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garry Charlier 
10/06/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gabriela Arcos 
10/06/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
10/06/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
10/13/2006 
Comments:  I endorse this ISDS 
