Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2857 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ecuador 
Project ID: P094784 
Project Name: Ecuador - Chimborazo Productive Investments (PIDD) Project 
Task Team Leader: Garry Charlier 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P105550 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (65%);Roads and highways (35%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (P);Other 
environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.80 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
3.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
3.50
7.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to support the conservation and sustainable management of 
Chimborazo s paramos, by promoting improved natural resources management practices, 
strengthening relevant legal and policy frameworks and building local capacity in the sustainable 
use of natural resources.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be financed through a US$4m GEF grant and at least US$7.3m in co-financing 
from the following sources: i) The IBDR "Chimborazo Productive Investment (PIDD) Project" 
($3m); ii) a counterpart contribution by the provincial government CHPC ($ 0.8m); and iii) 
Ecuadorian NGOs ($3.5m). The project consists of the following components and activities:  
 
Component 1. Conservation and recovery of the paramos and related highland ecosystems 
(Total cost: US $ 9.5 M; GEF: US $ 3.2 M ). Proposed activities are:  
Page  2
i)Demonstration Sub-Projects - Type 1: Establishment of community organic crops, coupled 
with recovery of wild relatives of domesticated cultivars, reforestation with native species, and 
soil recovery. This activity will incorporate traditional indigenous practices as well as other 
improved techniques, and will help to scale-up the ongoing pilot initiatives currently financed by 
the GPCH;  
 
ii)Demonstration Sub-Projects - Type 2: Assistance provided to improve the existing program 
of the Chimborazo Reserve to reintroduce, manage, and eventually commercialize sub-products 
of native camelids, particularly alpacas and vicunas. This activity will be complemented with 
improved administrative infrastructure, basic equipment, and capacity building for local 
community beneficiaries;  
 
iii)Demonstration Sub-Projects - Type 3: Implementation of a pilot PES model, to be designed 
under Component 2, to test a conservation incentive structure (addressing either water 
consumption/conservation or silvopastoral practices); and  
 
iv)Business Plans Preparation for the development of ecotourism and other productive activities 
aimed at increasing income generation within communities adjacent to paramos.  
 
Component 2. Capacity building for the sustainable management of natural resources (Total 
Cost: US $ 1.3 M; GEF: 0.5 M). Proposed activities include:  
 
i) Development of policy and legal framework for the improved management of natural 
resources. Policy framework will be oriented toward overall improvement of integrated natural 
resources management, while the legal framework will comprise the development of local 
ordinances for forestry control ; ii) Development of a toolkit to provide information on 
methodologies to mainstream conservation practices, including PES , into main economic 
activities (agriculture, forestry, irrigation, and ecotourism); iii) Training to the Provincial 
Government staff and Farmer-to-farmer training of best environmental practices among local 
communities; and iv) Design and operation of a participatory monitoring system not only to 
assess the impact of conservation strategies developed through the project, but also to guide 
decision making on sustainable natural resources management.  
 
Component 3. Project Management and Evaluation (Total Cost: US $ 0.5 M; GEF: 0.3 M)  
 
The project will be managed by the Provincial Government (CHPC) with the support of a 
technical team (coordinator and specialized consultants), the cost of which will be covered by 
this project.  In addition, this component will cover the design and implementation of a 
monitoring system to assess the impact of project activities. The PIDD project and the proposed 
GEF-funded project will use and share the same implementation arrangements.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Province of Chimborazo in Ecuador, more specifically the Chambo and Chanchan river basins.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower is currently preparing the World Bank-funded Chimborazo Productive Investment 
(PIDD) Project. Safeguard management at this stage is considered adequate and will be assessed 
during the preparation of the proposed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN) 
Page  3
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment (EA) will be carried out during preparation. It will assess the 
project s potential impacts, other safeguard policies triggered (including Natural Habitat and 
Forestry); and will propose measures to mitigate any identified impacts.  The EA for this project 
will be based on the EA being prepared for the linked "Chimborazo Productive Investment 
Project"-PIDD, among other aspects, the environmental screening criteria and procedures that 
will be applied for PIDD irrigation sub-projects will be adapted to the GEF investments as 
needed. The EA will include and Environmental Plan as well as a description of the public 
consultations carried out on the environmental aspects of the project. A summary report of the 
EA will be incorporated as an annex to the PAD, disclosed separately prior Appraisal and 
submitted to the Infoshop.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project is expected to promote conservation and recovery of highland ecosystems 
currently under high pressure due to unsustainable agricultural and forestry practices. The project 
will seek to incorporate environmental aspects in agricultural practices in lowland areas so as to 
help to control the advance of the agricultural frontier towards fragile highland ecosystems.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project is expected to promote conservation and recovery of natural habitats and 
incorporating environmental aspects in agricultural practices in lowland areas so as to reduce the 
impact of the advance of the agricultural frontier towards fragile highland ecosystems. The 
recovery of natural habitats might include reforestation of selected sites with native species to 
build on the ongoing program of the local government.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
It is expected that the project triggers OP4.10. The Recipient will finalize a Social 
Assessment (SA), which involves a free and prior consultation with the beneficiaries.  Given that 
the project beneficiaries are mainly indigenous peoples, the entire project will be considered an 
Indigenous Peoples Project. Thus, the project documentation will provide detailed information 
on how the project as a whole is culturally appropriate, based on free, prior and informed 
consultation, and has the support of the involved communities. The GPCH will prepare a report 
describing the project?s overall compliance with the Indigenous Peoples Policy, paying 
particular attention to issues related to land and natural resources. Although a stand alone IPPF 
will not be required, the IPPF outline will be followed to prepare the summary report. This report 
will be incorporated as an annex to the PAD, disclosed separately prior Appraisal and submitted 
to the Infoshop.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There will be no physical resettlement due to the project actions, however, a Process 
Framework could be developed to assess the potential risks of improved agricultural practices on 
traditional livelihoods and if necessary, will include a mitigation strategy. As far as possible and 
needed, the PF will result in local management plans that will contribute to more effective 
protection of forests, while at the same time allowing for sustainable use.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The partially blended IBRD-funded PIDD project which finances irrigation and road 
rehabilitation infrastructure will apply a negative-list approach to disqualify any activities which 
would lead to resettlement. The proposed project will adopt a similar negative-list approach 
through clear exclusion criteria in the project EMP and Operational Manual.   This would also 
entail adequate screening mechanisms and the available skills locally to assess whether people 
may be restricted from access or be displaced either physically or economically as a result of the 
operation.  The screening mechanisms to determine which activities or sub-projects get funded 
and which do not, will be made explicit and incorporated into relevant manuals and project 
documents.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
-
EA will be completed by August 17, 2007; if needed Process Framework will be 
completed by the same date.  
 
-
Social Assessment will be completed by August 17, 2007.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garry Charlier 
04/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
