Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1790 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/11/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ecuador 
Project ID: P086626 
Project Name: Agricultural Competitiveness and Sustainable Rural Development 
(CADERS) 
Task Team Leader: Garry Charlier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (50%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (50%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project will promote agricultural competitiveness through (i) helping small 
producers to form and operate productive alliances with processors, exporters and wholesale 
buyers, (ii) improving governance and technology development in selected value chains, and (iii) 
assisting MAG in carrying out institutional improvements in key areas related to 
competitiveness.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total project cost is estimated at US$25 million, of which a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) 
of US$20 million is proposed.  
 
Proposed Components  
 
Component 1: Promotion of Production Alliances (US$9 to 11 million)  
 
Page  2
This component will assist small producers to set up or expand strategic production alliances 
with processors, exporters and wholesale buyers. It has two subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Organizational Support to Production Alliances.  This subcomponent will 
support the establishment of alliances between small producers and processors, exporters and 
wholesale buyers in selected geographic areas and/or lines of production. This includes project 
information dissemination, organization of producer groups, support to the formalization of the 
alliances, and technical assistance and training to prepare and implement alliance business plans 
to enhance competitiveness.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Funding of Alliance Business Plans.  This component will establish a 
financing mechanism to help implement the alliances? business plans. This will be done through 
a
competitive fund.  The fund will finance technical assistance, training, farm equipment, 
processing equipment, inputs, working capital, and other supporting investments required by 
small producers to participate in the alliances. The competitive selection process will consider 
inter alia the commitment of the partners downstream of the value chain to enter into the 
alliance, the profitability and sustainability of the activities proposed, the cost of the investments 
required, and the returns to labor generated. The alliances to be supported should help intensify 
and/or diversify production by small farmers. Financing from the fund will consist of matching 
grants, with producers co-financing the investments required by mobilizing other financial 
sources (credit, own resources, supporting funds from NGOs or other government programs, 
funding from the partner in the alliance, etc.).  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Governance and Technology Development in Selected Value 
Chains  (US$5 to 7 million)  
 
This component will enhance the competitiveness of selected value chains at national and/or 
regional level through improved governance as well as technological innovation. It will build on 
progress made by SICA and PROMSA.  
 
Technical assistance will be provided by the project to value chains for (i) improving the 
functioning of consultative councils, preparing strategic plans, examining competitiveness issues 
within the chains, identifying technology and investment needs, representing the interests of the 
chains, implementing conflict resolution and price negotiations mechanisms, and others; (ii) 
supporting small producer associations to increase their active participation and strengthen  their 
negotiating capacity within the chains; and (iii) designing and promoting mechanisms, such as 
parafiscalidad, to increase the financial sustainability of producer associations. Diagnostic and 
planning work will be carried out using participatory methods.  
 
This component will also establish a matching grant fund to support innovations to address the 
strategic technological constraints of the selected value chains at regional and national levels. 
The mechanism will be flexible and will finance proposals which may combine applied research, 
technology dissemination, and farmer training. Priorities will be established according to 
guidelines to be defined during project preparation based on criteria reflecting aspects such as 
poverty reduction, competitive advantage, technological need, feasibility, potential impact, and 
market demand considerations.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening of MAG (US$2 to 3 million)  
Page  3
This component will provide support to the Ministry of Agriculture to widen and modernize its 
operations in key functions related to competitiveness. The areas selected for support are: (a) the 
formulation and monitoring of sectoral policies, including the negotiation of commercial 
agreements; (b) the provision of accurate and timely agricultural statistics (structural, continuous 
production data, producer prices, market information, and industry consumption of agricultural 
products), building on the work done by SICA; (c) the planning and monitoring of special 
programs and projects; and (d) the improvement of the legal and normative environment for 
agriculture competitiveness and trade development. The project will finance technical assistance, 
training, software, relevant equipment, study tours, surveys, and the like.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$1 to 2 million)  
 
This component will support effective project management, monitoring and evaluation. It will 
finance the provision of technical assistance, goods, equipment and incremental operating costs 
to support the establishment and operation of a project coordination team within MAG, the 
setting up and operation of a management information system (MIS), and the implementation of 
M&E and learning arrangements. The component will also ensure that effective fiduciary 
arrangements are in place during implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined during preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower has recently completed implementation of two World Bank-funded projects (SICA and 
PROMSA); safeguard management was considered adequate and will be assed during 
preparation of proposed new project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCCEC) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment (EA) will be done during preparation. It will assess the project's 
potential impacts, other safeguard policies triggered (including Natural Habitat, and Cultural 
Properties); and will propose measures to mitigate any identified impacts.  
 
During the preparation phase, the project team will determine the type of agricultural 
initiatives and productive alliances that will be financed under the project. The type of 
investments will provide the basis to establish the EA category and consequently the type of EA 
to be developed. Given the pre-identified activities, the project team estimates that most of the 
investments will fall under Category B, however this aspect will be confirmed during 
preparation.  
 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Regardless of the type of EA to be developed, it will include among others the following 
relevant aspects: i) Procedures to carry out the screening and identification of negative impacts to 
be applied to individual investments; ii) Environmental Management Plan providing procedures 
to minimize identified environmental impacts,  instructions to include environmental procedures 
into the design of business plans; guidelines to improve pest management and develop 
environmentally sound practices; and iii) Monitoring Plan to assess the implementation of the 
agreed environmental procedures and compliance with environmental safeguards.  
 
EA will also include screening criteria for involuntary resettlement.  Initiatives eligible for 
project support under the productive fund will be limited to those that not cause involuntary 
resettlement.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Given that most of the investment will take place in areas that have been dedicated to 
agriculture since several decades ago, no impacts to natural habitats are expected. The project 
will avoid developing any activity that would risk the integrity of critical ecosystems or that 
would promote expansion of the agricultural frontier inside the territory of state or privately 
owned protected areas. In case it is not possible to avoid the development of activities in buffer 
zones of protected areas, they will be designed in such a way that they will substantially 
contribute to reduce the pressure towards protected areas. All these aspects will be carefully 
assessed in the EA.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
This aspect will be assessed in the EA and in the case that the project finances agro-forestry 
sub-projects, specific environmental procedures will be developed. The project will not support 
any type of activity that would promote the elimination and/or replacement of native forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
EA will include an assessment of pest management legal/institutional framework and 
existing capacity to safely handle pesticides and promote integrated pest management.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
This issue will be assessed in the EA.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An Indigenous People Management Framework will be prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/15/2006 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EA will be done by August 15, 2006; if needed Pest Management Plan will be completed by 
the same date.  
 
Social Assessment will be done by August 15, 2006; an IPDP will be prepared by the same 
date.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garry Charlier 
07/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
