Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2192 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/08/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ecuador 
Project ID: P097687 
Project Name: Galapagos and Ecuadorian Coast Natural Resources Management 
Task Team Leader: Roberto Chavez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%);Solid waste 
management (25%);Sewerage (15%);Sub-national government administration 
(15%);Information technology (15%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other urban 
development (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Other social 
protection and risk management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to support the GOE and donor community to first stabilize 
and then reverse the environmental and social degradation of the Eastern Tropical Pacific LME, 
especially the Galapagos archipelago, and to establish a policy framework and effective 
governance coordination that will facilitate sustainable tourism, fishing, and human 
development.  This will be achieved through:  
 
a)  Establishing with the GOE, the donor community, and stakeholders a policy framework for 
conservation and sustainable development for the integrated system of the Galapagos and the 
mainland coast that recognizes their ecological and socio-economic connectivity and serves as a 
basis for comprehensive planning and monitoring purposes;  
 
Page  2
b)  Implementing actions and infrastructure investments primarily on the coast to promote 
sustainable tourism and human development; and,  
 
c)  Implementing actions to strengthen natural resource governance and build long-term public 
support for conservation of the Galapagos and the Ecuadorian coast.  
 
All World Bank studies and investments under the project will facilitate, complement, and build 
upon other initiatives and programs, and avoid duplicating efforts at all costs.  The Bank will 
coordinate closely with the donor community in the project area, in particular with the Donors’ 
Roundtable on the Galapagos, and work with local, provincial, regional and national authorities.   
The legal basis for the proposed project is the Special Law for Galapagos of 1998.  Through this 
approach, the Bank seeks to establish a comprehensive development framework for the islands 
and coast of Ecuador.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
broad consultation process has been started at central, provincial, and grassroots levels to 
ensure local participation from the outset. Likely project components over five years from 2007 
to 2012 will include:  
 
a)   Establishing with the GOE, the donor community, and stakeholders a policy framework for 
conservation and sustainable tourism and human development in the Galapagos and the mainland 
coast that recognizes their ecological and socio-economic connectivity. This will build on prior 
analyses, such as those of the PMRC (Coastal Resources Management Program) and the 
Galapagos Regional Plan, and will include policies, guidelines, and description of essential 
actions for the four key areas of tourism, migration, fisheries, and invasive species.  Specific 
entry points, with their respective boundaries, will include:  
 
i)  Tourism: The growth of tourism both poses a threat to the islands while ignoring great 
potential on the mainland.  This component will include environmental impact assessments of 
proposed tourism investments and the adoption of adequate mitigation measures. It will be 
preceded by a study of the archipelago’s carrying capacity and willingness to pay assessment.  
Tourism in the Galapagos depends on conserving its unique environment and biodiversity, which 
in turn are affected by migration, fisheries, and invasive species. These are therefore essential 
elements of the policy and governance framework.  
 
ii) Migration: In accordance with the General Regulation of the Special Law for Galapagos, 
growth by migration must be stopped. This could be achieved by strengthening the capacity to 
manage the immigration/ emigration of temporary and permanent residents of Galapagos in a 
manner that is transparent, effective, and helps to achieve long-term population stabilization, 
possibly by outsourcing the migratory services managed by INGALA.  Concurrently, subsidies 
must be gradually phased out to lower resistance to emigration, which in turn will decrease 
reliance on non-renewable resources in favor of sustainable and appropriate green technologies.  
 
iii) Fisheries: Current artisanal fishing practices are one of the dangers to biodiversity in the 
Galapagos Marine reserve.  It is necessary to promote sound management of the EPTC’s larger 
marine ecosystem, which includes the Galapagos Marine Reserve, Ecuador’s coastal zone, and 
Page  3
the rest of Ecuador’s Exclusive Economic Zone.  This component will consist of re-purposing 
the Galapagos fishing fleet and favoring non-extractive uses in Galapagos by financing 
incentives and technical support for change to non-extractive activities in Galapagos or on the 
mainland.  
 
iv) Invasive species:  The increase in tourism, migration and access points to the islands directly 
increase vulnerability to disease vectors and invasive species, which in turn pose one of the 
greatest risks to biodiversity in the Galapagos.  This component will consist of mitigation 
measures of two types: building up the agricultural quarantine service SESA-SICGAL and the 
Galapagos National Park Service, which had begun with the adoption by GNPS of ISO9000.  
 
b)  Implementing actions and infrastructure investments both in Galapagos and on the mainland 
coast to promote sustainable tourism and human development.  These will include investments 
to:  
 
i)  Promote the alignment of state, private, and donor investment in the Galapagos and 
Ecuadorian Coast with GOE policy, plans and legislation regarding tourism and human 
development.  
 
ii)  Support local ecotourism development on the mainland coast by improving basic 
infrastructure (visitor information centers, tourism mitigation infrastructure such as sanitation 
services and established camping areas); rehabilitatingthe environment of the coast through 
reforestation on mangroves and coastal woodlands to curtail environmental and biodiversity 
damage or loss; strengthening capacity for environmental management in the participating 
municipalities, and providing local economic development support, thereby creating job 
opportunities and reducing the migratory “pull” of Galapagos as the supposed land of economic 
opportunity.  
 
iii)  Improve quarantine facilities; strengthen the management of invasive species in all ports in 
Galapagos and the mainland that are used for movement of cargo and passengers to and among 
the islands; strengthen Ecuadorian Merchant Marine capacity to provide security for tourism on 
the coast and patrol the islands and to enforce legislation.  
 
iv)  Support the establishment of Santay Island in Guayaquil and other protected and multiple-
use areas on the mainland coast as a resource for ecotourism development as well as a means to 
protect biodiversity and achieve sustainability of fisheries and other human uses of the 
coastal/marine environment.  
 
c)  Implementing actions to strengthen environmental governance and sustainable human 
development and build long-term public support for conservation of Galapagos and the larger 
marine ecosystem to which the archipelago belongs.  This will include:  
 
i) Facilitate the development of a national tourism strategy for the coast to complement and 
balance tourism to the islands, including technical assistance and capacity building at the local, 
municipal, provincial, and national levels, as well as tourism communication and promotion 
strategies.  
 
ii) Establish an open decision-support system and strategic planning tools for the archipelago 
and coast to provide the GOE, PMRC, INGALA, GNP, and local and provincial governments 
with a comprehensive instrument panel on “who’s doing what, where” for planning and 
monitoring purposes.  
Page  4
iii)  Assist local governments to build technical capacity and prepare sustainable development 
plans that will allow for the transfer of earmarked funds from the central government for water 
and sanitation and community-based disaster prevention and mitigation.  
 
iv)  Support reform and capacity building of institutions involved in the management of 
Galapagos, particularly of the GNPS, INGALA, and SESA-SICGAL; to fully enforce the 
legislation and to improve the natural resource governance both in Galapagos and on the 
mainland coast.  
 
v)
Strengthen programs for the ecological and socio-economic monitoring of Galapagos and 
mechanisms for use of this information for adaptive management of the archipelago, in 
accordance with the Special Law for Galapagos and its regulations.  
 
vi) Support the improvement of educational standards in Galapagos and the coast; the 
development of local context specific curricula; the development of educational activities for 
adults and children outside of the formal education program; and the development of children, 
youth, and community education in environmental and cultural stewardship.  
 
vii) Develop and implement permanent targeted awareness programs primarily among youth 
groups in order to ensure that decisions about Galapagos and the coast are well informed and to 
encourage the Ecuadorian people’s wish to ensure conservation of their natural heritage.  
 
viii) Provide specialized assistance in areas such as environmental negotiation training for 
GOE, local governments, trade organizations, and community-based organizations; and in 
mediation and conflict resolution  
 
ix) Support, in collaboration with neighboring countries and existing regional bodies where 
appropriate, strategic assessment and planning for the larger marine ecosystem of which 
Galapagos and Ecuador’s Exclusive Economic Zone are part.The proposed project preparation 
will undertake a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) specifically in the tourism, fisheries 
and migration sectors of the Ecuadorian coast and the Galapagos.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Galapagos Islands and Ecuadorian Coast   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Moderate to weak   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria Elizabeth Dasso (LCCPE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Strategic Environmental Assessment will be undertaken as part of project preparation and 
will define criteria for site screening, subproject selection and procedures for subproject EAs.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Natural habitats safeguard is triggered as the project will indirectly affect these on islands 
and coast.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Policy triggered due to presence of mangroves and coastal forests in project area.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Policy may be trigered in a few coastal municpalicites if subprojects are undertaken.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Policy may be triggered on the coast.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The possibility of involuntary resettlement occurring due to either civil works activities or 
proposed policy reforms and strengthening measures will be evaluated during project 
preparation, and, if needed, an appropriate resettlement instrument will be developed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/10/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Ideally wiil be carried out in 2006 with PHRD support (appplied for).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Roberto Chavez 
04/17/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/21/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
04/21/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
