Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2634 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/15/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ecuador 
Project ID: P100532 
Project Name: Second Rural Poverty Alleviation and Local Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Francisco J. Pichon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural 
non-farm income generation (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of PROLOCAL II is to replicate and scale-up the successful elements 
of current IBRD operation by: (i) building social capital development based on the strengthening 
of local organizational capacity and empowerment of local-level institutions; (ii) supporting 
human capital formation based on promotion of local networks' of local service providers and 
certification of capabilities to support local development planning processes and services; and 
(iii) promoting access to productive assets based on investments intended to create employment, 
diversify production, and increase income.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
PROLOCAL II is a repeater project to scale up the successful implementation of the ongoing 
PROLOCAL. The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of US$ 30 
million to be disbursed over a four-year period.  
 
The project components are the following:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Local Development Planning. This component aims at strengthening the capacity 
of local governments to engage in participatory planning, budgeting, and implementation of rural 
investments in their respective constituent areas. Under this component, local governments and 
rural communities would elaborate participatory development plans to identify and prioritize 
productive subprojects, a subset of which would be selected for streamlined preparation and 
execution.  
 
Component 2: Local Development Services. This component aims at improving the institutional 
capacity of local organizations and training various local stakeholders so they can deliver better 
services to rural communities. This component would provide technical assistance and capacity 
building activities to second-tier and grassroots organizations to improve their institutional 
capacity. Also, this component would provide resources to prepare and implement training 
programs to address local gaps, as well as promote the formation of local networks of service 
providers.  
 
Component 3: Subprojects. This component aims at increasing agricultural productivity, 
creating employment, and improving the income of the poorest stratum of rural communities. 
This component would provide technical assistance, capacity building, and financing for 
beneficiary groups to carry out productive subprojects. The project would establish a demand-
driven, matching grant fund to finance productive subprojects and strengthen the capacity of 
local financial institutions to provide co-financing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Selection of new geographical areas to be covered during PROLOCAL II will be completed 
when new government is in place. One option is to expand/connect existing micro-regions and 
intensify work with existing local governments willing to increase own counterpart financing and 
adopt PROLOCAL local development instruments. Another option is to restructure the 
geographical coverage to avoid an artificial combination of municipalities that do not make sense 
agro-ecologically or administratively. This second approach would favor working more closely 
with the provincial councils and locate the UTRs in the provincial capitals. The environmental 
and social characteristics of these areas will be evaluated as part of the Environmental 
Assessment and Social Assessment being conducted as part of project preparation activities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The experience acquired by the PROLOCAL team during Phase I is expected to facilitate the 
implementation of relevant safeguards policies. Borrower's capacity for safeguard policies has 
always been rated satisfactory in ISRs. Project preparation activities for the new phase include 
the development of an EA (and resulting Environmental Management Plan) and Social 
Assessment, both of which will  evaluate the effectiveness of safeguards-related measures used 
during the first project phase, and develop additional measures, if necessary, to enhance the 
Borrower?s capacity to deal with identified environmental and social issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSEO) 
Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN) 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (LCSEO) 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Prolocal II is a Category B project. The preparation of the Environmental Assessment began 
in August 2006. The   assessment will cover the additional geographical areas not included under 
Phase I.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Natural Habitats Safeguard is triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Forests Safeguard is triggered.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Pest Management Safeguard is triggered.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Physical Cultural Resource is triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Indigenous Peoples Safeguard is triggered. In the 
case it is triggered, an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan will be prepared to ensure that 
indigenous peoples receive benefits in a way culturally acceptable to them and adverse impacts 
are minimized or mitigated.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Involuntary Resettlement  Safeguard is triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Assessments began in August 2006. They will be completed by 
March 2007.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francisco J. Pichon 
12/04/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/08/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
12/08/2006 
Comments:   
