Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  37768 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/16/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ecuador 
Project ID: P083010 
Project Name: Low-income Neighborhood Upgrading and Urban Land Management 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Alexandra Ortiz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (75%);Solid waste 
management (25%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
9.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
0.00
9.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims at improving the quality of life of urban Ecuadorians who presently live in 
marginal conditions in intermediate cities and at providing the corresponding municipalities with 
the necessary tools to prepare for urban expansion in the next twenty five years. Specific 
objectives are to: (i) increase poor urban household access to basic urban services; (ii) increase 
citizen participation in urban development processes; (iii) increase poor urban household access 
to affordable land; and (iv) improve the urban planning capabilities of the participating 
municipalities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would be a specific investment loan with three components:  
 
(a) Comprehensive urban upgrading: the remedial approach  
Page  2
This component addresses objectives (i) and (ii) through an integrated social and infrastructure 
intervention in which community participation is a key success factor. It will finance 
comprehensive investments in poor urban neighborhoods, including: (i) water and sewer 
connections; (ii) improvement of drainages; (ii) improvement of existing interior roads; (iii) 
provision of lighting; (iv) construction of community centers and public spaces; (v) 
environmental mitigation works; (vi) land titling; (vii) community strengthening; and (viii) 
resettlement costs if needed.  Given that an estimated 600,000 urban families live in marginal 
conditions, this component will assist in scaling up urban upgrading in Ecuador. The project will 
work with municipalities that express interest and fulfill key conditions, including assignment of 
resources for co-financing, and willingness to simplify municipal ordinances.  
 
(b) 
Urban land management: the preventive approach  
 
This component addresses the objectives of increasing access to affordable land by the poor and 
improving the urban planning capabilities of the participating municipalities. It will finance 
technical assistance, land acquisition, and resettlement costs to: (i) strengthen the property rights 
system by simplifying and streamlining titling, cadastre, and registry procedures; (ii) prepare and 
test an innovative pilot to develop low cost urban settlements through partnerships among 
organized communities, municipalities, and private sector developers; (iii) acquisition of land for 
rights of way corresponding to the planned secondary arterial network needed to accommodate 
growth in the next twenty-five years; and (iv) resettlement costs associated with the acquisition 
of rights of way, the protection of environmentally sensitive areas, and the avoidance of human 
settlements in risk prone zones.  
 
(c)  
Institutional strengthening  
 
This component would finance technical assistance, equipment, and capacity building for the 
preparation of neighborhood upgrading sub-projects, improved urban planning, as well as 
capacity building for municipalities in financial and administrative management. The 
institutional strengthening component will be financed through counterpart funding using the 
municipal investment funds (FIM). FIM were created in 1990 to provide counterpart funding to 
international projects undertaken by BdE. These funds are channeled through BdE as 
complementary grants to municipalities. The existence of these funds is extremely positive as it: 
(i) allows the loan to be used exclusively for investment, as requested by the Fiscal Transparency 
Law; and (ii) enables the effective sub-loan rate of interest to drop to a very competitive figure.  
 
The responsible agency for the project will be BdE. Sub-projects will be implemented directly 
by the selected municipalities. MIDUVI and AME will play an advisory role in the entire project 
cycle.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Selected intermediate cities in Ecuador.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The country?s municipal development fund, known as the State Bank (Banco del Estado, BdE) 
will be the executing agency. It has ample experience in municipal lending and with World Bank 
and Interamerican Development Bank funded projects.  Additional institutional capacity for 
specific World Bank Safeguard Policies will be assessed during preparation.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN) 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHH) 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
Since urban upgrading sub-projects will not be determined before project implementation, 
an environmental framework and guidelines will be prepared. The environmental guidelines will 
provide with specific procedures to carry out the environmental assessment of each sub-project, 
in order to properly identify environmental impacts during all the phases and according to the 
different types of civil works to be financed (road improvement, community/recreational centers, 
improvement of drainage and sewage connections, etc). The guidelines will also provide 
instructions to develop management plans to establish measures to minimize the identified 
impacts and a monitoring plan to assess the implementation of such measures. The 
environmental plan will also be aimed at providing information for the establishment of a 
community environmental education program.  
 
Given that both, the implementing agency and the beneficiary municipalities will need to 
carry out the environmental screening of sub-projects and carry out EIAs for subprojects, an 
assessment of its capability to enforce environmental safeguards is under way. This study will 
help to identify gaps on technical capacity and will allow to establish the training and capacity 
building needs.  
 
The procedures to carry out the EIAs of the subprojects will be informed to beneficiaries 
and other key actors during the preparation phase.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
In some cases, natural habitats might be adjacent to urban areas. The environmental 
guidelines will establish clear criteria to select sites of intervention and investments to avoid any 
damage or degradation to existing natural habitats. Particular attention will be given to 
neighborhoods located nearby to native forests or wetlands. The Management Plan will include 
specific procedures to minimize or avoid impacts to such fragile ecosystems.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
In order to ensure the timely detection of activities that will damage nonreplicable cultural 
properties as well as the protection of cultural properties identified during preparation and/or 
implementation of the project, the project will use screening criteria that identify and provide 
appropriate procedures to protect any known cultural property in project areas as well as  chance-
find procedures for construction.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Resettlement might be needed in the urban upgrading and land management components due 
to the location of infrastructure works and the need to acquire land. A resettlement framework is 
under preparation which will also assess the capacity for implementation and/or capacity-
building needs of individual resettlement plans.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/26/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard-related studies are on their way and should be complete by the end of October 
2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Alexandra Ortiz 
10/02/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/02/2006 
Comments:  NA for Category B projects 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
10/02/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
