Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2922
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ecuador 
Project ID:  P094784 
Project Name:  Ecuador - Chimborazo Productive Investments (PIDD) Project 
Task Team Leader:  Garry Charlier 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P105550 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 16, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (65%);Roads and highways (35%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (P);Other 
environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.20 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.80 
 Local 
Communities 
2.00 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund 
3.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
3.50
18.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To increase production and market access of rural families living in the Chambo and 
Chanchan-Chimbo river basins of the Chimborazo Province, through investments in 
irrigation and roads improvement.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1-Productive Investments: This component will contribute toward supporting 
two key productive infrastructure systems that play an important role in the development 
of the local rural economy: i) irrigation rehabilitation and improvements, and ii) roads 
improvements.  
 
Component 2-Project Management: The aim of this component is to ensure: (i) the 
efficient and effective coordination and management of the project that will be 
implemented using the existing structure of the Chimborazo Provincial Council (CHPC); 
Page  2
(ii) an adequately functioning Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system; and (iii) a 
communication strategy to provide ample dissemination of project activities, results, 
implementation progress, etc. at various levels and to relevant stakeholders.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project location is the Chambo and Chanchan-Chimbo river basins in the 
Chimborazo province.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Five safeguard policies are triggered.  Environmental Assessment (Op/BP 4.01); Natural 
Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.11) and Pest 
Management (OP/BP 4.09).  
 
The project aims to improve existing rural road and irrigation infrastructure. The 
planned rehabilitation works will fall under Category B, thus, it is not anticipated that the 
project will have any significant environmental impacts that could adversely affect the 
natural environment in its area of influence. The civil works planned under the project 
will not require the implementation of major changes in the characteristics of the roads or 
irrigation systems, such as road width or alignment. In addition, no supplementary works 
are planned that could affect the direct areas of influence of the proposed roads and 
irrigation projects.  
 
To ensure an adequate environmental management, in the case of roads, the following 
aspects are taken into account during project design: slope stabilization, restoration of 
borrow pits and material deposit areas, control of earthwork management and existing 
Page  3
erosion processes, road drainage, and issues related to road and pedestrian safety. All of 
these measures will be listed in the POM and specific environmental clauses will be 
included in all civil works contracts. All project sites (roads and irrigation) will be 
screened for potential triggers of the Bank's environmental safeguards. Since the project 
activities relate to the improvement and rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, the risk 
of additional indirect negative impacts linked with human activities (colonization and 
deforestation) is very low.  
 
The roads and irrigation improvement works will allow to increase production and 
market access of rural families living in Chambo and Chanch?n-Chimbo river basins. 
Given the scale of intervention, it is not expected that increased agricultural production 
would entail a substantial increase in the use of pesticides. The recommendations of the 
EA will prevent additional impacts due to the potential increase in the use of pesticides 
by incorporating a Integrated Pest Management Plan.  
 
The Safety of Dams-OP 4.37 is not triggered due to the small scale and location of the 
irrigation improvement works contemplated under the project. No dams are located in the 
upstream part of the project sites, thus none of the irrigation channels to be improved will 
use a dam as source of water. The sources of water for the irrigation systems under which 
the project will be operating mainly consist of natural water streams receiving water from 
rainfall and glacier melting.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main potential impacts indicated in the EA progress report are: i) the removal of soil 
to widen the roads and prepare the road main platform, might cause damage to adjacent 
cultivars and health problems (respiratory diseases) if not properly managed and 
disposed; ii) soil removal that might also affect the quality of air and water streams 
(including irrigation systems) as the content of solid particles might increase; iii) asphalt 
and any other material used to finalize the construction of these roads might also pollute 
water streams; iv) road machinery might cause physical damage to private property and 
cultivars. Also, deficient designs and construction techniques in the past may have 
resulted in modest environmental degradation (erosion, sediment load). These are 
primarily related to the quarrying and borrow pit activities practiced in the past. The 
proposed project will improve environmental conditions by introducing better road 
design and construction techniques, and promoting the use of environmental and social 
sustainability criteria in the rural roads sector. The EA will include steps to mitigate any 
potential impacts identified, together with the respective budgets, responsibility, and 
schedules of execution.  
 
Regarding irrigation infrastructure, the specific sites and works will be defined during 
the implementation phase, however during the preparation phase, the types of systems to 
be rehabilitated have been identified. The project will seek to support only those works 
falling under Category B. The project will only finance small irrigation infrastructure, 
mainly consisting of lining the pre-existing irrigation channels. The main problem 
observed was the lack of lining, thus causing the existing channels to be inefficient in 
Page  4
capturing water. Most of the water is filtered and lost into the soil of the channel. This 
aspect is contributing to the shortage of water already existing in the Chimborazo 
Province. Lining will definitely help to rationalize the use of water. The potential impacts 
identified are related to the use of materials for the lining of the irrigation channels, that 
should be carefully managed in order to avoid negative impacts to soil and cultivars. 
These works will not imply deforestation or other type of damage of native vegetation.  
 
Natural Habitat: most, if not all of, the investments on road and irrigation infrastructure 
will take place in areas that have traditionally been dedicated to agriculture.  Thus, 
expansion to natural habitats and deforestation of native vegetation are not expected. The 
project will avoid any investments for road and irrigation infrastructure that would put at 
risk the integrity of critical ecosystems, or that would promote the expansion of the 
agricultural frontier towards such ecosystems, or inside the territory of state or privately 
owned protected areas.  
 
Forest: The expected rehabilitation works will not affect native forests, since the area of 
influence of both the roads and irrigation systems are far away from the remaining native 
vegetation patches and other native vegetation. This aspect in being further assessed 
through the EA. The project will seek to closely coordinate reforestation activities with 
the GEF Project under preparation to carry out reforestation with native species along the 
two rehabilitated roads and areas surrounding the irrigation systems.  The selection of 
native species will be based on a previous assessment of better adapted species for each 
area, and the selection of species that will provide additional soil stability to avoid 
landsides and contribute to water storage and adequate road maintenance.  
 
Pest Management:  The project will avoid supporting projects that could imply 
substantial increase in pesticide use, as far as possible will provide opportunities to 
develop appropriate pest management policies and procedures within the GPCH and the 
direct beneficiaries of sub-projects. The Environmental Plan will include an Integrated 
Pest Management Plan (IPMP). Integrated pest management is extremely important in 
agricultural practices and the benefit that it provides to the environment, as a means of 
mitigation.  It is a complex method based on knowledge of the biological cycle of pests, 
their behavior, prevalence, reproductive patterns, and the way in which they interact with 
other insect species.  Its application consists of the monitoring of pest populations, their 
presence, prevalence, and seasonality, as well as the cycles of crops or forest plants, 
information necessary for pest control.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EA provides an analytical basis for the safeguards diagnosis, as well as policies, 
plans and procedures for environmental management. The main screening criteria for 
both road and irrigation works have been proposed as follows:  
 
-
Roads will not cross or affect fragile areas, including protected areas, or that require 
involuntary resettlement.  
Page  5
-
The project will finance roads and irrigation systems:  (i) that tend to minimize the 
adverse impacts on highland ecosystems such as the paramo, (ii) where a socioeconomic 
benefit can be demonstrated, (iii) where the rules for community participation have been 
complied with,  
 
-
The project will finance roads and irrigation systems that will avoid affecting 
adversely the customs and cultures of the indigenous population in areas.  
 
-
Will include programs to strengthen the capacities of the public and private sector 
agencies involved.  
 
-
Will help to mainstream current government and provincial policies, legislation, and 
environmental regulations in the project preparation cycle (from planning through 
execution and maintenance) by designing and putting in place the appropriate 
management tools (guides, standards and methodologies).  
 
The project's civil works are of a simple nature and will not cause significant impacts. 
However, the EA will include a plan that contains the following specific sections: (a) 
institutional strengthening for the Provincial Government; (b) environmental 
management plan by selected site; (c) strategic communication plan; (d) promotion and 
dissemination plan; (e) community participation plan; and (f) follow up, supervision and 
control arrangements. An appropriate budget will be allocated for these activities.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures are: (i) obligatory environmental assessment of road rehabilitation 
interventions and screening of all irrigation sub-projects; (ii) environmental management 
plan to be included into the WUAs' sub-project investment proposals, plans and budgets; 
(iii) environmental monitoring by the project staff; and (iv) a negative list of sub-projects 
that can not be financed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are in majority the participants in the Water Users Associations 
(WUAs) involved in the operation and management the irrigation systems. Other social 
actors associated with the supply of irrigation in the province of Chimborazo are: 
indigenous communities and urban neighborhoods, second-tier organizations, third-tier 
organizations, rural parish committees (juntas parroquiales), parish assemblies, cantonal 
parliaments or civic committees, and non governmental organizations (NGOs). In the 
specific case of roads, Community Road Maintenance Micro Enterprises (CRMMs) or 
Road Associations are to be added. They will be involved directly in the implementation 
of the project's environmental management plan and the IPP during the implementation 
phase.   
 
The Provincial government of Chimborazo has been investing important efforts to 
reinforce the citizenship participation when issuing development plans for the province 
such as the following: the Development Plan of the Province (2002), Minga Por la Vida 
(2003), the Participatory Road Plan (2004) and the Participatory Budgeting (2006-2007), 
besides other initiatives carried out by Municipalities (e.g. Guamote, Colta) and 
Page  6
participatory planning at the level of second tier organizations (PRODEPINE 2000). 
Mechanisms for consultation and disclosure of safeguard policies during project 
implementation will build on this acquired extensive experience of the Provincial Council 
of Chimborazo.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/17/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/29/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/29/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/17/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/29/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
N/A 
Page  7
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garry Charlier 
06/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gabriela Arcos 
06/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
06/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
06/29/2007 
Comments:   
