Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2040 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/16/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P095819 
Project Name: Egypt Community and Local Dev. Project 
Task Team Leader: Eileen Murray 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 31, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (25%);Health (25%);Micro- and SME finance 
(20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%);General education 
sector (10%) 
Theme: Improving labor markets (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (P);Small and medium enterprise support (P);Population and 
reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
10.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
5.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will assist the Government in promoting equity through well-targeted interventions 
that provide temporary employment to the poor and access to basic infrastructure and health 
services among underserved communities.  This would be achieved by:  (a) scaling up the local 
area development approach by funding at least 1,000 sub-projects implemented by local 
governments in district and villages that are ranked in the lowest 25% of the poverty map, with a 
special emphasis on Upper Egypt and projects benefiting women; (b) creating at least two 
million person-days of temporary employment for persons living below the poverty line through 
the establishment of a more efficient workfare program based on international best practice; and 
(c) funding at least 200 community based health interventions in poor communities to address 
inequities in health outcomes, in partnership with the Ministry of Health and Population 
(MOHP), local governments and NGOs.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Local Area Development $60 million estimated cost. Local Area Development (LAD) in the 
Egyptian context is defined as several multi-sectoral integrated activities or sub-projects which 
are: (i) aimed at improving the welfare of the population in areas where there is a very high 
concentration of poor people as identified through a geographic targeting mechanism; (ii) 
selected by the population through a participatory process; (iii) managed by eligible district (hay) 
councils in urban areas or village councils in rural areas for the benefit of the population of those 
districts or villages; (iv) implemented through contracts with civil works contractors, suppliers, 
consultants and public or private service providers; and (v) supervised by district and village 
councils assisted by technically qualified and experienced public or private sector entities. SFD 
is keen on applying best practice experience from other parts of the world and becoming an 
innovative “community driven development” instrument which would support local level 
decision making and community participation.  The LAD program would focus on instituting 
participatory planning mechanisms at the local level – based on therural participatory 
assessments piloted under SFD III – in order to improve coordination and heighten sustainability, 
as well as gradual capacity strengthening of local actors within the context of their participation 
in the sub-project cycle.  Sub-projects to be funded will include the rehabilitation of village 
infrastructure (schools, health posts, feeder roads, markets, small bridges) and service provision 
activities such as literacy programs and early childhood development programs.  
 
Public Workfare Program (PWFP) $10 million .  This would support SFD’s orientations to 
move from a public works program, where the main emphasis has been on the infrastructure 
created, to a public workfare safety net program which would maximize temporary employment 
opportunities for poor people.  The PWFP will include: (i) setting up efficient mechanisms 
within SFD to establish a well-targeted public workfare program; (ii) launching the PWFP in a 
limited number of governorates, using the poverty map to target the poorest of the villages within 
those governorates and (iii) capacity building at different levels (SFD HQ and RO, PIU, district 
and village councils and Executing Agencies) in managing highly labor-based sub-projects. 
Further, targeting would be done by setting wage rates below the minimum wage and setting 
labor-intensive criteria. International experience of programs like Trabajar in Argentina would be 
integrated into PWFP design.  
 
Community Health estimated cost $20 million.   This component will contribute to the 
achievement of the health MDGs, i.e. infant mortality and maternal mortality, in communities 
that would otherwise lag behind in reaching these goals. The community-based health and 
population interventions would complement the Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) 
reform program and would focus on three areas: (i) the increased demand for health services and 
the promotion of health care activities at the household and community levels using NGOs, an 
area where SFD has a comparative advantage; (ii) the involvement of community based 
organizations (CBOs) to address gaps in service delivery and support to the MOHP in providing 
primary health care and other public health programs; (iii) the piloting of community-based 
financing schemes to mobilize resources to help the poor manage health risks.    
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The project will be implemented throughout the country.  SFD has prepared a poverty targeting 
toolkit (poverty map) to ensure that interventions are targeted to areas with large concentrations 
of poor people.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The World Bank’s EA policy and the Egyptian EIA system have many common features and are 
comparable in many aspects, such as screening, content of the environmental assessment report 
representing the main output of the system, the provisions for regional and sector environmental 
assessments, and finally the requirements for public consultation. Furthermore, Egypt has the 
basic institutional and legal infrastructure at the national, regional and local levels for 
implementation of the system. However, implementation track records require improvement, and 
the Bank is collaborating with EEAA and the Regional Branch Offices, through other Bank-
assisted projects, to build their capacity and improve environmental compliance.  
 
The Social Fund for Development (SFD) is a well established organization with a 15 year track 
record of implementing projects funded by over 20 donors. Environmental considerations have 
been built in to key stages of the project cycle (e.g., design, appraisal, implementation, and 
M&E).  Special programs have been carried out to further improve the understanding of 
environmental issues have taken place in the various Governorates – those were funded by the 
IDA funded Social Fund 3.  Existing standardized sub-project designs and appraisals make use 
of an environmental checklist followed by a screening process.  These are described in the 
Operations Manual for the Social Fund 3 project.  
 
The SFD has an Environmental Policies Sector (EPS). The Sector is in charge of developing 
and implementing the environmental strategies for the SFD, providing technical support and 
capacity building to the SFD working teams and management, coordinating with EEAA and the 
relevant environmental authorities at the Governorate levels, and implementing environmental 
pilot projects. The SFD is making an effort to mainstream the environmental aspects in its 
projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSRE) 
Ms Eileen Murray (MNSHD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Safeguards Compliance in CDD Projects.  Input is also being sought from the EEAA.  The 
EMP will describe the legal, institutional, and operational context, requirements and procedures 
for ensuring that environmental issues are addressed throughout project implementation.  The 
EMP will also describe a monitoring and evaluation process to ensure follow-up to ensure the 
extent to which environmental issues were addressed.  Potential sub-projects and their likely 
environmental impacts will be described in a table. As this project is a follow-up operation, 
many of the expected impacts can and will be anticipated.  Impacts will be broken down into two 
categories:  (a) those due to construction from civil works; (b) health care programs. Impacts due 
to minor construction works will be anticipated once key sub
-
projects are defined (based on what 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
has been financed under the on-going project) and general guidelines will be prepared in 
advance. In the case of health, these environmental issues are likely to revolve around medical 
waste disposal procedures and SME activities and to the extent possible specific procedures 
would also be anticipated for specific types of waste or emissions planned for in advance.  
Health and safety guidelines will be applied during construction work.  These issues represent an 
enhancement of the procedures applied systematically and routinely under the on-going IDA 
financed SFD project.  
 
Specifically, the EMP will:  (a) ensure that the Project is fully compliant with 
environmental legislation and Bank Safeguards; (b) further consolidate the integration of 
environmental standards in sub-projects financed under the Project; (c) foster a convergence 
between rural poverty reduction and the conservation and valuation of the environment; and (d) 
link environmental conservation and protection with investments targeted to the poorest 
segments of the population (Egypt Poverty and Social Impact Analysis November 2005).  
 
The EMP will include sections on:  
 
(1) Potential Cumulative Environmental Impacts.  The EMP will:  (a) assess the cumulative 
environmental impacts, if any, from the previous three phases of Bank fun
ding to the SFD; and            
(b) recommend a credible approach for addressing any significant cumulative impacts from 
multiple future sub-projects under the new loan.  
 
(2) Capacity Building.  The EMP will specify how the project would strengthen the 
capacity, as needed for environmental management of subprojects (including cumulative 
impacts) with SFD staff at the central and regional level, district (hay councils) in urban areas, 
and village councils in rural areas and staff from the Governorates, other beneficiary groups and 
any other entities with key roles in project implementation.  
 
(3) Cost. The EMP will include the cost of mitigation measures and monitoring and 
evaluation plans.  
 
Reference to other Safeguards in the EMP  
 
A
note will be made in the revised EMP (and project documentation) that sub-projects that 
could cause significant conversion or degradation of a natural habitat will not be supported  
 
Mosquito/malaria control issues will not be part of health interventions and therefore will 
not be an issue.  
 
A
provision will be made in the revised EMP for the handling of any cultural property 
issues that arise during construction.  In the event of “chance finds,” the country’s applicable 
laws will be followed   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The specific location of the sub-projects has yet to be determined.  Therefore, it is not 
possible to determine whether OP 4.12 will be triggered. However, projects which involve 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
construction/realignment of roads, development of on-site sanitation or sewerage systems, and 
solid waste management landfill or transfer stations may involve land expropriation and/or may 
impact the livelihood of the residents. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will 
be developed for the project to outline the procedure for addressing social impacts related to 
involuntary resettlement in a systematic fashion, identifying potentially affected people, 
developing compensation scheme, etc.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/04/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/30/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since this is a follow-up project, the EMP is in the process of being revised to make it 
consistent with the Manual for Safeguards Compliance in CDD Projects.The EMP and the 
RPF should be completed by end of March 2006.  The SFD would then spend the rest of the 
preparation period building the capacity of the key stakeholders with a focus on district (hay) 
councils and village councils.  
 
Semi-annual supervision missions will be conducted to ensure that the proper 
environmental and social management measures are implemented. It is expected that this 
activity will require 2-4 staff-weeks per year.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Eileen Murray 
02/27/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
03/08/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr David J. Steel 
03/08/2006 
Comments:   
