Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2380 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P097326 
Project Name: Upper Egypt Integrated Governorates Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Franck Bousquet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 12, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Agro-industry (20%);Other 
social services (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%);Sanitation (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
32.00
32.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is: to contribute to creation of  economic opportunities and 
improvement of  services in Upper Egypt by: (i) improving the stock and quality of basic 
infrastructure  at the governorate and district levels; and (ii) reducing costs and improving quality 
along the supply chain of competitive agricultural products.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Infrastructure at governorate level  
 
This component would support infrastructure investments at Governorate level.  The 
investments to be co-financed by the project would be part of a strategic Governorate 
development plan that would integrate the planned investments of line agencies.  Thus, the 
project would finance those priority investments that are not covered or insufficiently covered by 
Governorate or line agency budgets.  It will involve the co-financing of key economic and 
service infrastructure that have a Governorate-wide or multi-district scale, including regional and 
connecting roads, supporting infrastructure for industrial and commercial zones, water supply 
Page  2
and sanitation. Because other World-Bank financed projects are already addressing heath and 
education, investments in these sectors would not be targeted.  
 
This component would also include support to governorate services to develop their 
governorate development plans as well as support to manage the project, specifically in the area 
of procurement, financial management, reporting and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Component 2: Infrastructure at district  level  
 
The project would contribute to improving rural Upper Egypt's access to basic infrastructure 
and social services based on participatory district level planning. The local investments to be co-
financed would be identified through participatory district level planning and budgeting. It will 
involve the co-financing of social infrastructure (water supply, schools, social and youth centers, 
health clinics, postal services, etc), complementary to line ministries? and other donors, 
investment plans. Access to district-level funding may be based on a combination of: (i) priority 
for the lowest district in terms of the HDI; (ii) competitive allocation for the other districts based 
upon the successful completion of an integrated and participatory planning process.  
 
This component would also include support to formulate district development plan.  This would 
take the form of contract with community-participation facilitators to provide support to district 
officials and help them engage civil society and other actors while preparing their development 
plans. Social accountability mechanisms such as community score cards and social audits will be 
incorporated to ensure transparency and good governance.  
 
The community-participation facilitators would use the participatory district level planning 
methodology that will be developed in collaboration with the Social Fund for Development, the 
MISR program of UNDP, and the USAID Democracy and Governance program. The 
participatory planning pilot work carried out previously in Fayoum and Sohag  and under the 
Sohag Rural Development project will serve as a basis for the development of the methodology.  
 
This component would provide a concrete opportunity for the Egyptian Government to 
implement its  policy objectives on de-concentration at the Governorate level.  Through a 
learning-by-doing approach, it will strengthen the capacity of Governorate and district officials 
for planning and implementation, while furthering the decentralization process through engaging 
civil society in planning and implementation.  
 
Component 3. 
 Supply chain development  
 
The project would promote integrated supply chain development for those high value crops and 
livestock products that can benefit small holders and for which Upper Egypt has a potential for 
competitiveness. The component would finance some infrastructure, equipment and services in 
support of contractual arrangements between producer organizations and buyers (exporters, agro 
industries, supermarkets)  
 
Productive investments will be made to: (i) modernize and improve old irrigation systems at 
tertiary and quaternary canals (branch canals, mesqa and marwa) to save water; (ii) promote 
water-saving irrigation techniques for horticulture crops; (iii) create an enabling environment for 
private sector to invest in small post-harvest and marketing centers under a public-private 
Page  3
partnership arrangement; (iv) upgrade public laboratories (equipment cum training) for quality 
control, i.e compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards (SPSS).  
 
These post-harvest centers would be a meeting point, where farmers would be able to prepare 
their products for sale (grading, pre-cooling and packaging) and where buyers could buy 
standardized horticulture products in large quantities.  
 
Productive investments would have to benefit a majority of UE small and landless farmers. 
Public sector investments to support productive activities is justified on three grounds: (i) sharing 
the risks involved for agribusiness development in Upper Egypt; (ii) reducing UE locational 
disadvantages; (iii) bringing into the economic development stream the poorest segment of the 
population (economic inclusion).  
 
Services would include:  (i) support to grass root and regional professional associations, such as 
producer organizations (to offset the disadvantage of UE small farm size), and commodity-
specific supply chain associations; (ii) information services, linking farmers with buyers, and 
advisory services and professional training to members of integrated supply chains; (iii) applied 
marketing research and intelligence for new products and outlets.  
 
The services could be provided through: (i) a professional NGO or firm which will be 
contracted to establish a team of two to three resource persons per governorate with expertise in 
marketing and producer organizations; (ii) specific time-bound contracts with professionals from 
faculties of agriculture and branches of research institutes to support farmers' organizations for 
product quality.  Such services would be provided to support contracts between food processing 
industries, food exporters or domestic supermarket chains and farmer organizations. Lessons 
learnt under the Agriculture Export and Rural Income USAID-financed project will be built 
upon.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project Area: It covers the Governorates of Asiut, Menia, Beni Suef, Fayoum and Sohag in 
Upper Egypt, which are among the lowest ranking of the 26 Governorates in terms of HDI and 
income per capita. A total of 12.75 million people live in the project area. Since they are a group 
of adjacent Governorates just south of the metropolitan area of Cairo/ Giza, their proximity to 
markets will enable higher rates of return to investments in agricultural development than more 
southerly Governorates. The selection also takes into consideration on going and planned GOE 
and donor programs in other UE Governorates, including the on-going WB project in Sohag, the 
planned IFAD project in Asyut and Qena, and the synergies with USAID and UNDP programs 
on rural development and governance.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The World Bank's EA policy and the Egyptian EIA system have many common features and are 
comparable in many aspects, including screening, content of EIA report, provisions for regional 
and sectoral EIAs, and requirements for public consultations. The Bank is collaborating with 
GOE through other Bank assisted projects to build the institutional capacity and improve 
environmental compliance.  
 
The Project Operations Manual will provide the framework for designing the detailed 
environmental and social mitigation measures, as needed to be undertaken for each relevant 
subproject. In furthering decentralized and integrated planning and management, EMU 
department will be engaged with other sectoral departments in the project cycle from the 
Page  4
beginning, and will oversee environmental assessment and mitigation, and will be further 
supported through institutional strengthening and capacity building in selected areas.  
 
The targeted Governorates are the key recipients of the funds and implementers of the project, 
and as such will have the responsibility for preparing the ESIA, and the RFP, implementing the 
management plan, monitoring the performance of other involved parties such as NGOs and local 
groups, as well as reporting to the Bank during supervision on the state of implementation of 
environmental and social safeguards. The capacity of the concerned departments within the 
Governorates (The EMUs), should be carefully assessed during the preparation of the EIA and 
the RPF, and the resources made available to support their daily operation and the cost of 
implementation of the EMP and any needed RAPs should be carefully assessed and budgeted.  
 
In addition to that a confirmation from the Government/Governorates that the human and 
financial resources will be made available during the life time of the project should be reflected 
in the legal binding documents.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has been provisionally placed in Environmental Category A. The final rating will 
be determined based on the types of key economic and service infrastructure envisaged under 
Component 1. Type A sub-projects will require EIA's prior to appraisal, to be completed based 
on the final list of agreed strategic infrastructure investments per Governorate.  
 
Concerning Component 2 & 3 sub-projects, which will be defined based on participatory 
local planning/ local economic development during implementation, the Operational Manual will 
include the EMP guidelines for screening, environmental review and mitigation features during 
the design, construction and operation stages.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The Supply Chain development Component deals with high value crops, livestock and other 
productive activities. Depending on the amount and types of pesticides used, this OP may be 
triggered.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Due to the rich cultural and historical heritage in various locations in Upper Egypt, 
Operational Policy on Physical Cultural Resources may be triggered. Procedures to deal with 
chance finds will need to be developed.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
It is not yet clear whether any of the potential sub-projects will include any relocation or land 
aquisition. During preparation, and before appraisal, a resettlement policy framework will be 
developed to address any emerging relocation and land acquisition issue
s. If the policy is later 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
triggered, a RAP will be prepared and teh Operational Manual will include a section on social 
safeguard screening and instructions for dealing with anticipated mitigation measures to ensure 
compliance with World Bank policies.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Some of the sub-projects listed under all 3 components, such as water supply and sanitation 
at the Governorates level have not yet been defined, and there might be, though minor, a 
possibility of triggering OP/BP 7.50 on International Waterways   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/19/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
From approximately November 2007 through March 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Franck Bousquet 
10/31/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
10/31/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
10/31/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
