Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2405 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P101103 
Project Name: EGYPT - National Railways Restructuring Project 
Task Team Leader: Michel Bellier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 6, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
270.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
80.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching objective of the proposed ENRRP is to assist Government in implementing its 
restructuring strategy in view of improving the railway efficiency, strengthening its financial 
viability, and enhancing its capacity to better serve the social and economic needs of the country.  
 
Monitoring indicators would be selected to assess progress in four areas: (i) efficiency of 
services; (ii) improvement in safety; (iii) growth in revenue; and (iv) modernization of 
management practices.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The NRRP would finance key elements of ENR's 2007-2011 restructuring strategy, with 
particular emphasis on those components that are critical to improving efficiency and safety, 
increasing revenue, and modernizing management practices, as follows.  
 
Component 1:  Track Renewal. This component would involve the acquisition and installation 
of rail to renew around 400 km of track.   
Page  2
Component 2:  Signaling and Telecommunications.  Proceeds would be used to fund the 
establishment of a modern Central Traffic Control signaling system on some of the heavily-
trafficked routes, while a radio-based Direct Train Control system would be installed on low and 
medium traffic routes. In addition, this component would finance the creation of a network-wide 
Central Traffic Command and Control Center in Cairo to organize, coordinate and control train 
movements on the network.  
 
Component 3:  Motive Power and Rolling Stock.  Activities under this component would 
include the rehabilitation of about 40 freight locomotives and part of the freight wagon fleet, and 
modernization of rolling stock maintenance facilities at Tabeen.  
 
Component 4:  Management Information Systems.  Modern Management Information Systems 
would be introduced to improve train and freight operations, and maintenance of infrastructure 
and rolling stock, and to strengthen financial management.  
 
Component 5:  Improving Working Environment.  Funds from the Bank Loan would be used 
primarily to develop an environmental improvement program that would guide the clean-up of 
ENR?s main locomotive workshops and prepare an environmental strategy covering all ENR 
activities.  
 
Component 6:  Support to MOT and ENR in Implementing the Restructuring Strategy.  This 
component seeks to support the implementation of the overall ?renaissance? plan for a 
commercially oriented and financially sustainable Egyptian Railway. Activities would include: 
(i) developing a new legal and institutional framework entailing PSO contracts for passenger 
services; (ii) preparing the restructuring of ENR along the main lines of business and a plan to 
create a separate rail freight company; (iii) devising a plan to rationalize passenger maintenance 
facilities; (iv) formulating a plan to transfer ancillary activities to the private sector; (v) 
developing a Young Railway Professionals Program; (vi) undertaking a review of operating rules 
and procedures; and (vii) exploring the feasibility of electrifying the Cairo-Alexandria line.  
 
Components (1) and (2) would improve the safety of rail operations, while components (2), (3) 
and (4) would be critical to increasing capacity and improving the quality of services, notably in 
the freight sector, the most important activity for increasing commercial revenue over the 
medium-term. Component (6) would strengthen ENR's capacity to successfully implement the 
restructuring program.  
 
Implementation Arrangements.  The Ministry of Transport (MOT) has indicated that it would 
oversee implementation, but that the ENR would serve as implementing agency.  Specific 
arrangements for the oversight and the legal role of the MOT will be specified during project 
preparation.  With respect to the ENR, the mission indicated that it would need to establish a 
project management unit (PMU), reporting directly to ENR's CEO and to MOT, to act as the 
Bank?s main counterpart during implementation.  Specific tasks and responsibilities of the PMU, 
as well as institutional and contractual arrangements, will be firmed up during preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The project will affect the 5,085 km of railway network, sixty percent of which is concentrated in 
the Nile Delta and along the Nile Valley.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Egypt has a reasonably good legal and regulatory framework related to environmental and social 
protection, including requirements for environmental assessments and mitigation. The Egyptian 
guidelines for environmental impact assessment are being revised to be more in-line with those 
of the World Bank, per the piloting the use of the country system.  The Operations Manual will 
provide the framework for designing the detailed environmental and social mitigation measures, 
as needed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a Category B Project and the Bank policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 
4.01) apply to this operation.  This assumes that (a) no involuntary resettlement is expected for 
any of the project components, and (b) that the clean-up of ENR workshops will not entail any 
transfer of soil or hazardous materials off-site, or re-stocking of hazaroudous material.  The 
scope of the Environment Assesssment is subject to further clarification on the environmental 
significance of the clean-up activities in the maintenance facility and workshops that the ENRRP 
project would finance.  Since the project is still being prepared, it was agreed that the teams' 
environmental specialist would visit workshop facilities to see the environmental status and 
ascertain the extent of the clean-up that would be required.  If the latter conditions are not met, 
then measures to be agreed with MNSRE will apply.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/01/2006 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The necessary preparatory environmental impact assessment studies will be prepared over 
the next 6 months.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel Bellier 
07/24/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
07/25/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
07/24/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
