Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2392 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P094230 
Project Name: EG-GREATER CAIRO DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (30%);Water supply (30%);Sanitation (30%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P);Other financial and private sector development (P);Municipal 
governance and institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to contribute to improving the efficiency and livability of 
the Greater Cairo Metropolitan Area through strategic investments in urban infrastructure and 
transport systems and in the regeneration of deteriorating urban areas, while laying the long-term 
institutional foundation for efficient and coordinated management of service delivery and local 
assets.  Specifically, the project will:  
 
?
Improve the livability and efficiency of the GCMA for its citizens and visitors by 
addressing short-term locally-defined investment priorities in rehabilitating/expanding 
infrastructure and basic services in selected under-serviced urban areas, strengthening the urban 
transportation system with a focus on improving public transportation, and addressing selected 
environmental trouble spots; and  
 
Page  2
?
Establish a coherent long-term vision for sustainable development for the metropolitan 
area as a whole through the Strategic Development Plan process, with a focus on strengthening 
and streamlining the institutional framework for efficient service delivery and improved asset 
management at the local and regional level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
place with the scale of the GCMA and the complexity and magnitude of the challenges facing 
it requires a phased approach that focuses on addressing pressing short-term investment needs 
while at the same time sets the stage for improved urban management and service delivery that 
are needed for sustainable development in the long-term. Hence, the aim of this project, which 
can be seen as a setting stage, is to address selected high priority investment needs in the GCMA 
identified by the three Governorates, while preparing the SDP and its underpinning institutional 
arrangements as the foundation for subsequent investments and improved urban management.  
The proposed approach would thus achieve the dual objectives of emphasizing GCMA as an 
integrated metropolitan area through a planning process that sets its future vision and 
development strategies and strengthens the institutional framework for service delivery, and 
simultaneously addressing each Governorate?s immediate needs.  
 
The proposed project components listed below reflect the key pillars for physical investments 
(urban transportation and urban regeneration) agreed upon as part of the overall concept with the 
Inter-Ministerial and Governors Committee, including the preliminary priorities identified by the 
three Governorates for financing under the Project.  The institutional development component 
focuses on the preparation of the SDP and laying out the institutional foundation for coherent 
service delivery in the long-term.  As can be expected, the immediate needs of the three 
Governorates surpass the funds available under this project.  A screening process is currently 
being finalized and will serve to identify selected strategic investments that provide a maximum 
return in terms of economic, social and environmental impact, in addition to other criteria.  
Finally, as agreed with the Inter-Ministerial Committee, complex projects of regional 
significance that by virtue of their scale, complexity and/or anticipated impact would need to be 
securitized/developed under the SDP framework, would not be covered under this project.  
 
Component 1: Urban Transportation  
 
?
Strategic investments to improve the public transportation system.  Several investments 
are currently envisaged under public-private partnership (PPP) or private sector concession 
arrangements, including dedicated bus lanes in major thoroughfares, building a west-wing 
expressway with a public transport corridor, and upgrading the Heliopolis surface tram.  The 
feasibility of such investments and the required investments of the public sector would be 
addressed during preparation.  
 
?
Investments in traffic management and enforcement systems to improve traffic flow and 
pedestrian safety, including improved traffic signaling and pedestrian crossing systems in certain 
locations especially downtown, better organized on-street parking in highly congested areas and 
along major arterial corridors, and introduction of user/congestion charges.  The feasibility of 
investing in strategically located off-street parking structures (specific sites suggested by the 
Governorates) under BOT or other similar PPP arrangements would also be examined and 
facilitated under the project.  
 
Component 2: Urban Regeneration and Development:  
Page  3
?
Investments to improve/rehabilitate infrastructure services and environmental conditions 
in selected areas that are under-serviced, have deteriorating infrastructure and/or which have a 
particularly negative environmental impact with serious externalities imposed on GCMA as a 
whole.  In particular, several such areas exist in Qalyobiya and Giza.  El-Khososs City has a 
complete lack of infrastructure and services, with serious environmental externalities on 
surrounding areas.  Many districts have an old decaying wastewater collection network that 
suffers from frequent breakdowns. The solid waste collection and disposal system is highly 
inadequate and El Khanka landfill site is insufficient.  Shobra El-Khima and El-Akrasha areas 
suffer from serious industrial pollution due to smelters and metal casting factories and 
workshops in the midst of the urban fabric.  
 
?
Regeneration/revitalization of the urban fabric in specific attraction areas through urban 
design improvements to site approach, signage, landscape, hardscape and other interventions that 
would improve their attractiveness for visitors and livability for residents.  This includes adjacent 
urban areas to the Pyramids site for better integration with the planned new museum with 
Japanese funding, the Nile waterfront in areas such as El-Bahr El-Aazam to El-Marazeek., the 
areas surrounding Mohamed Ali Palace in Shobra El-Khima, El-Ashraf mosque in El-Khanka, 
and El-Zaher Paibars Mosque in Qalyob.  
 
?
Integrated urban upgrading including improvement/rehabilitation of infrastructure 
services and community development activities in a selected number of deteriorated residential 
areas that have inadequate or overloaded infrastructure and severe overcrowding and 
densification.  
 
?
Redevelopment of underutilized areas and brownfield sites, with a focus on examining 
the feasibility and appropriate modalities to maximize private sector participation.  
 
Component 3: Institutional development  
 
?
Strengthen the institutional framework responsible for the management and delivery of 
infrastructure and urban services at the regional and local levels, with an emphasis on clarifying 
responsibilities and jurisdictions, set new service standards and hold agencies accountable to 
them, establish performance benchmarks, setting up the information management systems that 
could coordinate and improve the decision-making and management process, and harmonizing 
planning and implementation of the different interventions.   
 
?
Strengthen transportation institutions, especially in traffic management, traffic 
enforcement, and passenger transport system planning and regulation, including the feasibility of 
establishing a metropolitan transport authority.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project spans the Greater Cairo Metropolitan Area (GCM), which comprises Cairo 
Governorate and the urban areas of the Giza and Qalyobiya Governorates.  The GCM is 
considered to be the thirteenth largest mega-city of the world, inhabited by 16 million people.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Egypt has a reasonably good legal and regulatory framework related to environmental and social 
safeguards, including requirements for environmental assessments and mitigation. The 
Operations Manual will provide the framework for designing the detailed environmental and 
social mitigation measures, as needed, to be undertaken for each related sub-projects.  
 
Page  4
The PIU will responsible for the preparation of all EIA, EMP and RPF. The necessary capacity-
building and training will be provided.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSRE) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Once project design is firmed, it will be decided whether to have a closed list of project or an 
open list of projects and this will directly affect whether a full-EIA or an EIA framework is 
needed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
To be determined at the QER Meeting which will take place on 8/17/2007.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
During preparation, and before appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be 
developed to address any emerging relocation and land acquisition issues.  If it becomes certain 
at any stage that any subcomponent will involve relocation or land acquisition, a RAP will be 
prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/18/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
Launching and completing the safeguard-related studies will take place during project 
preparation phase, starting from July 2006 until July 2007. Safeguard related documents will 
be disclosed before appraisal at the (i) infoshop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessibly 
locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected people.  
 
Upon clarity during early stage of preparation whether or not there will be a specific list of 
activities, or on the contrary an open list, a decision will be made as whether a "blueprint" 
EIA approach or framework approach will be required for the project. A "scoping" process 
will be started as early as possible to ensure that the stakeholders concerned are integrated in 
the scope of work.  
 
It is not yet clear whether some subcomponents will necessitate any relocation or land 
acquisition. During preparation, and before appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework will 
be developed to address any emerging relocation and land acquisition issues.  If it becomes 
certain at any stage that any subcomponent will involve relocation or land acquisition, a RAP 
will have to be prepared. The Operations Manual will include a section on social safeguard 
screening and instructions for dealing with anticipated mitigation measures to ensure 
compliance with World Bank policies. So far, there is a central and local government?s 
commitment to pursue the policy framework. It is understood that the three Governorates 
would bear the cost of any compensation from their own housing fund. However, if for any 
reason the task team observed reversed changes in government?s commitment during 
preparation, the entire subcomponent would be dropped.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ahmed A. R. Eiweida 
10/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
10/17/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
10/11/2006 
Comments:   
