                                                                                                                                                                                                        43672


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                                APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 10/26/2007                                      Report No.: AC2576
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of                 Project ID: P095392
                                                                                                            Project Name: EGYPT-NATURAL GAS CONNECTIONS PROJECT
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Anna Maria Bjerde
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: November 5,            Estimated Board Date: January 24, 2008
                                                                                                            2007
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: MNSSD                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                             Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Oil and gas (100%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other economic management (P)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):              75.00

                                              Public                                                        IDA Amount (US$m.):                0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    Borrower                                                           78.70
                                                                                                                                                                                       78.70
                                                    Authorized                                              Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                            Simple []           Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                                                                                                                                   Yes [ ]       No [X]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
                                                              Disclosure

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                        Public                              The project development objective is to (i) contribute to GOE?s goal of reducing
                                                                                                            subsidies in the energy sector by switching consumption of LPG for natural gas through
                                                                                                            investment in new connections; and (ii) exploit the scale economies in transportation of
                                                                                                            natural gas relative to LPG in very densely populated areas, thereby reducing the cost of
                                                                                                            gas provision. The cost reduction makes it feasible to reduce overall gas subsidies.

                                                                                                            3. Project Description
                                                                              Authorized                    The Project will support the Government?s on-going program to expand the access to
                                                                                                            piped natural gas in the Greater Cairo area where the feasibility study prepared by Town
                                                                                                            Gas has estimated that approximately 2 million households can be connected to the
                                                                                                            network within the six year program period. This number has been determined based on
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            criteria established for suitability of connections taking into account issues related to
                                                                                                            safety and structural integrity of buildings. Given that the works included in the program
                                                                                                  Public    are part of the annual investments planned by the existing local distribution
                                                                                                            concessionaire (Town Gas), the World Bank support would focus on contributing
                                                                                                            towards a share of the investments targeted to connect about 300,000 households within
                                                                                                            Greater Cairo. The project will include two components:

 (a) Gas Transmission aiming at extending the existing gas transmission system by
adding 37 km of pipelines and 4 pressure reduction stations (PRSs) in the Cairo area to
provide additional supply points and to improve reliability of supply for the expansion of
the distribution network.

 (b) Gas Distribution and Connection aiming at expansion of the gas distribution system
for the connection of about 300,000 new customers, including the conversion of the
customers appliances to natural gas. The Distribution and Connection component would
allow transport of gas at the points of delivery from the transmission network to housing
areas, interconnect and control pressure in IP/MP/LP mains and to deliver gas to each
individual house. The component would also include the connection of new appliances
and the conversion of existing appliances in the customer household for the safe use of
natural gas.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The overall program aims to provide gas to around 2 million households, of which Bank
financing will connect around 300,000 households. The project will cover 28 districts in
Cairo and Giza Governorates and will focus on extending services to areas which are
currently partially covered as well as new areas. The network design and roll-out plan
has been designed by Town Gas as part of its planning activities and a summary of the
results and details of the material required for the program are presented in the detailed
feasibility study in the project files. Town Gas uses the Advantica Stoner SynerGEE Gas
Network Analysis software for network design which is Industry standard software and is
probably the widest used set of software for gas transmission and distribution analysis
and design world wide.

 EGAS/Town Gas categorizes properties into three different properties for the purpose of
screening out properties not suitable for gas connections:

 1) Category "I" Good condition and easily accessible single storey dwellings and flats:
comprising Villas ranging in consumption from 1m3/hr to 40m3/hr, depending on the
existence of swimming pools, boilers, in addition to the conventional types (cooker), etc.
E.g., New Cairo.

 2) Category "II" Flats and other dwellings of a reasonable standard in areas with
reasonable access: Rate of consumption from 0.1 to 0.4 m3/hr. Areas: El Maadi, Masr El
Gededa, Down Town, Nasr City, Faisal, El Haram, El Abbasia.

 3) Category III" Poor housing with possible access problems and likelihood of structural
problems: Rate of consumption from 0.1 to 0.25 m3/hr. Areas: El Wayly, El Zawya El
Hammra, El Matria, Ein Shams, Dar El Sallam, Basateen, El Sharabia, Omrania, El
Moneeb, Sakyet Meky, Bolak, Embaba, El Waraak.

 It is worth noting that areas where weak structures exist are classified by Town Gas as
"no gas area" to avoid possible structural problems associated with establishing the
network.

 EGAS and Town Gas have established Environmental Departments that follow rigorous
environmental practices. For construction and maintenance, standards used by British
Gas are applied. These standards are today contained in the Recommendations of the
Institutions of Gas Engineers and Managers (IGEM).

 For environmental and social safeguards, the environment department of EGAS and
Town Gas has strict criteria for construction of gas distribution infrastructure with an aim
to ensure safety and to avoid any disturbance to cultural and archeological properties. To
mitigate this, the entities have developed capacity in collecting maps and undertake site
tracing and they use trial pits before major construction. They also work closely with the
Governorate?s Information Center to anticipate potential issues.

 Although the exact location of the new PRSs have not been agreed to, it has been
confirmed that they will be located in the El Haram, New Cairo, El Mokatam and El
Shorouk districts. All of the PRSs will be located on land owned by the Governorate
and/or on property owned by the Ministry of Petroleum. As such, no land expropriation
is anticipated. However, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared in case the
Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered during project
implementation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD)
   Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 The proposed project falls under the World Bank environmental Category A
classification due to its size, geographic location and potential environmental impacts.
Of the World Bank?s ten environmental and social safeguard policies, Operational Policy
4.01 on Environmental Assessment is triggered. Of the four planned pressure reducing
stations in Greater Cairo, all will be located on land owned by the Governorate and/or on
property owned by the Ministry of Petroleum. As such, no land expropriation is
anticipated. However, the Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
is included, and a Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared to ensure that proper
compensation is administered in case access to amenities or sources of income is
restricted.

 It has also been deemed that the Operational Policy on Cultural Property (OPN 11.03,
being revised as OP 4.11) may be triggered, but only during construction in areas where
cultural relics may be found during the construction phase.

 To ensure proper attention to the safeguards, an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment Framework (ESIAF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been
prepared, including a Chance Find procedure related to OP 4.11. The ESIAF/RPF was
carried out by a leading environmental consulting firm, EcoConserve and individual
consultants with risk assessment expertise as well as expertise in preparing ESIAFs for
large complex infrastructure projects according to the Terms of Reference approved by
the World Bank.

 The ESIAF has identified the following most significant potential negative impacts
during the construction phase:

 Traffic Flow: The installation of the natural gas network is bound to affect the traffic
operations during construction. The construction will entail narrowing major roads by
longitudinal and/or lateral excavation. Either method will produce different levels of
impact on the major road network. The narrowing of the road will reduce the number of
traffic lanes available for traffic movement and will also entail the prohibition of on-
street parking along the length of the road works. The narrowing may reduce the right-
lane either partially or totally. In either case, traffic may avoid the construction side and
encroach with traffic in the adjacent lanes.

 Air Emissions: Air emissions during construction will arise from: (i)
excavation/backfilling operations which generates suspended particles; (ii) dispersion
from stockpiles of waste or sand used for filling trenches; and (iii) exhaust from
excavation vehicles (excavators, trenchers, loaders, trucks) containing SOx, NOx, CO,

VOCs, etc. The effects of such impacts are expected to be local and short term;
especially that soil stockpiling is normally minimal at the site, and is normally filled
within the same day. Another indirect source of air emissions is the traffic congestions
that may occur. Air emissions from vehicles are usually affected by different modes of
traffic, including traffic congestions.

 Noise: Construction activities will increase noise levels caused by excavation.
Construction noise varies from increase of noise intensity due to engine operation, and
intermittent impacts which may take place during demolition of asphalt, either by
trencher or jack hammer. The effects on construction labor are considered more
significant, because they are exposed to high levels of noise for relatively longer periods.
Residents of neighboring areas are the second-level recipients of elevated noise levels, as
the noise intensity will be relatively dissipated at their locations. In addition, traffic
congestions, which could be caused by excavation works, will also affect noise levels in
the area, which may increase ambient average noise intensity levels.

 Risk to infrastructure: Most of underground pipeline infrastructure (such as water,
sewerage and telecommunication) in Greater Cairo has been established a long time ago,
without accurate documentation for its routes and depths. Therefore, the risk of breaking
infrastructure lines is relatively high. Normally the contractor applies manual excavation
to avoid such situations since the contractor is obliged to pay for the damage. The most
important environmental impact will arise in the case of breaking a sewerage pipe, where
wastewater accumulates in the trench and, possibly, floods onto the streets causing
significant nuisance to the surrounding environment. The breakage of a water supply
pipe may result in cutting the supply to a number of residential units, which may, if it is
not repaired for a long period, direct residents to use other sources of water which may
either be expensive or unsafe. The effects of cutting telecommunication cables during
excavation are mainly socioeconomic, due to cutting possible business communications.

 Effects on some structures: Weak and old structures are very sensitive to differential
settlements, which could be caused, mainly, by dewatering. Excavation for natural gas
pipelines is usually shallow and does not exceed 1.0 meter depth. In very few areas in
Greater Cairo, ground water depth may be less than that.

 Effects on culturally valuable sites: The effects on culturally valuable sites could occur
due to the following reasons: (i) structural damage to a monument due to possible
dewatering during excavation; (ii) effects to a monument's foundations due to excavation
works; (iii) damage to the monument due to vibration from machinery; (iv) reduction in
the aesthetic value of the site; and (v) improper management of discovered antiquities
during excavation.

 Waste disposal: Wastes that are generated during the construction phase include: (i)
excavated soil and excess sand, (ii) concrete and bricks waste; (iii) demolished asphalt,
(iv) containers of chemicals and lubricant oils used for construction machinery; (v)
possibly damaged asbestos water pipes during excavation; and (vi) dewatered water from
trenches

 During the operation phase, the following have been identified as potential negative
impacts:

 Improper handling of odorant: The odorant containing Tertiobutylmercaptin (80%) and
Methylehylsulphide (20%) is classified as a hazardous substance. Improper handling of
the odorant could come from (i) storage in unsafe conditions, in terms of occupational
health and safety; and (ii) leakage to the environment causing different types of hazards
related to its high reactivity and possible production of pollutants. This release to the
environment could take many forms such as discharge of remaining odorants in
containers, after use, in land or sewers, disposal of used containers with domestic waste,
or by open disposal; and recycling of used containers for other materials.

 Noise of PRSs. The pressure reduction stations cause noise generated from the
reducers'pipes. Noise levels are normally increased by a few decibels in and around their
location. The generated noise is constant (not intermittent) and normally dissipates
beyond a few meters.

 Safety aspects of PRSs operation: The safety risks associated with the operation of
PRSs have been assessed for the workers and the public at large using Quantitative Risk
Assessment (QRA) modeling and the results have been compared with international risk
acceptance criteria "As Low As Reasonably Practical ? ALARP".

 The risks have been assessed for the industrial workers and general public representing
the two types of risk namely the "Individual Risk" and "Social Risk" within each PRS.
For the general public, the simulation assumed that the station is surrounded by busy
roads, as well as public buildings. The conclusion drawn from the QRA is that the risk is
within the acceptable limits provided safety precautions are considered and strictly
followed in the design, operation and maintenance of such facilities.

 To mitigate the potential impacts, an Environmental and Social Management and
Monitoring Framework (ESMMF) has been formulated. The implementation of the
ESMMF is estimated to cost US$850,000, and will be financed by EGAS. Annex 10 of
the Project Appraisal Document presents the detailed mitigation measures and the
institutional arrangements.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The ESIAF considered several alternatives, including not undertaking the project. Not
undertaking the project would undermine the Government?s Energy Strategy to expand
natural gas connections among households to reduce the energy subsidies and the fiscal
deficit, as well as to achieve social benefits brought by piped gas over LPG. Social

benefits include: the provision of clean and stable energy, improved house cleanliness, as
LPG cylinders usually contains dirt and insects, reduced noise caused by LPG
distributors, reduced price of LPG cylinders due to reduced demand, reduced child labor,
who commonly work in LPG distribution; and reduced inconvenience to handicapped
people, in delivering LPG cylinders to their houses.

 Alternatives to the sequencing of construction activities were also considered.
Construction of the gas network within the city comprise two main components, the first
being the distribution network in the direction of longitudinal roads, and the second being
the connection network to the residential units perpendicular to road direction on both
sides. Two alternatives were considered:

 Alternative 1: Complete the construction of the distribution network and then start the
connection network at a later stage.

 Alternative 2: Complete both networks simultaneously in one stage.
 The ESIAF considered several alternatives, including not undertaking the project. Not
undertaking the project would undermine the Government?s Energy Strategy to expand
natural gas connections among households to reduce the energy subsidies and the fiscal
deficit, as well as to achieve social benefits brought by piped gas over LPG. Social
benefits include: the provision of clean and stable energy, improved house cleanliness, as
LPG cylinders usually contains dirt and insects, reduced noise caused by LPG
distributors, reduced price of LPG cylinders due to reduced demand, reduced child labor,
who commonly work in LPG distribution; and reduced inconvenience to handicapped
people, in delivering LPG cylinders to their houses.

 Alternatives to the sequencing of construction activities were also considered.
Construction of the gas network within the city comprise two main components, the first
being the distribution network in the direction of longitudinal roads, and the second being
the connection network to the residential units perpendicular to road direction on both
sides. Two alternatives were considered:

 Alternative 1: Complete the construction of the distribution network and then start the
connection network at a later stage.

 Alternative 2: Complete both networks simultaneously in one stage.

 The advantages of Alternative 1 over Alternative 2 are: (i) technical problems during
line testing could be avoided, as detecting leaks in the main pipe will be much easier if no
connections are placed; (ii) phasing of connections could be done corresponding with
signed contracts for new customers; (iii) lower risks for re-excavating parts of the line
including leaks; and (iv) shorter traffic disturbance time for the first excavation stage
because there are no lateral intersections with the traffic flow.

 The advantages of Alternative 2 over Alternative 1 are: (i) amount of excavation/filling
works slightly less, because intersections between mains and connection trenches are

excavated only once; (ii) enabled mobilization of equipment and areas of storage
occupied only once; and (iii) traffic disturbance occurs only once.

 The amount of excavations in the two alternatives are approximately the same, however,
the second alternative has a clear advantage of causing disturbance only once for the
same street, in addition to less air emissions and traffic disturbance caused during
equipment mobilizations. Therefore alternative 2 will be pursued as much as possible,
but the phasing of connection works depend mainly on developing contracts with new
customers, and therefore there may be occasions where also Alternative 1 is used.

 Routing alternatives apply to transmission mains, distribution mains and connection
mains. For transmission mains alternatives, the selected project alternative is to provide
reinforcements to the existing mains using the same route. The main advantage of this
selection is the benefit from the design of the existing route which forms a ring around
Greater Cairo. This facilitates access to different geographic locations with a minimum
length of pipelines required. Forming another route for the required new mains would
achieve the same technical objective but at a greater cost. Therefore the reinforcement
alternative is preferred.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
EGAS/Town Gas contracted with the ESIAF/RPF to be carried out by a leading
environmental consulting firm, EcoConserve and individual consultants with risk
assessment expertise as well as expertise in preparing ESIAFs for large complex
infrastructure projects according to the Terms of Reference approved by the World Bank.
They assigned the Head of the Environment and Safety Department in EGAS along with
a team to supervise the consultants.

 Furthermore, the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency has already approved the
ESIAF.

 Finally, MOP/EGAS has a very good track record in paying due attention to safety
measures in the development of the gas sector and use standards and procedures used by
British Gas. Robust and rigorous attention is paid to environmental and social aspects,
supported by the environmental departments that have been created since long ago in
EGAS and Town Gas.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations were carried out with key stakeholders. The ESIAF held two consultation
sessions as required for Category A projects. These were very well advertised and
attended.

 Furthermore, during project preparation, a willingness to pay (WTP) study to assess
lower-income household?s ability to pay was carried out during the course of preparation.
According to the WTP study, the lowest income groups are not likely to be able to

connect to the network if it results in a substantial increase in monthly payments
compared to the current spending on LPG (currently ranging from LE 8-LE 24 depending
on distributor).

 Given the financing options currently available to consumers, it is likely that the poorest
sections of the population will choose a 10 year repayment plan, which translates into a
monthly payment of about LE 21 at the prevailing interest rate (11.5%). The total cost,
including taxes and natural gas consumption is likely to be around LE 26 to LE 30 per
month. The provision of a targeted subsidy to eligible low income consumers through
the removal of the interest charge on installments is being discussed with EGAS to bring
the monthly payments for natural gas connection and consumption closer to the average
spending on LPG. Final agreement of how to implement this measure will be reached
during the Appraisal mission. This would reduce the monthly payment of the connection
charge from about LE 21 to about LE 12.5.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       12/04/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   11/29/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    12/04/2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                    12/05/2006
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       12/04/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   11/29/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    12/04/2006
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Not applicable



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             No

  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?           Yes
  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential         Yes
  adverse impacts on cultural property?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process             Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector       Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                               Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Anna Maria Bjerde                        10/19/2007
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed                      10/19/2007
Social Development Specialist       Mr Knut Opsal                               10/19/2007
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Hocine Chalal                            10/19/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jonathan D. Walters                      10/19/2007
 Comments:

