                                                                                                                                                                                                       43575


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 12/12/2006                                    Report No.: AC2479
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of                Project ID: P094229
                                                                                                            Project Name: ALEXANDRIA GROWTH POLE
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: November 6,           Estimated Board Date: April 3, 2007
                                                                                                            2006
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: MNSIF                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                            Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Roads and highways (40%);Sanitation (25%);Water supply (25%);Sub-national
                                    Disclosure                                                              government administration (5%);General public administration sector (5%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban

                                              Public                                                        services and housing (P);Other financial and private sector development (P);Municipal
                                                                                                            governance and institution building (P)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):            100.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                    Authorized                                              Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER                                                         30.00
                                                                                                                    BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES                        10.00
                                                                                                                                                                                     40.00
                                                              Disclosure                                    Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                           Simple [X]         Repeater []
                                                                        Public                              Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)         Yes [ ]      No [X]

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The project development objective is to support economic development of Alexandria
                                                                                                            Governorate by removing key infrastructural constraints, reducing barriers to investment
                                                                                                            and ensuring the socio economic integration of the poor.

                                                                              Authorized                     The project aims to (i) support Alexandria Governorate?s economic development and
                                                                                                            utilization of local assets through investments in land development and improved
                                                                                                            accessibility between centers of economic activities ad major transport hubs; (ii) support
                                                                                                            private sector development through removing key infrastructural and administrative
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            constraints hindering its operation and growth; and (iii) improve access of residents in
                                                                                                            squatter settlements to infrastructure, basic services and income-enhancing opportunities.
                                                                                                  Public

                                                                                                            3. Project Description
                                                                                                            The project includes the following four components:

 Component 1:           Priority Infrastructure in Support of Local Economic Development
 1.1. Providing off-site infrastructure needed to support private development of land
bordering Lake Marriout?s main basin through the carrying out of works.

 1.2. Rehabilitating critical access roads linking major centers of economic activity in
Alexandria through the carrying out of works.
 Component 2:           Improvement of the Local Investment Climate
 2.1. Streamlining key business start-up licensing procedures at the Alexandria Investor
Services Complex through the provision of goods.

 2.2. Preparing the regulatory framework for the registration of existing land and real
property at the North Merghem enterprise park through the provision of goods.

 2.3. Designing the regulatory, technical and financial framework for private sector
expanded role in managing and developing industrial areas in Alexandria, through the
provision of technical advisory services.

 Component 3: Urban Upgrading of Squatter Settlements
 3.     Providing support to basic infrastructure, community facilities and services,
including the construction of water, wastewater networks, surface water drains,
rehabilitation of access roads, establishment of community facilities through the carrying
out of works and the provision of community services.

 Component 4:           Institutional Development and Technical Support to Project
Operation
 4.1. Updating Alexandria?s Master Plan including an urban structure plan for
Alexandria Governorate, a land use plan for Alexandria City and detailed local area plans
for selected strategic areas through the provision of technical advisory services.

 4.2. Establishing the Alexandria Development Agency through the provision of goods
and technical advisory services.

 4.3. Supporting the operational capacity of the PMU for the implementation of the
Project activities, the EMP, the Resettlement Policy Framework, the monitoring and
evaluation of the Project, and the engineering design and construction supervision of
component 1 of the Project, through the provision of goods and technical advisory
services.

 The following are the key performance indicators, listed according to the relevant
project development objective:
 i.     Increased private sector investment in the project area adjacent to Lake Marriout
as a result of servicing lands and improved ambient conditions.
 ii.    Improved accessibility and reduced travel time to the main centers of economic
activity (industrial estates, enterprise parks, and Alexandria ports), through
rehabilitation/reconstruction of selected arterial roads.

 iii.  Improved living conditions of the population living in selected undersrviced
squatter settlements as a result of increased access to basic infrastructure and economic
services.
 iv.   Improved local business environment as a result of streamlining key business
start-up procedures and regularizing land ownership

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is implemented in several areas in Alexandria, these areas are:

 &#61656;      The vacant land in the vicinity of Lake Marriout, including the area
surrounding Carrefour, 380 Feddans (160 hectares);

 &#61656;      The area north of the Merghem Industrial Zone and south of Agamy and
Max, where the selected roads for rehabilitation are located;

 &#61656;      Merghem and El Nahda Industrial zones located south of Alexandria city
and separated by the Cairo Alexandria Desert Road;

 &#61656;      El Amrawy squatter area, located in the eastern part of Alexandria city;

 &#61656;      Naga El Arab squatter area, located in the western part of Alexandria city;
an

 &#61656;      El Hadara El Gedida squatter area, located in the central part of
Alexandria city.

 &#61656;      Three to five other squatter settlements to be selected.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Knut Opsal (MNSRE)
   Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSRE)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project falls under the World Bank environmental category A classification
due to its size, magnitude, and irreversibility of potential environmental impacts. Of the
World Bank ten safeguard policies, only Operation Policy 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment and Operation Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) are
triggered. As such, a full Integrated Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(IESIA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were carried out. By virtue of
good practice, an independent Social Assessment (SA) was also carried out. The IESIA,
RPF and SA reports were prepared by an Egyptian Independent Consulting Firm (North
South Consultant Exchange) in collaboration with an international firm (Royal
Haskoning, Netherland BV) according to the Terms of Reference approved by the World
Bank.

 The IESIA addresses the potential environmental and social impacts of the various
project components, and means of mitigating the negative impacts. The IESIA document
presents those impacts in terms of project components, and component phases
(construction/operation). The integration of the various project components, along with
the integration of the environmental and social aspects is also presented. Project
alternatives are evaluated, both at the aggregate and at the component levels. The IESIA
also lays out the necessary institutional arrangements necessary to implement the
mitigation measures set forth in the environmental and social management plan (EMP). A
monitoring plan is also presented to ensure the efficacy of the environmental and social
management plan.

 During the IESIA preparation, the borrower consulted with stakeholders twice. The first
round of consultation took place during the scoping stage of the IESIA and was held on
May 29, 2006. This meeting helped the consultant to define the scope of work, and focus
on the most relevant environmental and social issues, through feedback of the
participating stakeholders. A widely publicized second consultation took place on
August 1, 2006, after the draft IESIA was completed, which was attended by NGOs, local
population, Academics, media, EEAA, and government officials from central and local
government levels.

 In view of OP 4.01?s focus on social/environmental integration, and in order to give
explicit attention to social issues, a separate Social Assessment was carried out and the
key findings were integrated into the IESIA. The main purpose of the social assessment is
to provide a participatory framework for gathering, analyzing and incorporating socio-
economic information in planning, implementing and monitoring the AGPP. This
includes an analysis of context and social issues with (ii) a participatory process of
stakeholder consultation and involvement to provide (iii) operational guidance on
developing project design, implementation and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This
has been carried out through (i) a participation and consultation strategy; (ii) baseline

information and a monitoring strategy (iii) identification of potential adverse impacts and
where needed an action plan to mitigate such impacts.

 The project does not involve any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts. However, some of the potentially negative impacts include:

 - Solid Waste generated from different construction activities will be handled according
to the contractor waste management plan. Solid wastes will be disposed of in the official
land fill operated by Onyx. Hazardous waste, if any, will be clearly marked and disposed
of at the Nassereya hazardous waste disposal site located in the Amreya area.

 - Construction Impacts: (for all components including works) could be significant,
however they are only temporary. Typical impacts are those of dust, noise, traffic
congestion, and disturbance to the residents of the area. Good construction practices
would mitigate most of these temporary impacts to acceptable levels. Dangerous
activities in public areas will be controlled to reduce risk to the public, traffic and
warning signs will be placed at construction sites, trenches will be provided by fences, or
railings. The construction contract document will incorporate all requirements to
minimize disturbance from construction activities as stated in Annex 5 of the IESIA
report. It will be monitored by the Environmental Specialist at the PMU to ensure
compliance and implementation of the required provisions by the Contractor.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Some of the expected positive project impacts include:

 - The sustainable development of the area surrounding Lake Marriout will reduce the
adverse environmental impacts resulting from uncontrolled development around the lake
and generate revenues that will be partly used to protect the environment.

 - Reconstruction/rehabilitation of critical access roads will enhance the attractiveness of
the industrial areas for investors and contributing to an increased level of economic
activity in the areas concerned, along with the reduction of pollution due to transport
along the Cairo Alexandria Desert Road.

 - Increasing access to infrastructure and services in squatter settlements will provide
good quality water on a continuous basis and will reduce unaccounted for water. Thus the
project will provide controlled water supply to the households and will reduce overdraft
of the aquifer. The project will also improve collection of wastewater, leading to the
overall improvement of health conditions of the population.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
An analysis of alternatives was carried out during the IESIA preparation. The no project
alternative would result in the following negative situations:

 - Uncontrolled urban development around the Lake, resulting in increasing the adverse
environmental impacts due to the rising number of squatter settlements in the area with
limited basic services and infrastructure.

 - Squatter settlements will remain without adequate basic infrastructure including water
supply, sewerage and access roads. Severe adverse environmental and health conditions
would increase and impact negatively the public health and economic opportunity for
residents in these areas.

 - Air quality will deteriorate due to the congested critical access roads, and productivity
of the most competitive manufacturing sectors in Alexandria will decline due to increased
trip time from factories to the main transport hubs (Alexandria and El Dekhila ports).

 - Persistence of the 3 major barriers to investment as identified by investors themselves-
namely, i) lengthy business start-up licensing procedures; ii) lack of land and property
registration in industrial areas; and iii) weak management of industrial zones, including a
system of maintenance and operation. Such unfavorable business climate will impact
negatively the overall economic development in Alexandria, reduce new investments
potentially established in Alexandria, including subsequent job creation opportunities,
and further deteriorate the environment conditions in the industrial areas.

 The second alterative assessed the implementation of each project component
separately, and as such has been evaluated on its own merits. It was concluded that this
will not yield the same benefits as the integrated approach suggested under this Project.
For instance, the improvement of the wastewater disposal system will not improve the
water quality in Lake Marriout unless squatter settlements around the Lake are developed
in a sustainable manner to ensure continuous improvement of the Lake environment.
Similarly, the area surrounding the Lake cannot attract private developers unless the land
is serviced and the ambient is improved. In the same token, the overall sustainable
development of Alexandria requires improving the business climate to attract investors
together with providing basic services and infrastructure. Finally, improving the
environment conditions in squatter settlements through provision/rehabilitation of basic
infrastructure would not ensure sustainable development in these areas without
socioeconomic and community development activities. The integrated approach
suggested under the Project was therefore assessed as the most appropriate for Alexandria
given the existing situations and envisaged aggregate impact.

 In addition to such an aggregate level analysis, proposed alternatives for components
involving major works content have also been analyzed, i.e. component 1.1 land
development surrounding Lake Marriout and component 1.2 roads rehabilitation.
Evaluation of alternatives considered investment costs, land requirements, environmental
impacts, social impacts, community needs and local conditions.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Mitigation measures have been identified to ensure that the defined objectives of the
project are achieved whilst preventing and reducing any adverse environmental and
social impacts.

 In addition, pre-tender conferences will be held to brief pre-qualified contractors on the
effective implementation of mitigation measures. All pre-qualified contractors will be
called to a pre-tender conference at which environmental, health and safety issues will be
outlined. The contractors will be briefed on: (i) chance find procedures, (ii) special
procedures to be adopted in the vicinity of sites defined as requiring protection, (iii)
penalties for non-compliance, and (iv) coordination with concerned authorities.

 Liaison arrangements will be established between the public, contractors, and the
Project Management Unit. A procedure will be established to allow the general public to
lodge complaints at the Project Management Unit about excessive disturbance.

 The contractors will provide suitable and reliable equipment for construction, with a
formal maintenance program to ensure efficient operations. All employees of the
contractors and supervising institutions will get suitable training in health, safety and
environment.

 The monitoring of construction activities will have to ensure that mitigation measures of
construction impacts are being implemented properly, while monitoring of operation
activities is to ensure that no unforeseen negative impacts are arising. Monitoring will
comprise supervision of the civil work contractors as well as physical monitoring.

 The EEAA Regional Branch Office (RBO) and the Environmental Management Unit
(EMU) in Alexandria will have the overall responsibility to oversee that adverse impacts
are maintained to acceptable levels and corrective actions are taken when required. A
project monitoring report will be prepared on the effectiveness of the ESMP once every 6
months and will be sent to the World Bank after review and approval of the RBO.

 Since some of the project?s physical components are likely to result in land acquisition
and/or resettlement, OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. A Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) is the instrument used, because the nature and extent of land
acquisition/resettlement of the various sub-components are not expected to be known at
appraisal. The policy framework establishes resettlement objectives and principles,
organizational arrangements and funding mechanisms for any resettlement operation
and/or land acquisition that may be necessary during implementation.

 The institutional arrangement and capacities of the organizations in-charge with the
implementation and management of the proposed project were reviewed with the
intention of providing technical assistance and proposing reinforcement of these
organizations as required.

 Training programs as summarized in the ESMP, will be designed and implemented
with the assistance of local and international experts and will include Supervising
Institutions.

 Technical assistance will be provided to EEAA regional branch office and Alexandria
EMU to set up baseline data on existing environmental conditions and to develop a
quality assurance and a quality monitoring program. These activities will be implemented
in close coordination with the on-going World Bank Egyptian Second Pollution
Abatement Project (EPAP II).

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the IESIA preparation, the borrower consulted with stakeholders twice. The first
round of consultation took place during the scoping stage of the IESIA and was held on
May 29, 2006. This meeting helped the consultant to define the scope of work, and focus
on the most relevant environmental and social issues, through feedback of the
participating stakeholders. A widely publicized second consultation took place on August
1, 2006, after the draft IESIA was completed, which was attended by NGOs, local
population, Academics, media, EEAA, and government officials from central and local
government levels.

 In view of OP 4.01's focus on social/environmental integration, and in order to give
explicit attention to social issues, a separate Social Assessment was carried out and the
key findings were integrated into the IESIA. The main purpose of the social assessment is
to provide a participatory framework for gathering, analyzing and incorporating socio-
economic information in planning, implementing and monitoring the AGPP. This
includes an analysis of context and social issues with (ii) a participatory process of
stakeholder consultation and involvement to provide (iii) operational guidance on
developing project design, implementation and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This
has been carried out through (i) a participation and consultation strategy; (ii) baseline
information and a monitoring strategy (iii) identification of potential adverse impacts and
where needed an action plan to mitigate such impacts.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       08/16/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   08/16/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08/18/2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                    08/24/2006
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       08/16/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   08/16/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08/18/2006

* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process            Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                           Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr Ahmed A. R. Eiweida     11/29/2006
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed     12/06/2006
Social Development Specialist     Mr Knut Opsal              12/06/2006
Additional Environmental and/or   Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif    12/11/2006
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif    12/11/2006
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Hedi Larbi              12/05/2006
 Comments:

