Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC2540
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID:  P095819 
Project Name:  Egypt Community and Local Dev. Project 
Task Team Leader:  Eileen Murray 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (25%);Health (25%);Micro- and SME finance 
(20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%);General education 
sector (10%) 
Theme:  Improving labor markets (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (P);Small and medium enterprise support (P);Population and 
reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
6.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
5.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
29.00
40.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Community and Local Development Project will support the Government of Egypt 
in increasing access to basic services and infrastructure in the poorest areas of Egypt as 
part of its efforts to make safety nets more effective, thus maintaining broader equity 
objectives of balanced growth.  This will be achieved through scaling up the SFD's Local 
Area Development approach of funding well-targeted interventions identified through 
participatory planning and implementation mechanisms that help poor communities 
organize collectively to meet their needs and by funding sub-projects using, to the extent 
possible, labor intensive methods.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project has only one component which is the Local Area Development (LAD) 
component.The operational and administrative costs of the SFD will be financed by the 
Government of Egypt in line with its long-term commitment to this agency.  
 
The Local Area Development (LAD) will shift SFD's previous approach of funding 
geographically scattered sub-projects towards a program of multi-sectoral sub-projects in 
a
specific area such as a markaz (rural district council) with high concentrations of poor. 
This component will support sub-projects to be implemented through local sponsoring 
and intermediary agencies in the intervention areas that are ranked in the lowest 20 
percent of the poverty map with a special emphasis on Upper Egypt.  The maximum 
financing for a LAD Project is LE 15 million (US$2.5 million equivalent). Each LAD 
project is made up of discrete sub-projects with a financing ceiling of LE 700,000 
($120,000 equivalent) with the following features:  
 
-
A
strong focus on improving the welfare of the population in areas with high 
concentrations of poor and disadvantaged persons identified through a targeting 
mechanism;  
 
-
Managed by local sponsoring agencies for the benefit of the population in these areas;  
 
-
Sub-projects are selected by the population through a participatory process;  
 
-
Implemented by intermediary agencies which could be Community Development 
Associations (CDAs), NGOs, district or village councils, or technical directorates of Line 
Ministries; and  
 
-
Managed and supervised by the local sponsoring agencies, the responsible 
intermediary agencies, and SFD.  
 
Eligible sub-projects will normally include improvements and extensions of water and 
wastewater networks, road paving, canal covering, community driven health 
interventions (e.g. improved primary health care service and operations, engaging the 
private sector through public-private partnerships to fill gaps in health service delivery, 
community based health financing schemes), literacy programs, vocational training, early 
childhood development programs, etc.  Labor intensity will not be applied to gauge 
effectiveness of the above sub-projects.  
 
Public workfare labor intensive sub-projects.  As part of this project's poverty reduction 
focus, certain sub-projects are amenable to the application of labor intensive methods 
such as canal cleaning and covering, waste collection and disposal.  These labor intensive 
sub-projects will be executed with a labor content of at least 50 percent of the total cost 
of the sub-project.  The beneficiaries will be paid at a rate not exceeding the prevailing 
wage rate for non-skilled labor in the area.  
 
The LAD projects will include the activities required for sub-project preparation as well 
as implementation and monitoring. Capacity building activities for local partners and 
civil society groups are key elements of the up front preparation process. Monitoring and 
evaluation arrangements are also planned; these will include a baseline and a follow-up 
survey, beneficiary assessments and technical and financial audits.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project interventions would be implemented in any area of Egypt.  Intervention areas will 
be selected using SFD's poverty targeting toolkit.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel P. Owen (SDV) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is classified as Category "FI" (Financial Intermediary) in accordance with the 
Bank's Operational Policy OP/BP 4.01. This classification was selected as the project 
involves investment of Bank funds through the Social Fund for Development (SFD) as a 
financial intermediary, in subprojects that may result in environmental impacts.  Due to 
the project's "FI" classification, SFD will screen proposed subprojects and ensure that 
intermediary agencies carry out appropriate EAs for each subproject. Before approving a 
subproject, the SFD will verify (through its own staff, outside experts, or existing 
environmental institutions) that sub-projects meet the environmental requirements of 
appropriate national and local authorities (e.g., Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency 
(EEAA), Environmental Management Units in the various relevant Governorates where 
the subprojects are to be implemented, etc.) and is consistent with the Bank's OP 4.01, 
and other applicable environmental policies.  
 
No projects classified as Category A according to EEAA's guidelines will be eligible for 
funding under the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Positive Environmental and Social Impacts  
 
Page  4
The sub-projects are likely to result in a number of positive environmental and 
socioeconomic impacts. Generally, all of the projects are expected to create employment 
and business opportunities for local people. For infrastructure sub-projects, other positive 
impacts could include improved access to drinking water and an improvement in water 
quality through the introduction of wells, water pumps, and water distribution systems; 
improvement of agricultural production through irrigation support systems; and decrease 
in water-borne diseases and improvement in health through sanitary drainage systems and 
latrines. The education and health sub-projects would provide deprived communities with 
basic services through the establishment of health clinics and facilities and education 
centers. This may have the effect of improving health and education status in the rural 
areas where the sub-projects are implemented, as part of the SFD's mission to combat 
poverty and improve the livelihoods of local citizens.  
 
Potentially Negative Environmental and Social Impacts  
 
Whereas the net impacts of the sub-projects implemented by the SFD are expected to be 
positive, there may be some negative impacts, associated with infrastructure or health and 
education sub-projects which should be addressed during the sub-project preparation 
phase. The most potentially significant negative impacts of these sub-projects may 
include noise and air pollution caused by construction activities, the risks of polluting 
water sources or groundwater, and the mismanagement of construction waste causing the 
increase of construction waste or other forms of solid waste as well. The ESMP 
document summarizes some of the negative environmental and social impacts that may 
be associated with sub-projects under the LAD Project's different components. 
Nonetheless, the SFD will carefully evaluate potential impacts and their mitigation 
measures for every sub-project considered for funding.  
 
Best Practices for Environmental and Social Mitigation  
 
The early detection of adverse environmental and social impacts (instead of dealing with 
such impacts as they arise) will enable SFD staff to put in place measures for the 
management and control of these impacts prior to their occurrence. The advance 
identification of suitable mitigation measures is a useful tool for standardizing the 
methodology for dealing with foreseen problems. The first step in mitigation practices is 
prevention, where the SFD will aim to avoid the identified potential adverse impact of the 
sub-project. If prevention is not possible, the scale or degree of the impact should be 
minimized as much as possible.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The exact intervention and/or locations of the sub-projects are not known at this stage. 
However, different rehabilitation and compensation techniques will be investigated, in 
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, and applied as a means to negate or 
ameliorate any likely adverse environmental and social impacts. The ESMP document 
presents mitigation measures during the construction and operation phases. These 
Page  5
measures are based on generally well-known best practices as well as past experience 
from SFD Projects.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of project preparation, the SFD has prepared the necessary environmental 
documents, namely the "Environmental and Social Management Plan and Guidelines 
Manual (ESMP)". The document outlines the Environmental Management Plan for the 
project, and lays out the EA arrangements for the sub-projects, identifies roles and 
responsibilities of the various actors, proposes environmental checklists for assessing 
potential impacts, eligibility, of typical sub-projects expected during the life of the 
project, suggested environmental management measures and environmental monitoring 
program for such sub-projects, and evaluates the institutional capacity of the SFD and 
proposes measures for capacity building. Furthermore, the ESMP presents a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) to address resettlement issues if and when they arise. The 
relevant environmental requirements are also described in the Operations Manual, with 
due reference to the ESMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
simple approach is proposed for public consultation in the early stages of sub-project 
preparation and planning:  
 
-
The stakeholders will be made aware of the different elements and features of each 
sub-project and their main objectives and target groups. Once an environmental and 
social assessment has been made, the results of this study will be disclosed to all 
concerned primary stakeholders.  
 
-
The stakeholders will then be encouraged to share their concerns, issues, and any 
comments they have on the sub-project or its likely impacts. This will include discussions 
on alternative proposed mitigation measures that are to be accounted for in the sub-
project design, implementation, and operation phases.  
 
-
The final step is to incorporate the stakeholder inputs into the sub-project plans in 
order to improve the sub-project design. The process of stakeholder involvement and 
consultation will continue during sub-project implementation as well in order to integrate 
any additional comments and issues that may arise from the construction and 
implementation phase.  
 
A
formal consultation process took place with a wide array of stakeholders on the 
ESMP and RPF.  These documents were revised to take into account stakeholder 
comments. The revised ESMP and RPF have been disclosed in-country and both 
documents are now accessible on the SFD website at the following link 
http://www.sfdegypt.org/groups_a.asp#6. The ESMP and the RPF have been disclosed in 
the Bank's infoshop.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/11/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/11/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  7
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Eileen Murray 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel P. Owen 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr David J. Steel 
 
Comments:  The project has been transferred to the TTL on November 8, 2006, therefore no 
required signature from the Regional Safeguards Advisor. 
