Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2002
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  El Salvador 
Project ID:  P083833 
Project Name:  Ensuring SME Participation in International Trade 
Task Team Leader:  Pablo Fajnzylber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme:  Export development and competitiveness (P);Small and medium enterprise 
support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
14.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
2.86
2.86 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the competitiveness of 
Salvadoran small and medium enterprises (SMEs) as well as of companies with strategic 
linkages with SMEs, by means of supporting innovation and technology adoption, quality 
enhancements and exports. Thus, the main expected beneficiaries of the project are SMEs 
and their strategic partners. Other beneficiaries include public and private institutions that 
provide technology or quality services to the private sector 
–
ranging from universities 
and public R&D centers to testing laboratories and quality certification consultants – and 
the units within the Ministry of the Economy in charge of implementing the country’s 
policies in the areas of quality and innovation. Indeed, while ESPRIT will focus on co-
financing innovation, quality enhancing and export projects developed by SMEs and 
associated companies, it will also provide complementary support to the expansion of the 
supply of technology and quality services for private firms, and the strengthening of the 
institutions in charge of El Salvador’s technology and quality policies. 
 
The achievement of the PDO will be measured against the following main project 
outcomes: (i) increased innovation and technology adoption by the SMEs and associated 
companies supported by the project; (ii) increased compliance with international quality 
Page  2
standards and regulations by project supported SMEs and their partners; and (iii) 
increased exports and increased sales to large exporters by the SMEs supported by the 
project.  
 
The following are the key performance indicators to assess progress towards the PDO.  
 
(i) 
Number of firms that introduced new products and/or processes through ESPRIT-
supported innovation projects: 50 by the end of the second year and 200 by the end of the 
project.  
 
(ii) 
Number of firms supported by the project that received internationally recognized 
quality certifications: 20 by the end of the second year and 80 by the end of the project.  
 
(iii) 
New exports generated by firms supported by the project: US$ 7 million by the 
end of the second year and US$ 31 million by the end of the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Support for Policies to Enhance Quality and Innovation  
 
This component will assist the GOES in the implementation of a coordinated policy to 
promote quality upgrading, technology adoption and innovation among SMEs and their 
strategic partners.  
 
Component 2: Program to Promote Innovation, Quality and Productive linkages  
 
This component will finance the creation of new co-financing lines under the common 
name FONTEC (Fondo Tecnologico). FONTEC will be composed of three funds targeted 
to the promotion of innovation, quality and productive linkages. FONTEC will support 
local firms in their efforts to innovate through the introduction of new products, services 
or production processes, as well as in their quality upgrading and certification activities, 
and in their efforts to develop stronger productive linkages with other SMEs and/or with 
large firms.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will have a nation wide coverage   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No risks of adverse social impacts were identified and no social safeguards were 
triggered by the project. At the same time, the project does not trigger any environmental 
safeguards and is expected to have a neutral or positive environmental impact.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pablo Fajnzylber 
01/25/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana 
01/25/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan G. Goldmark 
01/25/2006 
Comments:   
