Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2455 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Eritrea 
Project ID: P093387 
Project Name: Eritrea Integrated Rural Development 
Task Team Leader: Kazuki Itaya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 4, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
42.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
In geographic areas targeted under the project, participating households will adopt agricultural 
technologies that achieve higher yields and/or incomes and improve the quality of the soil.  
Improvements in roads, water management, and access to energy will be undertaken to support 
the primary objective of more productive and sustainable agricultural performance   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This project will address the urgent, acute food security issues in Eritrea by building community 
and farm level productive assets for food production, such as water structures, as well as 
addressing needs for farm inputs and local level technical support.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Anseba (Habera, Hamelmalo, Hagaz), Maekel (Gala Nefhi), Debub (Dbarwa, Mendefera, Emni 
Haili, Adi Quala) and Gash Barka (Molki, Shambko).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined.   
Page  2
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
project EA will be prepared for the project activities identified at appraisal. At the same 
time, an ESMF will be prepared to determine environmental safeguard policies that are likely to 
be triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Project may include irrigation and watershed management activities in protected area which 
may impact natural habitat.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
If Watershed management activities in upper catchment trigger forest policy, it will be 
addressed under EA.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Crop and Animal production may include use of chemicals.  Avian Flu prevention activities 
may include use of chemicals.  Here a Pest Management plan will be prepared.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Since small dams and reservoirs are likely to be built, a rapid archaeological survey will be 
conducted.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Where the project asked to finance opening of new lands and resettlement of people on the 
land, all resettlement would have to be undertaken in a manner consistent with the Bank's policy 
on involuntary resettlement. Depending on the selection of sites  
 
for the project, this issue may not be relevant, but it will be addressed fully if needed and 
then the project will prepare  a Resettlement Policy Framework.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Project may finance small earth-dams and watercatchment that seem to be smaller than 15m. 
However, this would need to be verified during the appraisal.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Work in selected water catchments may affect flow into rivers shared with Ethiopia.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
Disputed border zone with Ethiopia is within Zobas to be covered under project.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/29/2007 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
ESMF and RPF (if needed) to be completed by Mid January.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kazuki Itaya 
10/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/12/2006 
Comments:  Social Safeguard Specialist to be selected. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
10/13/2006 
Comments:  approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
