Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2587
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P098093 
Project Name:  Productive Safety Nets APL II 
Task Team Leader:  Trina S. Haque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 9, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (98%);Central government administration (1%);Sub-
national government administration (1%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Vulnerability assessment 
and monitoring (S);Other social development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
175.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
CANADA: CANADIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
(CIDA) 42.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)153.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
86.00 
 
IRELAND, GOV. OF 
6.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
332.50
620.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the overall PSNP series is to contribute to reducing 
household vulnerability and improving resilience to shocks. This will be achieved 
through reform of the humanitarian emergency system to a development-oriented 
program which provides timely, predictable and adequate transfers to beneficiary 
households, thus allowing effective consumption-smoothing and avoiding asset-
depletion; creates productive and sustainable community assets; contributes to large-scale 
rehabilitation of severely degraded areas; stimulates local markets through demand 
linkages; and establishes more effective responses to shocks such as drought to avoid 
increasing destitution among affected households.   The PSNP series include three 
Page  2
phases: Transition Phase (APL 1, 2004-2006); Consolidation Phase (APL II, 2007-2009); 
and Integration Phase (APL III, 2010-2014).  
 
The objective of the proposed PSNP APL II is to continue to improve the efficiency, 
effectiveness and fairness of the program in terms of ensuring (i) timely, well-targeted 
transfers, (ii) the quality and environmental impact of the public works, (iii) the 
complementarity between the PSNP and other food security interventions, (iv) the local 
accountability dimensions of the program, and (v) Ethiopia?s ability to respond to 
drought.   
 
3. Project Description 
APL II will continue implementation of the project components approved as part of APL 
I, as well as the various modifications planned or underway to further strengthen core 
program implementation. APL I comprised two components, Safety Net Grants for 
activities including public works and direct support and Institutional Support activities, 
focused on capacity building and M&E. APL II will continue support to these two 
components as well as include additional activities to support Integrated Risk Financing 
as described below.  
 
Component 1: Safety Net Activities  
 
(i) 
Labor-intensive public works (PW) will provide grants to households whose 
adults participate in public works sub-projects. Sub-projects to be undertaken are 
determined locally by the beneficiary communities through an annual, participatory 
planning process that focuses on integrated watershed management. Since the most 
appropriate time for undertaking public works is during the dry season, which occurs in 
general between January and June in Ethiopia, most public works and payment will be 
scheduled during this period. This timing is also beneficial to households by ensuring that 
the bulk of transfers are provided to them before the ?hungry? season starts (around 
June). The timing of PW aims for households to have the resources available when they 
are needed, as well as works to be undertaken at the most appropriate time in terms of 
weather conditions and when labor demand from alternative agricultural activities is at its 
lowest.    A major focus of APL II will be on improving the quality and environmental 
impact of the public works activities.  
 
(ii) 
Direct support (DS) will provide grants to households who are labor-poor and 
cannot undertake public works. Beneficiaries will include, but are not limited to, orphans, 
pregnant and lactating mothers, elderly households, other labor-poor, high risk 
households with sick individuals (such as people living with HIV/AIDS), and the 
majority of female-headed households with young children. During an interim period, 
payments to the chronically food insecure in pastoralist regions may also be made via 
Direct Support while appropriate safety net activities for these areas are being designed 
and piloted.  
 
Component 2: Drought Risk Financing  
 
While Component 1 focuses on the chronically food insecure, Component 2 seeks to 
provide timely resources for transient food insecure households in response to shocks. 
This component is seen as central to the sustainability of the overall PSNP by providing 
Page  3
early response financing which can more effectively prevent household asset depletion 
and increased levels of destitution. It consists of a contingent grant to provide financing 
for scaling-up activities under Component 1 in response to localized or intermediate 
drought events. Its use will be guided by the Livelihood Protection Cost Index ? a 
rainfall-based index utilizing 30 years of rainfall data in Ethiopia ? developed and 
successfully piloted by the Government and WFP in Ethiopia in 2005/2006. Should the 
index be triggered, this will result in a payout or disbursement to Government up to a 
specified limit; i.e., the more severe the event as defined by the index, the higher the level 
of payout. Different index triggers and limits will be defined for the contingent grant 
financing and for the index insurance so that under a given drought scenario the 
appropriate levels of resources will be triggered.  This grant will be part of a coordinated 
portfolio of financing instruments supported by other development partners that will 
improve the predictability of resource availability.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Support.  
 
This component will strengthen all aspects of program implementation, including:  
 
Capacity building at community level to strengthen beneficiary identification and local 
level planning; at woreda and regional to improve financial management and 
procurement capacity, and at all levels to improve technical supervision of public works.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation by focusing on the implementation of the monitoring 
framework designed under APL I and additional instruments such as the Rapid Response 
Mechanism and Information Centre that are critical to ensuring smooth program 
implementation.  It will also focus on improving monitoring of public works through the 
scaling up of the annual Public Works Review. It will finance the impact evaluation 
survey that will follow the baseline survey implemented under APL I, social assessment 
to ensure proper treatment of social factors that affect the implementation, quality, 
effectiveness and impact of safety net activities, and beneficiary assessments to assess 
beneficiary satisfaction with safety net interventions. Strategic training activities to 
further strengthen capacity for monitoring, evaluation, and reporting will be implemented 
at all levels.  
 
Transparency and accountability measures that will ensure widespread understanding of 
program objectives, procedures, and implementation progress among key stakeholders, 
both domestic and international. This will include development of material on program 
objectives and procedures suitable for communication at community levels, conduct of a 
citizen?s report card, publication of critical program information at federal level through 
various media, etc.  
 
The Institutional Support component will also finance several studies and pilots that 
have been included as triggers for APL III. These will define the supporting interventions 
necessary to promote graduation and determine how they should be appropriately 
integrated with the PSNP.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Public works activities will be carried out in rural areas in some 234  woredas throughout 
Ethiopia, selected on specific criteria outlined in the Government?s Program 
Implementation Manual.  
Page  4
In cropping areas, the public works are expected to be within 5 kilometres of the homes 
of the intended beneficiaries, or less in areas of steep or difficult terrain.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Due to the small size of the individual public works, no large-scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts are expected. Nonetheless, due to the large number of public works, 
it is important that they follow good environmental practice.  
 
As indicated in the Table above, the Environmental Assessment policy, Pest 
Management policy and Projects on International Waterways policy are the key 
applicable policies.  
 
It may be noted that the PSNP public works program will not involve any resettlement 
or involuntary loss of assets or access to assets. Such projects are not permitted under the 
PSNP. Thus the Involuntary Resettlement policy is not triggered. Any areas to be closed 
to facilitate environmental rehabilitation will be identified and voluntarily agreed by the 
communities concerned; access to forest resources will continue to be permitted by 
agreement of the community.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Future activities in the project areas are expected to consist of further watershed 
development interventions, and improved farming and land-use management systems, 
under the community watershed development approach approved by the government of 
Ethiopia. These are expected to make further contributions to positive environmental 
transformation, which is one of the objectives of the PSNP.   
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are no project alternatives that would help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. The 
proposed public works are themselves intended to have positive environmental impacts; 
the planned measures are aimed at ensuring that good environmental practices are 
followed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental assessment and 
management framework in Ethiopia:  
 
-The Proclamation on the Establishment of Environmental Protection Organs (No. 
295/2002) assigns organizational responsibilities for environmental management 
activities as well as environmental protection regulations and monitoring. It gives the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) the legal powers to ensure enforcement and 
compliance with environmental laws and standards and differentiates the responsibilities 
among the environmental agencies at federal and regional level.  
 
-The Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No. 299/2002). Article 5: 
Project Requiring Environmental Impact Assessment of the Proclamation states that: 
"Every project which falls in any category listed in any directive issues pursuant to this 
Proclamation shall be subject to environmental impact assessment"; it also states that 
programmes and policies with potential impacts shall be subject to the provisions of the 
proclamation.  
 
-The Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002). This law 
recognizes the fact that some social and economic development endeavours may inflict 
environmental harm that could make the endeavours counter productive. To this end, it 
aims to eliminate or, when not possible, to mitigate pollution as an undesired 
consequence of development activities.  
 
Despite the satisfactory legislation and procedures designed, and training given, it was 
noted during the recent APL I Public Works review that not all projects were being 
screened as required by the ESMF. It was also noted that monitoring of ESMF 
implementation had not yet been instituted by woreda or Regional authorities.  
 
In response, the following measures are being taken for APL II:  
 
(a) 
The provisions for ensuring and monitoring implementation of the ESMF will be 
re-designed to place full responsibility with newly-created Regional Public Works Focal 
Units (RPWFU), taking into account existing capacities and any capacity-building 
requirements.  
 
Page  6
(b) 
The RPWFUs will be provided with Management technical assistance (TA) as 
required in order to ensure that they are able to fulfill the responsibilities required of 
them, including ensuring implementation of the ESMF.  
 
(c) 
Staff of the Regional Environmental Protection Authorities, who have a key role 
in the ESMF procedure, and the woreda Environmental Focal Persons, will participate in 
the awareness-creation and training courses for the PSNP Public Works, which includes 
ESMF II training; This training will be provided by teams drawn from MoARD at 
Federal and Regional level, with technical assistance from the Natural Resources 
Management personnel of MoARD and WFP.  
 
(d) 
Monitoring of ESMF implementation is being incorporated in the regular internal 
M&E system and in independent Public Works reviews.  
 
It is considered that with revised roles and responsibilities, and supported by awareness-
creation and training in ESMF implementation and monitoring, the woreda technical staff 
will have the capacity to undertake the basic environmental screening required by the 
ESMF for individual sub-projects. Since it is not intended that the PSNP will include 
public works necessitating a separate EIA, it is considered that with adequate awareness-
creation and training, the Regional Environmental Protection Authorities have sufficient 
capacity to review and determine, in the exceptional cases that may arise, where an EIA 
may be required, and to make arrangements for such an EIAs if necessary. Such an EIA 
would be conducted using wereda staff with support from BoARD, MoARD and other 
stakeholders as required.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the beneficiaries of the PSNP, as well as those involved in the 
implementation of the programme. The provisions of the ESMF, including potential 
environmental impacts and related mitigating measures, are incorporated into the training 
materials being used for woreda and kebele levels, which reach over 1 million beneficiary 
households. They are consistent with the Community-based Participatory Watershed 
Development guidelines developed over many years of participatory watershed 
management processes by government and NGOs in Ethiopia, and which have been 
adopted by kebeles and communities throughout Ethiopia. 
 
The Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP) includes a community Public Works 
(PW) component, aimed at developing productive and sustainable community assets and 
infrastructure in areas of chronic food shortage. These PW, which are derived from a 
community watershed development planning process, are intended to make a major 
contribution towards environmental transformation, and consequently improved 
agricultural productivity and more sustainable livelihoods. Such changes, in conjunction 
with other interventions, are expected to support eventual graduation from poverty of the 
beneficiary households.  
 
Page  7
Many PW are intended to enhance the environment and increase the productive capacity 
of the natural resource base. However, a large proportion of past mass-mobilisation 
efforts towards environmental rehabilitation in Ethiopia have failed or have been 
abandoned, as a result of which the environment has returned to its degraded state, and 
some projects designed to protect or enhance the natural resource base have ended up 
doing the opposite. Thus such projects have the potential for adverse environmental 
impacts on human populations or the biophysical environment, if their location or design 
does not follow good environmental practice.  
 
The instrument commonly employed to ensure that projects are designed to avoid or 
minimize negative environmental impacts in Ethiopia is Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA).  The EIA requirements of both the Government of Ethiopian and the 
PSNP donors are addressed through an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/15/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/15/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Page  8
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Trina S. Haque 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
 
Comments:   
