Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC628
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P079275 
Project Name:  Rural Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader:  David J. Nielson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (80%);Vocational training (20%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
54.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
CANADA: CANADIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
(CIDA) 17.00
17.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed Rural Capacity Building Project (RCBP) is to 
assist the Ethiopian Government to strengthen the agricultural technology system, make it 
more responsive to clients' needs, and enhance the capacity ofproducers to select 
economically viable technologies and practices. This would be achieved through: (i) 
modernized TVET colleges which are more responsive to the changing needs of a 
demand-driven and market-driven agricultural sector; (ii) piloting new initiatives in the 
agricultural advisory service system to introduce demand-driven and participatory 
mechanisms; (iii) a strengthened agricultural research system with improved institutional 
and human capacity to generate and disseminate client-demanded and market-oriented 
technologies.  
 
Key Performance Indicators  
 
%
of clients who state to have gained useful knowledge or other long-lasting benefits 
due to provision of research and/or advisory services;  
 
Number/% of TVET graduates who found employment in private sector, NGOs, or 
launched own business;  
Page  2
%
of client satisfaction with professional qualifications of staff recruited from TVETs;  
 
%
of
farm household income increased due to adoption of technologies and practices 
attributable to project intervention in targeted Woredas;  
 
Number of research projects in identified priority areas conducted in collaboration with 
national research institutes, NGOs, private sectors, and IARCs.  
 
The proposed project would support several goals of the interim CAS of enhancing pro-
poor growth through private sector development (particularly in agriculture); enhancing 
human development outcomes by improving governance through decentralization of 
public services; increasing agricultural productivity, and reducing vulnerability.  It would 
contribute directly toward achieving pro-poor growth by improving the profitability of 
small farms and related agri-business firms.  It would support generation of agricultural 
technology needed for accelerated productivity growth. Finally it would enhance human 
development outcomes by building human capital in the agricultural sector, both in the 
public and private sectors.  This would be done in several ways.  In agricultural 
extension, The goal of the Agricultural Extension Component would be to improve the 
effectiveness of this agricultural extension program as it scales up, particularly with 
regard to its capacity to respond to the expressed needs of farmers (especially market-
oriented farmers) to enhance women???s participation and GE mainstreaming in all 
aspects of the extension system and to support the emergence of non-public sector 
agricultural services as an additional feature of extension services in Ethiopia. First, the 
project would provide vocational training for people intending to work as professionals in 
the agricultural service programs or in agri-business.Secondly, it would provide 
vocational training for people intending to farm. Thirdly, the project would continue 
support for advanced training programs for agricultural scientists and educators, started 
under the ongoing ARTP. The project would also further decentralize agricultural 
training and farm advisory services to regional and local levels, thus making them more 
responsive to farmers' needs.The project would also help to reduce the vulnerability of 
the rural poor by providing them information about new technologies and techniques with 
which to reduce variability in income, while at the same time helping them to increase the 
average levels of their farm income.  
 
The objectives and interventions of the project are critical to achieving the broader aims 
of the PASDEP.  Neither the design of the interventions, however, nor their 
implementation is straightforward, since these objectives have been part of Ethiopia's 
development agenda for the last two decades and improvement has been slow.  The 
proposed project will strengthen the base of human capital and service provision needed 
for rural growth and will do so with local governments and rural communities as full 
partners in the process.  The project will also assist in exploring options for the process of 
reorientation of the extension service presently under way.  Each of these elements of the 
project is important in achieving core goals of the interim CAS.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Capacity Building for Agriculture Technical and Vocational Education 
Training (TVET) (US$ 6.3 million)  
 
Page  3
The TVETs play a central role in human resources development for middle level 
professionals in the extension system and in the future, the government anticipates that 
TVETs will increasingly serve the needs for vocational education of the private sector. 
The Agriculture TVET Capacity Building component will expand and deepen the 
program for agriculture TVET colleges. It will assist the agriculture TVET colleges to 
implement the government's longer term plan for these colleges to serve the changing 
needs of an increasingly market- and private sector driven sector, by addressing the needs 
for training of future entrants into commercial farming, agribusinesses and rural NGOs. 
RCBP would finance:  (1) development of a strategic plan for the future of the 
AgTVETs; (2) strengthening the capacity of those AgTVETs chosen to continue 
providing training for DAs in terms of equipment, curriculum development and training; 
and (3) for the remaining AgTVETs, support their transformation into training 
institutions with new mandates, through strategic planning, equipment or facility 
development, curriculum development and training.  
 
Component 2: Agricultural Extension Component (US$ 29.0 million)  
 
The goal of the agricultural extension component would be to improve effectiveness of 
the agricultural extension program to better respond to the needs of all farmers and 
especially emerging market-oriented farmers.  This would be achieved by providing 
support for:(i) measures to maintain and improve the technical backstopping capacity for 
Development Agents (DAs), as the government completes and consolidates the 
expansion of the current program;(ii) building in a cost-effective and sustainable way, the 
capacity of about 20 percent of the Farmer Training Centers (FTCs) to enable them to 
become operational in meeting the needs of farmers for information and training;(iii) 
activities designed to develop experience on a limited scale with new institutional 
innovations and operational systems featuring greater decentralization, more participation 
by farmers in financing, planning and evaluation; increased pluralism in service delivery, 
and enhanced responsiveness to demands emanating from local conditions and markets; 
and (iv)capacity building for results-based M&E and impact assessment of agricultural 
advisory services.  It is expected that these latter activities would influence the future 
evolution of the institutional framework for the overall program.  Building on the existing 
capacities, which differ between regions and even within regions, and on a range of 
approaches that are successfully employed in various places in Ethiopia, this component 
would: (a) enhance the ability of the agricultural advisory system to operate in a demand-
driven and accountable way that satisfies men and women subsistence as well as 
commercial farmers' needs for information, advice, linkages, training and other services, 
and (b) support the development of approaches for achieving a sustainable and cost-
effective system. Accordingly, the Agricultural Advisory Services Component would 
have four sub-components: (i) Technical Support for DAs; (ii) Capacity Building for 
FTCs, (iii) Institutional Innovation in Agricultural Advisory Services and (iv) Capacity 
Building for Results-Based M&E and Impact Assessment of Agricultural Advisory 
Services.  
 
Component 3: Agricultural Research (US$ 22.3 million)  
 
Page  4
The core objective of RCBP agricultural research support would be to facilitate National 
Agricultural Research System institutional strengthening by enhancing participation of 
stakeholders in priority setting, resource allocation, implementation and where possible 
funding, and provide for HRD, technical assistance (TA), infrastructure, equipment, etc. 
to re-enforce NARS capacity to generate and disseminate client-demanded and market-
oriented technologies.  
 
Component 4: Improving Information and Communication Systems in MoARD (US$ 
3.0 million)  
 
The forth component would strengthen MoARD's capacity to coordinate, monitor and 
evaluate initiatives in the agricultural sector by building ICT capacity at federal, regional, 
woreda and FTC levels. RCBP would assist MoARD in developing a system for 
collecting and analyzing data from the FTC level and provide the necessary ICT 
equipment, networking services, and training for its implementation.  
 
Component 5:  Development of Agricultural Market Institutions  (US$ 7.0 Million)  
 
RCBP would support analytical work geared toward understanding and developing 
practical solutions to addressing constraints in the agricultural marketing system through 
support to policy assessment and lesson learning and implementation support to 
developing a commodity exchange. The component would also assist the Government to 
enhance product quality and manage food safety and agricultural health risks through the 
provision of training and equipment to support quality control and quarantine activities 
within MoARD.  
 
Component 6: Project Management(US$ 3.4 million)  
 
This component would support the establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) 
under the direction of Federal and Regional Steering Committees.  The PMU would be 
established at the federal level and Focal Persons would be hired to coordinate 
implementation of RCBP activities at Regional and Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural 
Research (EIAR) levels. Institutionally, the PMU would be situated within the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Development (MoARD) and report to the State Minister.  The 
PMU would be responsible for the overall management of the RCBP including the 
planning, budgeting, financial management, environmental management, reporting, 
procurement, communication, monitoring and evaluation, and interaction with IDA and 
CIDA. To effectively deliver these responsibilities, the PMU would be staffed by 
competent professionals hired on competitive basis from the market. Staff would be 
located at the federal level as well as at the regional level.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will operate through FTCs in selected woredas (currently it is estimated that 
about 20% of the woredas in each of the four main regions will be targeted), through 
Page  5
TVET colleges in each of the four main Regions, and through agricultural research 
facilities nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is likely to incur minor environmental and social impacts such as soil 
erosion, soil and water pollution, loss of vegetation and air pollution.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is not expected to have potential indirect and/or long term impacts as the 
construction and rehabilitation activities will be handled in an environmentally and 
socially sustainable manner.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
discussion of alternatives was not relevant as most facilities already exist.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address potential negative environmental and social impacts, the Government of 
Ethiopia has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  Both documents have been disclosed in 
Ethiopia as of February 23rd, 2004.  The Bank also disclosed the documents at the 
Infoshop on February 23, 2004.  
 
Page  6
The ESMF outlines the environmental and social screening processes to be applied prior 
to the rehabilitation and construction of facilities.  The RPF outlines the policies and 
procedures to be followed in the event that Project activities involve land acquisition 
leading to the loss of livelihoods  and/or economic assets.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in this project are the Regional and Local 
administrations/governments, the TVET Colleges, Research Centers, and FTC's and their 
participating farmer groups.  The project will assist the TVET colleges, FTCs and 
farmers to use rapid rural appraisal/participatory techniques to consult with local 
communities affected by project activities. These consultations will ensure project 
outcomes are participatory and socially inclusive. The stakeholders will be consulted in 
the context of the environmental and social screening process.  
 
Also, during project preparation, consultation with the Regional and Local 
administrations/governments, the TVET Colleges, and the FTC's and Farmer's 
representatives was an on-going process.  As the project is implemented, consultations 
will gather increased momentum, and project success will depend on close and effective 
collaboration and participation of local farmers and their regional/local administration 
with their FTCs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/23/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/23/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2004 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David J. Nielson 
06/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
06/12/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
06/12/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Robert Townsend 
06/12/2006 
Comments:   
