Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2797
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P092353 
Project Name:  Irrigation and Drainage Project 
Task Team Leader:  IJsbrand Harko de Jong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 19, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (80%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
95.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Irrigation and Drainage (I&D) project constitutes a key element of the 
Bank's strategy in Ethiopia, and will contribute to achieving priority objectives of the 
Government of Ethiopia and World Bank through increasing agricultural productivity, 
the fourth thematic pillar of the ICAS, and hence accelerating growth and reducing rural 
poverty. More reliable access to water through investment in water management is a 
fundamental requirement for the commercialization of agriculture. Returns to the use of 
productivity enhancing inputs (fertilizer, improved seeds, etc.) rise as supply of water 
becomes more reliable. Moreover, farmers can move into higher valued products, through 
satisfying the requirements of markets, and capturing high seasonal prices. Through 
intensification and transformation of agricultural production systems, the project aims to 
support more inclusive growth that translates into rural poverty reduction.  
 
The project also aims to support the Nile Basin Initiative and contribute to improved 
cooperation between Nile riparian countries. Investments under the project will show the 
tangible benefits that accrue to the improved understanding on the part of the Nile 
riparians. All parties benefit from continued commitment to the agreements reached 
under the NBI, and the project contributes to sustaining that momentum.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Lending Instrument  
 
The proposed lending instrument for this operation would be a Specific Investment 
Loan (SIL). The implementation period would be eight years (FY08-FY15), thereby 
providing the GoE with the time necessary to implement the construction and 
institutional strengthening agenda. The project duration is longer than a conventional 
operation because of the significant capacity and institutional challenges associated with 
ensuring the sustainability of the investments. Because of the duration of the project, 
clear benchmarks for progress in implementation are defined and will be assessed during 
implementation, with corrections in course undertaken as necessary.  
 
Total Project cost is estimated at US$ 98.0 million, of which US $95.0 million will be 
financed by IDA. A total of US $3.0 million will be financed by beneficiaries.  
 
Project Development Objectives and Key Indicators  
 
The development objective of the project is to sustainably increase agricultural output 
and productivity in project areas. The expected overall project results include: (i) increase 
in value added per worker, and (ii) increase in value added per hectare.  
 
Project Components  
 
The proposed project comprises three technical components: (i) Irrigation Development, 
(ii) Agricultural and Market Development, and (iii) Irrigation Management. The fourth 
component is Program Management. The project will support the Lake Tana growth pole 
and will closely work together with other operations such as the Tana Beles project 
(under preparation) and the Rural Capacity Building Project.  
 
Component 1: Irrigation Development  
 
The objective of this component is to sustainably develop about 20,000 ha of ground 
and surface water infrastructure and ascertain future irrigation potential in 80,000 ha. The 
component will directly benefit participating households, expected to number 
approximately 20,000.  
 
The component will finalize feasibility and detailed design studies, prepare bidding 
documents and launch tenders for construction and construction supervision, and develop 
irrigation infrastructure covering about 20,000 hectares. The component will also conduct 
feasibility studies into 80,000 hectares of irrigated agriculture and will conduct a number 
of additional studies. Finally, the component will promote low-cost irrigation 
technologies in low-lying areas around Lake Tana. Specifically, the project will finance 
the following sub-components:  
 
(i) 
Sub-component 1.1 - Irrigation Investments. Development of about 20,000 
hectares of irrigation and appurtenant infrastructure, including completion of technical 
Page  3
feasibility and detailed design studies, implementation of works, and construction 
supervision. Two sites have been retained for development : Megech and Ribb. The 
component will also promote existing low-cost individual irrigation technologies, and 
will pilot groundwater development around lake Tana. All studies, construction and 
construction supervision will be outsourced to the private sector. Beneficiaries will be 
expected to contribute to overall investment costs.  
 
(ii) 
Sub-component 1.2 - Technical Assistance. The project will prepare feasibility 
studies for up to 80,000 hectares of new irrigation development in selected sites, 
including Anger, Upper Beles, Negesso and Megech. Anger will be taken up to design 
level, if the feasibility study confirms its viability. A number of additional studies will be 
conducted, including appropriate irrigation legislation, support for the completion of an 
irrigation strategy and establishment of a national irrigation maintenance fund for the 
maintenance of public irrigation infrastructure.  
 
(iii) 
Sub-component 1.3 - Environmental and Social Assessments. The project will 
provide support to the GoE in conducting environmental and social assessments of 
investments in hydraulic infrastructure to help ensure that these meet internationally 
accepted standards. The assistance will not be limited to infrastructure immediately 
associated with the project, but will be extended to other hydraulic infrastructure, 
including proposed storage works on the Gumara, Megech and other rivers in the lake 
Tana sub-basin. The component will also finance implementation of the 
recommendations of the assessments in the project area.  
 
Component 2: Agricultural and Market Development  
 
The objective of this component is to promote sustainable intensification and 
commercialization of agriculture on the irrigation schemes developed by the project. The 
component will provide resources to assure the delivery of adaptive research and 
development (R&D) on improved production systems and technologies, the delivery of 
agricultural advisory services including increased pluralism in service, the strengthening 
of research-extension-farmer linkages, and the improvement of market linkages within 
the project's target Woredas (districts) and Kebeles (sub-districts). Activities under this 
component will be implemented by the regional agricultural bureau and complement the 
interventions of the Rural Capacity Building Project (RCBP) in the project's areas.  
 
Sub-components and activities to be funded are the following:  
 
(i) 
Sub-component 2.1 - capacity-building for farmers in irrigated production through 
the delivery of adaptive R&D and farm management tools that will enable them to take 
full advantage of irrigation infrastructure and technologies;  
 
(ii) 
Sub-component 2.2 - capacity-building for applied research and extension 
services to improve the delivery of relevant agricultural and farm management advice; 
and  
 
Page  4
(iii) 
Sub-component 2.3 - market and value chain development, as well as a matching 
grant mechanism, to help commercial entities (SME/SMIs, including farmer owned 
entities) take advantage of market opportunities and develop value chains.  
 
Component 3: Irrigation Management  
 
The objective of this component is to enhance the efficiency and the financial 
sustainability of irrigation infrastructure intended for implementation and future study. 
This will be accomplished in two ways: (i) strengthening the capacity of water user 
associations to enhance their constituency base and to carry out necessary O&M and cost 
recovery functions; and (ii) promoting and implementing a greater role for public-private 
partnerships in irrigation infrastructure management in order to improve efficiency and 
operational performance.  
 
The component includes the following sub-components:  
 
(i) 
Sub-component 3.1 - Developing and Strengthening Capacity of Water User 
Associations: this will include (a) implementation of an intensive program of stakeholder 
consultations and dissemination of information to farmers; (b) establishment of legally 
recognized water user groups, (c) implementation of demand-based approaches to system 
planning and design for Ribb and Megech schemes; and (d) strengthening capacities of 
farmers, WUAs and regional and national irrigation extension staff. The costs of this sub-
component will include a provision for the shortfall in O&M cost recovery from water 
users during the initial years of scheme operations, and the O&M costs of primary public 
irrigation infrastructure.  
 
(ii) 
Sub-component 3.2 - Promoting the Role of Private Operators in Irrigation 
Infrastructure Planning and Operation: this will include advisory and transaction TA to 
implement the Ribb and Megech transaction models, and identification of other possible 
opportunities within the remaining 80,000 hectares of feasibility study. The sub-
component will assess risks associated with each scheme, consult with Government and 
farmer groups on risk allocation, communicate with stakeholder groups, develop legal 
agreements and bid documents, launch a search program for both foreign and local 
bidders, and manage the bid and contract negotiations.  
 
Component 4: Program Management  
 
The objective of this component is to manage resources in accordance with the project?s 
objectives and procedures. It will finance the following sub-components:  
 
(i) 
Sub-component 4.1 - Management of the Project, including: (a) provision of 
technical assistance, training, office equipment and vehicles, minor office upgrading 
works, auditing and evaluation studies, and incremental operating costs in support of 
project management; (b) overall project planning, outsourcing of quality oversight 
through independent financial and technical audits and evaluation of project activities; 
and (c) strengthening procurement and financial management capacity at all levels.  
Page  5
(ii) 
Sub-component 4.2 - Establish a Monitoring and Evaluation system. Determine 
project specific performance based MIS system, based on baseline survey arrange for 
data collection and reporting on key performance output and impact indicators, through 
surveys, participatory assessments and mid-term and final evaluations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented on sites on the north and east side of Lake Tana, 
Megech and Ribb respectively.  Feasibility studies on up to an additional 80,000 ha will 
be conducted in Megech, Upper Beles and Anger.  Adjacent to, and within, the command 
areas are important habitats that will be sensitive to irrigation developments.  
Resettlement within the command areas, and, for Ribb, into the command area from the 
new Ribb reservoir financed by the GoE, will be necessary to realize irrigation benefits.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The principal environmental sensitivities associated with the proposed irrigation 
developments are aquatic habitats in project rivers and Lake Tana, and wetlands along the 
lakeshore and within the command areas.  These habitats provide important spawning 
and nursery areas for economically important fish species well up into the drainages, and 
vital habitat for vulnerable and threatened bird species.  Changes in river flows and 
annual flooding due to water storage and withdrawals, as well as land conversion, can put 
these habitats and species at significant risk.  As well, water-borne diseases, especially 
malaria, are environmental health threats in the area that may be exacerbated by irrigation 
development.  Potential water quality impacts from the use of agricultural chemicals are 
also a concern.  The principal social issues are associated with resettlement of people to 
Page  6
and within command areas as a consequence of reservoir flooding, plus land restructuring 
and consolidation, to realize irrigation benefits. Relocation, adapting to new agricultural 
production systems, and developing new community structures will be quite stressful for 
the people involved, and will take some time and careful support to be completed 
successfully.  All the above concerns can be adequately addressed through the planned 
environmental and social assessments, and consequent management/resettlement plans.  
The Lake Tana area is rich in cultural heritage; sensitive sites will be identified during the 
EAs and impact mitigation, if necessary, included in the EMPs.  Though the presence of 
indigenous peoples is not expected, this will be checked during the planned social 
assessments.  Large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are not expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The GoE-financed Ribb Dam is one of five dams being planned by MoWR on rivers 
draining into Lake Tana, and irrigation developments in addition to Megech and Ribb are 
also being planned.  Cumulatively, these developments may well have significant adverse 
biodiversity and social impacts in the basin.  Consequently, to guide the sustainable 
development of the Lake Tana basin, a strategic environmental and social assessment 
(SESA) is planned during preparation of the Tana Beles Integrated Water Resources 
Development Project by the World Bank.  As well, the I&D project will provide support 
to the GoE in conducting environmental and social assessments of investments in 
hydraulic infrastructure to help ensure that these meet internationally accepted standards. 
The assistance will not be limited to infrastructure immediately associated with the I&D 
project, but will be extended to other hydraulic infrastructure, including proposed storage 
works on the Gumara, Megech and other rivers in the Lake Tana sub-basin.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Final selection of the Megech and Ribb project sites was the result of an analysis of the 
comparative economic, environmental and social benefits and costs of a number of site 
alternatives proposed by the GoE.  Design of the two irrigation schemes during project 
implementation will involve the consideration of a number of alternate infrastructure 
layouts (pumps, canals, roads, etc.) to deliver irrigation benefits while minimizing 
environmental and social impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Substantial infrastructure works such as access roads, drainage and irrigation canals, and 
pumping stations are expected which will entail the acquisition of individual, communal 
or/and public lands, and the possibility of adverse environmental impacts.  Detailed 
information about the nature, location and operation of the works, and their potential 
impacts, will only become available during project implementation.  Hence, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed on February 21, 2007 to establish the 
basis for subsequent preparation, review and approval of EAs and RAPs.  
 
Page  7
Both the responsible federal and regional authorities have inadequate capacity to 
thoroughly address safeguards concerns during the preparation and implementation of the 
irrigation schemes.  Thus, the I&D project will finance technical assistance to support the 
development of TORs for EAs and RAPs, the review and approval of documents, and the 
implementation of EMPs and RAPs.  
 
The Ribb scheme will be dependent on water supplied from an upstream dam being 
financed by the GoE.  Feasibility and design studies commissioned by the GoE are 
scheduled for completion in April 2007.  A Dam Safety Review is being commissioned 
with I&D project preparation funds to ensure the Ribb Dam is planned and designed to 
meet the standards expected under OP 4.37.  Preparation of an Emergency Preparedness 
Plan (EPP) and arrangements for public awareness and training will also be outlined in 
the review.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Borrower's feasibility studies are expected to be launched by February 2007 and 
completed by September 2007.  These studies will involve substantial consultations with 
project beneficiaries and other affected people.  The ESMF and RPF specify further 
consultations, as needed, in the preparation, disclosure and approval of EA studies and 
RAPs.  EAs and RAPs will need Bank approval before finalization of detailed designs 
and construction bid documents.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/22/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  9
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr IJsbrand Harko de Jong 
03/29/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
03/29/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
03/29/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
03/29/2007 
Comments:   
