Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2456 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/18/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P101473 
Project Name: Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Robert J. Roche 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (85%);Sanitation (15%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
10.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives are to:  
 
.
Reduce the supply-demand gap for potable water in selected urban areas in Ethiopia;  
 
.
Improve access to improved sanitation in selected urban areas of Ethiopia; and  
 
.
Improve the performance of selected urban water and sewer utilities.  
 
As a result of the proposed project, urban residents in the cities where the project is 
implemented will have increased access to potable water and improved sanitation facilities.  In 
these urban areas, the hours of water availability will be increased for those already using piped 
water and, in addition, the water networks will be expanded to provide more people with piped 
supply.  
 
The project will also increase access to improved sanitation facilities, mainly for low income 
urban residents.  In low income areas, the project will also provide improved drainage and 
reduce un-controlled and unhealthy sewage flows.  
Page  2
The project will also undertake legal, institutional and sector reforms that will permit selected 
urban water and sewer utilities to function in a more efficient manner, to deliver better service 
and achieve a higher degree of financial sustainability.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The following approaches are under consideration for the project:  
 
i.  A stand alone urban water supply and sanitation project for Addis Ababa only;  
 
ii.  A stand alone urban water supply and sanitation project for Addis Ababa plus two or three 
additional urban cities; or  
 
iii.  Including a water component in a larger national urban development project.  
 
Of the above, a stand alone water project for Addis Ababa plus two or three additional cities is 
favored.  A stand alone water project would permit more resources to be dedicated to the urban 
water and sanitation sector and could be prepared quickly. Targeting up to four cities plus Addis 
Ababa will help to address the urgent needs in the sector nationally, while at the same time not 
increasing project implementation requirements beyond IDA?s ability to ensure implementation 
quality.  
 
A
sector investment loan is proposed, with a grant of between US$5 and US$10 million from 
the Global Partnership for Output Based Aid.  Given the large public good elements of improved 
sewerage and drainage, these components of the project could be structured as a grant?if IDA 
grant resources are available.  In addition co- or parallel financing is being sought for the project. 
An Adaptable Program Loan instrument is not proposed because of the uncertainty in the long 
term institutional arrangements in Addis Ababa and the scope and timing of system expansion 
there.  
 
For each selected city, there will likely be four project components plus an unallocated amount.  
 
These, and indicative percentages of the total investment, are shown in the following table.  
 
Component  (% of Total)  
 
1.
Rehabilitation of existing infrastructure & promoting demand management - 30%  
 
2.
Increasing water supply & sanitation infrastructure - 60%  
 
3.
Sector Reform - 3%  
 
4.
Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation, Environmental & Social Management - 3%  
 
5.
Unallocated - 4%  
 
Component 1, Rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and promoting demand management, 
would provide for the restoration of existing water supply and sewer treatment plants to installed 
capacity, repair and/or replacement of existing water supply networks, bulk and other meters, 
financial and customer management, demand management initiatives and measures, and light 
vehicles. The related costs of engineering work are also included in this component.  
 
Page  3
Component 2, Increasing water supply and sanitation, would likely include investments to 
provide for expanded capacity at existing water reservoir and water and wastewater treatment 
plants or through new installations, and to extend piped water and sewer networks in urban areas. 
Special attention would be given to low-income areas including community participation and 
labor intensive works. It would also include the provision of heavy rolling stock, tools and 
complimentary engineering consultancies.  
 
Component 3, Sector Reform, includes support for sector policy revisions and development, 
work on the legal and institutional framework for water supply and sanitation, developing polices 
and measures for enhanced private sector participation and financing in this sector, and 
improving utility governance and efficiency.  Stakeholder consultation measures are also 
included in this component.  
 
Component 4, Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation, would provide for costs 
associated with project implementation, to synthesize existing water and sanitation access data to 
determine baseline figures and to monitor progress under this project and in meeting the overall 
water supply and improved sanitation access goals under the MDGs.  This component also 
includes training, workshops and other capacity building measures and support for 
environmental and social management.  
 
The total project size would be about US$120 million, and considering its size versus other 
cities, Addis Ababa will likely receive about 65 percent of the investment.  However, the task 
team will ask for guidance on how large the project should be.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in urban areas, namely, Addis Ababa plus 2-3 other cities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capactiy for the implementation of the Bank's safeguard policies is 
currently limited. Therefore, the proposed project will support measures that will strengthen the 
Borrower's capacity to identify and assess potential adverse environmental and social impacts 
and to implement and monitor appropriate mitigation measures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Mr Frederic Giovannetti (AFTU1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered by the proposed project due to its planned rehabilitation and 
construction activities under components 1 & 2. In the event that future investment locations 
cannot be determined prior to appraisal, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework. In cases where the investment sites have been identified prior to 
appraisal, the Borrower will carry out separate Environmental Impact Assessments. Both types 
of documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
OP 4.12 is triggered by the proposed project due to its planned rehabilitation and 
construction activities under components 1 & 2. In the event that future investment locations 
cannot be determined prior to appraisal, the Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF). In cases where the investment sites have been identified prior to appraisal, the 
Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Both types of documents will be 
disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
OP 4.37 is triggered because the proposed project will depend on a dam for its water supply. 
Under the proposed project, the Addis Ababa Water Utility intends to increase the maximum 
operating level of the dam that currently supplies water to Addis Ababa. To ensure that the dam 
is technically and environmentally sound, the Borrower will carry out a Dam Safety Analysis.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
OP 7.50 is triggered because the proposed project will finance water works that will increase 
the supply of surface and ground water to Addis Ababa and several other smaller cities. 
Therefore, Ethiopia's riparians will be notified as required with this operational policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/14/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Dam Safety Analysis: Preparation to commence Oct/Nov 2006  
 
ESMF & RPF: Preparation to commence Oct/Nov 2006  
 
Environmental Impact Assessments: Preparation to commence Oct/Nov 2006  
 
Resettlement Action Plans: Preparation to commence Oct/Nov 2006  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert J. Roche 
09/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
09/14/2006 
Comments:   
