Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3076 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P106228 
Project Name: ET-Ethiopia Nutrition (FY08) 
Task Team Leader: Andrew Sunil Rajkumar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to: (i) enhance institutions, capacity and 
knowledge, as well as linkages between different nutrition-relevant sectors, to be able to reduce 
malnutrition as rapidly as possible; and to (ii) enhance utilization of the most cost-effective 
preventative health, nutritional and ECD interventions.  
 
The project has been designed to fund activities that will help: (i) strengthen institutional 
capacity of relevant government agencies at the Federal, regional and woreda level to implement 
appropriate cross-sectoral coordination, training and knowledge building activities; (ii) improve 
the linkages between nutrition and nutrition-relevant sectors including food security, education, 
health and water, and also linkages with the private sector; (iii) strengthen surveillance, data 
gathering and monitoring activities regarding relevant nutritional and health indicators; (iv) 
improve the state of knowledge regarding how to best reduce malnutrition given limited 
resources; (v) increase access to, and utilization of, key micronutrients including iodine; and (vi) 
increase community-level knowledge and practices regarding optimal nutrition-related behavior 
including optimal breastfeeding behavior, and optimal early childhood education practices.  
 
Page  2
Preliminary indicators and targets are:  
 
-
Establishment of a national coordination agency for nutrition?to coordinate nutrition related 
inputs from  health, food security and agriculture, social welfare, education, water, private sector, 
and trade and industry.  
 
-
Significant national coverage of salt iodization program to at least 60% of the population.  
 
-
Establishment of at least 100 sentinel sites in the country conducting surveillance of nutrition-
related indicators.  
 
-
Increase in the median duration of exclusive breastfeeding by 50% in selected woredas.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation will use both existing structures as well as additional surveillance 
and monitoring data to be collected as part of Sub-Component 2b (see below). This sub-
component will add to the existing system to develop a structure that is better able to conduct 
nutritional surveillance as explained below.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Nutrition Project to be financed by IDA will be a part of the multi-donor National 
Nutrition Program (NNP). The main strategies of the NNP are to (a) strengthen ongoing national 
interventions to deliver nutrition and ECD services; (b) transition current nutrition and ECD 
interventions into preventative and sustainable interventions using community based nutrition 
and ECD approach; (c) strengthen intersectoral nutrition and ECD linkages; and (d) strengthen 
the capacity of institutions to formulate policies and implement the National Nutrition Program.  
The NNP will be implemented within the context of the country?s decentralized system of 
service delivery at the level of region, woreda and kebeles.  
 
The NNP will be based on five guiding principles:  (i) Sustainability; (ii) Linkages and 
Coordination among programs and interventions; (iii) Involvement of the Private Sector; (iv) 
Cost-Effective Interventions; and (v) Knowledge Building.  
 
Based on these strategies and principles, the NNP has two main components proposed for 
implementation in the first phase. Each of these is subdivided into sub-components, and an 
estimated breakdown of the required funding is as follows:  
 
Table 1.  Ethiopia National Nutrition Program:  Estimated Cost and Financing for Period 2007-
2013  
 
(in US$ Millions) 1/  
 
Components:  
 
1.
STRENGTHENING NUTRITION AND ECD SERVICE DELIVERY. Total Required: 
US$170 million  
 
a)  Enhanced Outreach Strategy (EOS)  - US$80 million; Known or Expected Commitments To 
Date from Donor Partners 2/:  
 
EC (11), SIDA (2), MI (0.5), UNICEF (1);  
Page  3
b)  Management of Severe Malnutrition:US$30 million; Known or Expected Commitments To 
Date from Donor Partners 2/:  
 
UNICEF (1), Irish Aid (2)  
 
c)Community Based Nutrition and ECD: US$35 million; Known or Expected Commitments To 
Date from Donor Partners 2/: UNICEF (9), JICA (4), USAID (2);  
 
d)
Micronutrient Interventions: US$25 million, Known or Expected Commitments To Date 
from Donor Partners 2/:  CIDA (3), USAID (1), Japan (5), MI (1).  
 
2.
INSTITUTIONAL AND KNOWLEDGE BASE STRENGTHENING. Total Required: 
US$ 25 million  
 
a) 
Capacity Building, Program Implementation and Advocacy: US$ 7 million, Known or 
Expected Commitments To Date from Donor Partners 2:  Gates Foundation (1); TA from Others 
(1) 3/;  
 
b)
Nutritional Information System, Surveillance and Operations Research: US$15 
million;Known or Expected Commitments To Date from Donor Partners 2: UNICEF (1); EC (2);  
 
c) 
Strengthening Intersectoral Nutrition and ECD Linkages and Understanding 
Multisectoral Impacts: US$3 million  
 
TOTAL FINANCING REQUIRED: US$ 195 million  
 
1/ The detailed funding requirements for each component will be discussed and firmed up 
during pre-appraisal and appraisal.  
 
2/
Figures exclude $95 million committed by the World Food Program for the Targeted 
Supplementary Food Program over the next three years.  
 
3/
FAO, WHO, UNICEF, USAID, possibly CIDA providing smaller amounts for technical 
assistance.  
 
It is initially proposed that the IDA-supported project finances Sub-Components 1d, 2a, 2b and 
2c as in the table below.  
 
Table 2.  Ethiopia IDA-Supported Nutrition Project:  Proposed Contributions to Sub-
Components of National Nutrition Program for Five-Year Period 2008-2013  
 
(in US$ Millions)  
 
Proposed Components  
 
1.
STRENGTHENING NUTRITION AND ECD SERVICE DELIVERY: Proposed 
Contribution: US$10 million  
 
a)  Community-Based Nutrition and ECD: US$5 million;  
 
b)
Micronutrient Interventions:US$ 5 million;  
 
2. 
INSTITUTIONAL AND KNOWLEDGE BASE STRENGTHENING -  Proposed 
Contribution: US$10 million  
 
a) Capacity Building, Program Implementation and Advocacy: US$3 million;  
 
b)
Nutritional Information System, Surveillance and Operations Research: US$6 million;  
 
c) Strengthening Intersectoral Nutrition and ECD Linkages and Understanding Multisectoral 
Impact: US$1 million;  
 
TOTAL PROPOSED CONTRIBUTION: US$20 million  
Page  4
The allocation across sub-components in the above table is what the team proposes, providing a 
significant share of the total project funds (50%) to leverage the Bank?s comparative advantage 
in institutional strengthening and knowledge building. But one of the issues on which the team 
seeks guidance is whether the proposed allocation across sub-components is appropriate. 
Another issue to note is that UNICEF is a large player in this area in Ethiopia, and often uses its 
own systems of procurement, management and so on. IDA funding would have to be channeled 
across sub-components and managed in a manner consistent with Bank guidelines regarding 
procurement, financial management and other issues.  
 
Each of the sub-components of the NNP is now described. The description below covers all 
sub-components of the NNP ? and not just the sub-components proposed in Table 2 for the IDA-
supported project ? since the possibility of IDA funding for other sub-components remains ?on 
the table?.  
 
Component 1.  Strengthening Nutrition and ECD Service Delivery  
 
a) 
Sustaining Enhanced Outreach Strategy (EOS) with Transition Into the Health Extension 
Program (HEP).  The Government of Ethiopia supported by development partners is currently 
implementing a group of interventions under the EOS, consisting of outreach services for child 
survival interventions. This initiative which began in 2004 covers 6.7 million children from 6 to 
59 months of age; and 1.6 million pregnant and lactating women in 325 food insecure and 
drought affected woredas spread over 10 regions of the country. The services, provided at the 
kebele (sub-district) level include: (a) screening for acute malnutrition of children and pregnant 
and lactating mothers, (b) referral to the Targeted Supplementary Food Program (TSFP) and the 
therapeutic feeding program (TFP) wherever functioning,  (c) Vitamin A supplementation for 
children aged 6-59 months, (d) deworming for children aged 24-59 months, (e) measles 
immunization for children aged 9-23 months,  (f) information, education and communication on 
infant and young child feeding, and (g) ITN promotion and distribution in malaria endemic areas. 
Social mobilization precedes the outreach activities.  
 
To improve the country?s health situation, the government introduced the Health Extension 
Program (HEP) in 2003, including development of a cadre of salaried Health Extension Workers 
(HEWs) ? eventually two in every kebele ? who will provide basic curative and preventive health 
services in every community. The EOS is seen as a transition program. In the longer run, it is 
envisaged in the government?s Health Sector Development Plan that the HEP, with community 
volunteers supporting the activities of the HEWs, will take over the role of the EOS. But it is 
acknowledged that this transition will take several years. In the meantime the HEW program has 
to be full developed, with a community volunteer program of appropriate scale rolled out and 
fully operational. To date 17,000 out of the 30,000 HEWs have been trained and deployed, with 
another 7,000 currently undergoing training.  
 
As part of the National Nutrition Program (NNP), it is proposed to: (i) continue the full EOS in 
the 325 woredas where it currently operates; (ii) to provide TSFP to eligible beneficiaries in all 
of these 325 woredas; and (iii) to provide Vitamin A and deworming to children in all woredas 
round the country, as part of a limited version of EOS. Over several years, these activities would 
Page  5
be scaled down in line with the Sustainability principle, and responsibility for the interventions 
would be transferred to the Health Extension Workers working together with community 
volunteers, as envisaged by the Ministry of Health.  
 
It should be noted that these interventions are very cost-effective, and were found, in the 
recently delivered Ethiopia Malnutrition ESW  (World Bank, 2007), to have benefit-cost ratios 
between 2 and 60 in Ethiopia, in line with the National Nutrition Program?s Cost-Effectiveness 
principle.  
 
b) 
Management of Severe Malnutrition ? Therapeutic Feeding Program.  With support from 
UNICEF, the Government has established a model for cost-effective treatment of severely 
malnourished children. Currently, this program is estimated to cover only 18,000 out of 
approximately 150,000 children who need treatment for severe malnutrition at any one time.  In 
this program, severely malnourished children (from EOS campaigns or from other channels) are 
referred to the therapeutic feeding program that provides at community level outpatient 
therapeutic care for children with appetite and no complications. If complications are present 
children are referred to the therapeutic feeding units integrated in health facilities for a short stay. 
As part of the NNP, this activity is proposed to be scaled-up over the next four years to cover all 
these estimated 150,000 children who have severe malnutrition. According to the recent Ethiopia 
Malnutrition ESW (World Bank, 2007), this activity is less cost-effective than some of the others 
working against malnutrition in Ethiopia, but still has a high benefit-cost ratio of about two.  
 
Community-Based Nutrition and ECD.  This component is proposed to be implemented 
gradually, to be scaled up to cover 150 woredas over the first 4 years. This will be a subset of the 
325 woredas where the full EOS and HEP are currently operational (and where it will continue to 
operate). This approach envisions making communities and households responsible for 
preventing poor nutrition and preventative health among children as well as pregnant and 
lactating women. Addressing the nutrition ?knowledge deficit? among communities, in line with 
the Knowledge Building principle of the NNP, is key here. Community volunteers will be the 
main agents of change within communities, working together with Health Extension Workers as 
envisioned in the third Health Sector Development Plan (see above under sub-component 2a), 
with a goal to help households understand why nutrition and preventative health matters to their 
development and their children?s future. Knowledge building regarding early childhood 
education practices which are also an integral part of Early Childhood Development would also 
be a key part of this sub-component. Knowledge building regarding early childhood education 
practices which are also an integral part of Early Childhood Development would also be a key 
part of this sub-component.  
 
Tools to help with knowledge building would include a communication strategy with 
appropriate mix of channels, media and messages. Communities may be supported by project 
grants to address causes of malnutrition at the community level.  One possibility is that the 
volunteers would be beneficiaries of the Productive Safety Nets Program (PSNP), and would 
receive food or cash through this program in return for working as community volunteers; they 
would not have to provide labor for public works like most PSNP beneficiaries have to. This 
would give them an incentive to perform well. The service delivery package will target 
Page  6
households with under-2 children, as well as pregnant and lactating mothers. Community-based 
interventions of this nature were found in the Ethiopia Malnutrition ESW (World Bank, 2007) to 
have very high benefit-cost ratios exceeding 25.  
 
c) 
Micronutrient Interventions. This sub-component involves the provision of key 
micronutrients - initially iodine, Vitamin A and iron - through both supplementation and 
fortification, and will include salt iodization. Latest available data show that almost two thirds of 
the population suffers from iodine deficiency; iodine deficiency is known to reduce infants? IQ 
by 10 to 15 percentage points, and to have a substantial negative effect on school outcomes. Salt 
iodization and other micronutrients interventions are known to be among the most cost-effective 
among all interventions in developing countries, and were found in the recent Ethiopia 
Malnutrition ESW (World Bank, 2007) to have benefit-cost ratios exceeding 50 in Ethiopia, very 
much in line with the Cost-Effectiveness principle. The sub-component will also include 
operations research for zinc and other micronutrients; and surveys. The sub-component will be 
technically linked to the Global Micronutrient Initiative.  
 
Component 2.   Strengthening of Institutions and Knowledge Base for Nutrition Policy and 
Program Implementation, with three proposed sub-components:  
 
a) 
Capacity Building, Program Implementation and Advocacy.  This sub component, like 
the others within Component 2, very much addresses the Knowledge Building project principle. 
It will support: (a) establishment of a National Coordination Body for Nutrition; (b) the 
institutional capacity for implementation at different levels of Government; (c) building 
sustainable local capacity at the middle and senior management level by strengthening links 
between universities and research institutes at the Federal and regional levels with universities 
and research institutes outside the country; and (d) the development and implementation of 
advocacy and communication strategy for the National Nutrition Program.  
 
b) 
Nutritional Information System, Surveillance and Operations Research.  Knowledge 
Building would be limited without a high-quality nutrition information system in the country. An 
assessment of the current information systems and the gaps has already been undertaken with 
UNICEF support. Based on the recommendations as well as further analysis and analytical 
contributions from other sources, the existing information systems will be strengthened. The aim 
will be to build a system that provides ? mostly at biannual or annual intervals ? an adequate 
range of localized data from different data sources, on nutrition-related indicators. These will 
include indicators of nutritional status, as well as indicators of health, food security, 
water/sanitation and other variables that affect nutrition.  
 
The system will draw on data from existing sources such as the Early Warning System, national 
surveys, localized survey including NGO surveys, the Health Management Information System 
and the Emergency Nutrition Coordination Units (ENCUs). It will strengthen and modify these 
systems as appropriate, and add new data sources such as additional surveys. Regional 
governments and bodies will have a key role. A key activity will be to strengthen the Federal and 
regional ENCUs, and to extend their mandate to, among other things: (i) supervise the 
implementation of surveys conducted at regular intervals at sentinel sites, and not just on an 
Page  7
emergency basis; and (ii) oversee independent monitoring and evaluation of the program 
activities as well as early warning and emergency related information system.  
 
A
key aspect of this sub-component will be the use of technological innovations to improve the 
nutritional information system, such as the use of cellphones by Health Extension Workers 
(HEWs). The cellphones would, among other things, be used to record data on indicators related 
to nutrition and preventative health, and would also provide alerts for emergency situations. 
HEWs would be given incentives ? such as shared personal use of the cellphones ? to conduct 
proper recordkeeping; currently, they submit hard copy monthly reports but these are of very 
poor quality because the HEWs have little incentive to put time and effort into proper 
datakeeping. Involvement of the Private Sector including Google and other organizations is vital, 
to maximize efficiency and to enhance sustainability.  
 
This sub-component will also undertake operations research, testing of innovations, surveys and 
other Knowledge Building initiatives that would lead to improved service delivery and program 
outcomes, for nutrition and ECD.  
 
c) 
Strengthening Multi-Sectoral Nutrition and ECD Linkages and Understanding 
Multisectoral Impacts.  This sub-component directly addresses the vitally important Linkages 
and Coordination principle of the program. It will strengthen linkages between the different 
programs affecting nutrition, food security and ECD, so as to maximize the impacts of these 
programs not just on nutritional and ECD outcomes but also on other relevant outcomes. This 
will be implemented through advocacy, analysis, use of nutrition outcome indicators in program 
design and targeting, and in monitoring and evaluation.  The main programs which are proposed 
to be linked include:  (a) the coming Education Quality Improvement Program (FY09) and other 
education sector programmes including school health and nutrition; (b) the EOS and Targeted 
Supplementary Food Program (e) the Health Extension Worker Program; (d) food  security 
programs (e) productive safety net programs which has interventions in public works, and cash 
grants to pregnant and lactating mothers (f) WASH and other water and sanitation programs (g) 
agriculture and rural capacity building programs (h) gender and programs to enhance welfare of 
women and girls and (i) HIV/AIDS programs.  
 
At the same time, there is currently a significant gap in our understanding of the relative 
impacts of different types of interventions and programs in different sectors on nutrition and 
ECD outcomes, and this makes it difficult to know where to channel resources. Knowledge 
Building is needed to address this situation. Analytical work will be done to better understand 
these relative impacts, drawing on the data collected through the improved nutritional 
information system to be implemented through Sub-Component 2c.  
 
It is important to remember that the multi-sectoral nature of nutrition and ECD means that there 
are many programs affecting nutritional and ECD outcomes that are not explicitly included in the 
NNP (as in Table 1). Investments in water and sanitation, for example, would certainly improve 
malnutrition significantly. But at present, there is little knowledge as to the relative impact of 
such interventions on nutrition/ECD, relative to others. One aim of Component 2 would be to 
foster better understand of the relative impacts of different interventions, so that donors could 
make better choices as to where to channel funding. Increased funding for interventions that have 
Page  8
a
significant positive impact on nutritional and ECD outcomes are encouraged, even for 
interventions that are not explicitly included in the above table.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide in Ethiopia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/18/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew Sunil Rajkumar 
09/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/27/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Miriam Schneidman 
09/27/2007 
Comments:   
