Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1166 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P092353 
Project Name: Irrigation and Drainage Project 
Task Team Leader: IJsbrand Harko de Jong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 30, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (80%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
95.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The overall Irrigation and Drainage program seeks to increase incomes and reduce effects 
of climate variability on agricultural productivity by financing irrigation development, and by 
strengthening the GoE strategy for irrigation and drainage, among others through the 
development of a decision tool that assists public officials in deciding priorities among proposed 
investments in irrigation. The development objective of the program is to increase irrigated area 
through investments that are cost effective, environmentally and socially sound, and beneficial to 
the rural poor. In addition, the project aims to contribute to further strengthening cooperation on 
the Nile between Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan. The proposed program will develop an incremental 
total area of up to 20,000 ha.  
 
2. 
Choice of Instrument. The IDA irrigation portfolio in Ethiopia is not well established for 
historic reasons. Much needs to be learned on a variety of issues associated with the performance 
of irrigated agriculture. In view of this, of the long time it takes for irrigation investments to 
mature, and the comprehensive way in which irrigation needs to be addressed and stakeholders 
need to be involved, an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) is justified. An APL would provide an 
opportunity to underwrite the Government's long-term irrigation and drainage development 
objectives.  
Page  2
3. 
In pursuit of the overall outcomes referred to above, the specific objective of Phase 1 of 
the APL would be to implement a first set of investments that satisfy a multi-criteria analysis 
(MCA) conducted during preparation. In parallel, Phase I would take a more comprehensive look 
at strengthening the knowledge base of irrigation development in Ethiopia and would conduct at 
least one PPP pilot, for the benefit of subsequent phases of the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is based on the assumption that a more reliable access to water puts a high premium 
on the use of productivity enhancing inputs, provides more flexibility, reliability, quality and 
product uniformity to satisfy the requirements of markets, and enables farmers to obtain higher 
seasonal prices. The project therefore seeks to capture linkages between irrigation and markets. 
The project aims to support the Government's long-term sectoral program for irrigation and 
drainage development and management, and will contribute to meeting the resource shortfall 
associated with the program. A policy note for such irrigation and drainage development and 
management program will be prepared during project preparation.  
 
The project will adopt a comprehensive approach to sustainable irrigation development, and 
will consist of the following four components:  
 
1.  Irrigation and Drainage Development  
 
The project will develop selection criteria, as well as a process for vetting, to capture technical 
feasibility, economic viability, social/environmental sustainability, and market access. Suitable 
sites will be selected during project preparation considering all options, including (i) 
smallholders, such as smallholder subsistence farmers in small-, medium and large-scale 
schemes as found around lake Tana, outgrowers associated with larger-scale investors, and dry 
season horticulture producers, (ii) medium-scale private investors such as full-time horticulture 
producers, and (iii) large private investors such as full-time flower producers or large private 
investors in industrial crops (cotton, sugarcane) in Ethiopia's Western Lowlands. In applying the 
criteria, the project will develop 20,000ha of irrigation and drainage, and complete detailed 
feasibility studies on 80,000 ha. The component will identify and promote opportunities for 
Public Private Partnerships (PPP) in the financing, construction, and operation and maintenance 
of irrigation infrastructure. The project will also promote affordable irrigation technologies, and 
provide support to private irrigation service providers. PPP will be promoted on the basis of an 
assessment of comparative and competitive advantages, analysis of institutional options, as well 
as identification of constraints and opportunities.  
 
In addition, the component will address watershed degradation, erosion and sedimentation 
through targeted investments in the upper watersheds through existing operations. Where 
possible, and in particular where doing so would enhance the investment fundamentals, 
hydropower development options will be considered and proposed for further development. The 
project would work in close consultation with ongoing efforts.  
 
2.  Agricultural Support Services  
 
Page  3
In close collaboration with ongoing efforts, the project will put in place incentive based 
mechanisms and instruments to private sector involvement in delivering agricultural support 
services. Services include agricultural extension, market information, agricultural mechanization, 
rural finance in combination with the establishment of cereal banks. The project would pilot 
innovative contracts arrangements between public and private sector to administer the above 
services. Much of this support would be implemented through performance contracts.  
 
3.  Institutional Strengthening  
 
Based on a capacity strengthening needs assessment that will be conducted during project 
preparation, the project will support strengthening of institutions and organizations involved in 
the implementation of the project, including the implementing agencies, regional Bureaus, Water 
Users' Associations, Producers' Organizations, and private sector operators. Additional capacity 
strengthening assessments will be done during project implementation. This includes: (i) an 
assessment of national irrigation management training capacity, and capacity strengthening 
needs; (ii) assessment of national irrigation research and extension capacity, and capacity 
strengthening needs; (iii) capacity for supporting PPP in irrigation and drainage; and (iv) national 
design, contracting and supervision capacity for project implementation.  
 
4.  Project Management and M&E  
 
The project will be implemented under the responsibility of the Ministry of Water Resources. 
The Ministry will establish a multi-disciplinary Steering Committee including representatives of 
Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Development, the regional Bureaus of Agriculture and Rural 
Development and others to reflect the multi-sectoral challenges that the project will face during 
implementation. The Steering Committee will provide regular operational and strategic guidance 
to the Project Implementation Team. The Project Coordinator will be an irrigation specialist with 
a
strong multi-sectoral background, in particular related to agricultural services provision. 
Appropriate arrangements will be put in place to ensure full stakeholder participation in the 
planning, design and implementation of the project. The project team considered whether the 
delivery of capacity building and agricultural support services should be organized "in-house", or 
whether support would be sought from existing projects. It was decided to work as much as 
possible with the Capacity Building and Marketing and the Watershed Management project that 
are currently under preparation. Specific issues related to the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) would 
be addressed by the project itself, e.g., attracting private investors.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented on sites on the north and east side of Lake Tana (Megech and 
Ribb), and along the Anger River. Feasibility studies on up to an additional 80,000 ha will be 
conducted in Megech, Upper Beles and Anger.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower institutional capacity for safeguard policies is weak. Capacity building is foreseen 
under the project in this and other technical areas, as well as in the areas of participatory 
development and community and group organization, in particular Water Users Associations.   
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Each proposed irrigation scheme will include environmental and social analysis and planning 
as part of the feasibility studies, and an independent EA study. An Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be written during project preparation to guide these 
studies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Proposed irrigation schemes may put important natural habitats at risk if not sensitively 
designed. Preservation of such habitats will be factored into feasibility studies, and considered in 
the independent EA studies.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Feasibility studies will include consideration of the need for IPM and pesticide management 
in preparing plans for scheme development and operation. As needed, individual scheme pest 
management plans will be prepared and then evaluated during the independent EA studies.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Field surveys during the feasibility studies will identify any important physical cultural 
resources that need protection.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
A
Social Analysis will, among other things, identify any indigenous peoples that may be 
affected by, or may benefit from, the different schemes. If such groups exist, an IPDP will be 
prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Some land acquisition or restriction of accesss to resources is likely during development of 
the irrigation schemes. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, and 
Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared for each scheme as part of the feasibility studies.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Irrigation schemes that involve dam construction (Ribb, Anger) will be subject to technical 
oversight as prescribed by the policy, depending on dam heights and other risk factors.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project will be located in the Nile Basin. The Nile is an international waterway, and 
notification requirements will be met within the context of the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI). The 
NBI is a regional initiative of nine Nile riparian countries, and all projects under the NBI have 
been discussed by the Nile Council of Ministers. Eritrea, which is an observer in the NBI, will be 
notified separately if so needed. Information regarding NBI projects is made available through 
the NBI Secretariat in Entebbe, Uganda. Based on the ongoing consultations, information 
sharing, and transparency with regards to NBI projects, as indicated in minutes of the Nile-COM 
and ENCOM, the requirements of OP7.50 are considered met.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  5
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Substantial infrastructure works such as access roads, drainage and irrigation canals, and 
pumping stations are expected which will entail the acquisition of individual, communal 
or/and public lands. Detailed information about the nature and location of the works, and 
their impact on land and on the population, will only become available during project 
implementation. Hence, an ESMF and RPF will be prepared by February 2007 and disclosed 
before the appraisal mission planned for April 2007 to establish the basis for subsequent 
preparation, review and approval of EAs and RAPs.  
 
A
Social Assessment (SA) will be conducted as part of the feasibility studies. It will focus 
on stakeholder identification, their socioeconomic profiles, their social organization, 
including the existence or non-existence of water user groups, systems of land tenure and 
land status, impact of the project on the land, existing survival strategies in terms of 
irrigation, organization and access to water. The SA will propose recommendations from a 
social perspective for project design, including supportive measures for capacity building, 
professional associations and other institutional arrangements, in particular a system for 
monitoring and evaluation which is adequately adapted to measure and assess the social 
indicators which need to be developed. The SA will also pay particular attention to the issue 
of vulnerable ethnic groups and other marginal groups. Relevant information will be 
provided to determine whether OP 4.10 related to Indigenous Peoples is triggered.  
 
Borrower's feasibility studies are expected to be launched by February 2007 and completed 
by September 2007. These studies will involve substantial consultations with project 
beneficiaries and other affected people. The ESMF and RPF will specify further 
consultations, as needed, in the preparation of EA studies and RAPs. EAs and RAPs will 
need Bank approval before finalization of detailed designs and construction bid documents.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr IJsbrand Harko de Jong 
12/27/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Nina Chee 
12/27/2006 
Comments:  Nina Chee, acting for Warren Waters. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
12/28/2006 
Comments:   
