Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC1989
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P094704 
Project Name:  Ethiopia - Financial Sector Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader:  Priya Basu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 16, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTFS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P);Regulation and competition 
policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project will aim to build the foundation for a more effective and sound 
financial sector that can ensure better access to finance for all. This objective will be 
achieved through developing the necessary skills and institutional capacity, establishing 
an enabling environment and the necessary financial sector infrastructure, and 
introducing new financial products that are better tailored to borrowers’ needs and can 
help lower the risks and costs faced by both borrowers and lender.  
 
Through these efforts, the project will not only generate a positive impact in the near 
term, but also, it will enhance the preparedness and capabilities of financial sector policy 
makers, regulators, supervisors and market participants to respond to a more open and 
competitive financial sector, as the sector evolves.  
 
Moreover, the project will help expose key players in the financial sector to sound 
practices and lessons of experience by facilitating an interchange of ideas and experience 
with counterparts in other developing countries. With its strong focus on engaging with 
professional associations and civil society to create public awareness on various aspects 
Page  2
of financial sector reform, the project will also help in promoting a more conducive 
atmosphere for initiating and sustaining financial sector reforms.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project, designed to support the Government’s efforts in the area of 
financial sector development, should be viewed as the first phase of a longer-term 
financial sector engagement between the Government of Ethiopia and the Bank/other 
donors. The project would include the following components:  
 
1) Institutional capacity building. The project will support capacity building for NBE in 
areas including regulation and supervision of banking and insurance, economic research 
and monetary policy formulation and implementation, reserve management and foreign 
exchange operations, and human resource management. The project will also pursue 
improving corporate governance of public and private financial institutions.  
 
2) Strengthening key elements of the financial sector infrastructure. The project will 
provide support to upgrade financial sector infrastructure through: (i) payments systems 
modernization, including automation of Addis Ababa clearing house and establishment of 
regional clearing houses; (ii) strengthening credit information systems, including revision 
of the legal framework and automation of data submission and retrieval; (iii) developing 
capital markets infrastructure, including a stock exchange and a centralized electronic 
depository, clearing and settlement system for bond market development; and (iv) 
establishment of a collateral/asset registry to facilitate secured loan transactions.  
 
3) Supporting the development of new financial products.  The project will promote 
financial sector diversification in Ethiopia by supporting the development of new 
financial products for housing finance for middle-and low-income Ethiopians, leasing, 
small and medium enterprise financing, agricultural risk insurance, credit cards, etc.  
 
4) Component Four: Enhancing Professional Skills in the Financial Sector. The project 
will pursue the development of financial sector professional skills, including of bankers, 
insurers, leasing experts, mortgage specialists, securities specialists and so forth, by 
strengthening the capacity of the Ethiopian Institute of Banking and Insurance (EIBI), 
thus enhancing in-country capacity to provide training and assist skills development. In 
collaboration with banking and insurance industry associations, the project will also 
develop certification programs to ensure the quality of professionals entering the 
industry. Support will also be provided to develop the research capacity of industry 
associations.  
 
5) Implementation and Monitoring Component This component will support the 
strengthening and mainstreaming of project related implementation activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Most project activities will be in Addis-Ababa.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no safeguard issues associated with the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is designated in ‘Category C’ for environmental screening where 
theresponsibility for (potential) safeguard review and clearance has been transferred to 
the Sector Manager/Task Manager.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project is designated in ‘Category C’ for environmental screening where 
theresponsibility for (potential) safeguard review and clearance has been transferred to 
the Sector Manager/Task Manager.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
NA   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
NA   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  4
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project is designated in ‘Category C’ for environmental screening where 
theresponsibility for (potential) safeguard review and clearance has been transferred to 
the Sector Manager/Task Manager.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Priya Basu 
01/11/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antony Thompson 
01/12/2006 
Comments:   
Page  5
