Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/28/2007 
Report No.:  AC2669
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P091077 
Project Name:  ET-Road Sector Dev. Stage III Proj. (APL3) in support of Govt's RSDP 
Task Team Leader:  Yoshimichi Kawasumi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (90%);Central government administration (9%);Sub-
national government administration (1%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
225.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
161.68
161.68 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the Stage 3 of APL: APL3, (the Project) are (i) to assist the GOE in 
strengthening and increasing its road transport infrastructure and improving the reliability 
thereof;  and (ii) strengthening the institutional capacity in quality and efficiency of road 
construction, management and maintenance, creating conditions conducive to private 
sector participation in the road transport sector.  These objectives should lead to 
improving the road condition by strengthening existing road pavement structures and 
expanding road access to regional rural areas, with value for money, so as to enhance the 
efficiency of the existing main road network and improve access for the rural poor, 
supported by strengthened mechanism to monitor and evaluate performance of 
contractors/consultants, construction costs and unit rates.  
 
In this context, by combining the proposed investments and capacity building in APL3 
with the overlapping activities of APL1 and APL2 as well as the continuing policy 
reforms, it is expected to contribute to: (i) sustaining APL?s momentum to achieve the 
road condition targets through construction, rehabilitation, upgrading and preserving the 
priority federal and regional road network; (ii) providing a sustainable level of essential 
Page  2
road infrastructure to people in rural areas and improve rural access and mobility through 
the ERTTP; (iii) strengthen ERA reform program to improve the capacity and the ability 
to monitor implementation performance and costs to ensure the high standards of 
performance; (iv) complete the ERA modernization process; (v) establish efficient and 
self-sustaining construction industry through providing projects under national 
competitive bidding (NCB); (vi) establish a monitoring system of construction costs/unit 
rates and contractors/consultants performance - to ensure that ERA maintains necessary 
performance and cost data as a basis of evaluating their performance, consultants? cost 
estimates, and bid price; (vii) support improving urban transport management; and (viii) 
identify future road and transport projects. Through this process, the management of the 
sector will be strengthened and commercially oriented, and an efficient and self-
sustaining construction industry that is capable and competent of meeting the diverse 
needs of the sector will also be developed.   
 
3. Project Description 
The APL3 primarily covers the rehabilitation and upgrading of priority Federal Roads, 
rehabilitation and construction of priority Federal Link Roads and Regional Rural Roads, 
institutional strengthening of ERA to efficiently implement RSDP III in areas of quality 
assurance of procurement processing, contract administration, monitoring of 
environmental, social and safety activities, monitoring of the performance of contractors 
and consultants. The financing will also be extended to support ERA's ongoing effort to 
commercialize District Road Maintenance Contractors into autonomous commercial 
entities.  
 
Component 1 -- Upgrading/Rehabilitation of Federal Trunk and Link Roads  
 
-
The upgrading of the Gondar - Debark gravel road (107 km) federal trunk road from 
gravel to hot asphalt mix surface pavement;  
 
-
The upgrading of Aposto - Bore - Negele federal link road (268 km) from gravel to hot 
double bituminous treated surface.  
 
-
The rehabilitation of the Gedo - Nekempte (134 km) section of the Addis - Nekempte 
asphalt-paved federal link road.  
 
Component 2 -- Construction of Regional Rural Road  
 
-
The construction of Yalo-Nehile Road (70 km: part of Yalo - Dalol road) as a gravel 
road with stage construction method.  
 
Component 3 -- Institutional Strengthening/ERA Moderniation -- Quality assurance in 
implementation of RSDP; monitoring of contractor/consultant performance, and contract 
costs and unit cost rates; DMO modernization.  
 
Component 4 -- Preparatory Activities/Studies -- Support to accomplishment of 
Program Objectives.   
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Gondar - Debark road is located largely in Amhara National Regional Sate in the 
northern part of Ethiopia, and forms part of one of the major south-north road links in the 
country. Amhara state has an international border with the Sudan in the west and the 
national boundaries are with Tigray in the north-east and Afar in the east, Oromiya in the 
south and Benishangul-Gumuz in the south-west. The project road is also a short cut to 
important agricultural and tourist areas in the Simien Mountains. Agriculture is the 
predominant economic activity of the region.  
 
Gedo-Nekempt road is located in western Ethiopia in Oromia National Regional State, 
Merab Shoa and Misrak Wolega Zones.  The main towns along the project road include 
Gedo, Ijaji, Tibe, Bako, Ano, Sire and Nekemte.  The project area mainly grows 
subsistence crops- wheat, barley, oats, maize, sorghum, teff, pulses and several oil seeds. 
Cash crops such as coffee are cultivated in the Nekempt area. Agriculture is the 
predominant economic activity of the region.  
 
Apposto - Wendo - Negale road is located 350 km south of Addis on the Shashamene - 
Agere Mariam trunk road that forms part of the Addis-Ababa - Moyale (Kenya border 
road) route. It traverses parts of SNNPR, Oromiya and Somali regions and is the main 
access route for the development of the Sidamo, Borona, and Dolo areas in South-East 
Ethiopia. The economic activities along the road consist mostly of agricultural farming 
activities, some livestock and trading.  The project road transverses coffee growing areas, 
the gold mining center at Kibre Mengist and the grazing lowlands of the Somali Region. 
It has a direct influence area of about 10,000 km2. The section between Apposto and 
Wadera has land use potential for annual and perennial crops. Coffee and Enset are the 
major perennials while maize, barley, wheat and teff are the most important crops. The 
section from Wadera to Negele has high potential for livestock production. Agriculture is 
the predominant economic activity of the region.  
 
Yalo - Dalol road connects the Woredas of Yalo, Magale and Ab-Ala and their capitals 
to each other and to the neighboring Tigray Region, offering an excellent access to 
market for the Afar livestock and salt.  Further, the connection also offers an import route 
for the much needed grain products of the Tigray Region to reach the Afar Region 
Woredas. This route was considered highest priority by the Afar population during public 
consultations.   (Afar Region/State and Tigray Region/State). The Afar region is 
inhabited by pastoral people, cattle breading, is the main economic activity of the state. In 
the part of Tigray traversed by the road, a combination of cattle breeding and agriculture, 
are the main economic activity.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potentially adverse impacts include: soil erosion, temporary and permanent loss of 
land and property, the spread of HIV/AIDS, disturbances in the water quality, noise and 
dust are presumed to induce adverse physical environmental impacts during road 
construction work. Concerning Cultural Property (including graveyards, palaces, 
churches, natural sites such as waterfalls, etc.), EIA and the RAPs have taken systematic 
assessments of the road corridors, and no such sites will be affected. Construction and 
rehabilitation of the four roads will have an impact on some settlements of people living 
and working along the roads. For the purpose of resettling and compensation of the 
affected people, four individual Resettlement Action Plans have been reviewed, cleared 
and will be disclosed prior to project appraisal.   Total number of households affected by 
resettlement and/or compensation: is 3,477, at this point, along a total length of 643 km 
of roads.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No cumulative impacts are anticipated at this point. However, the depth and breadth of 
the EMPs prepared take into consideration any mitigation related to longer-term impacts. 
The RAPs that have been prepared also take a longer-term perspective towards 
mitigation, likewise, the ERA HIV/AIDS prevention strategy. The Project will undertake 
continuous monitoring of the environmental and social aspects to ensure that changes can 
be made, as needed.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The right of way requirements will be reduced from 30 meters to 20 meters in urban 
sections to reduce impacts on private properties and public amenities.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Under RSDP1 and 2, the borrower laid the foundation for sound environmental and social 
management within the roads sector in Ethiopia. As part of the RSDP I EA 
recommendations, an environmental monitoring branch (EMB) was established under the 
ERA. Under RSDP II, the Branch was transformed to an Environmental Monitoring and 
Safety Branch (EMSB). The EMSB consists of: one environmentalist, three sociologists, 
one ecologist, one hydrologist and a health officer. The health officer and one of the 
sociologists work permanently on HIV/AIDS prevention. The EMSB has been mainly 
engaged in reviewing EIA and RAPs prepared by design and EA consultants. 
Environmental monitoring activities are also being undertaken by the EMSB. Also, on 
the legal aspect, as an outcome of the continuous sector dialogue with the client, the 
Government proclaimed a new (July 15th/05) law governing compensation and 
involuntary resettlement; Proclamation No.455/2005.  
 
Individual Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA), Environmental Monitoring Plans 
(EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the first year's road program (4 roads) 
have been reviewed, cleared and disclosed prior to Appraisal.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The SA included consultations with stakeholders; local governments and administrations, 
NGOs,  
 
regional governments, sectoral administrations and federal authorities. The consultations 
focused on assessing the viability of the project, identifying potential areas of conflict 
between stakeholders and define areas of collaboration. Adverse environmental and 
social impacts and mitigation measures, were also discussed. The recommendations  have 
been integrated into the EMPs and the RAPs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/19/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/01/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/19/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/30/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yoshimichi Kawasumi 
03/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
03/28/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
03/28/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/28/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
03/28/2007 
Comments:   
