Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2172 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/22/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P096323 
Project Name: Tana Beles Integrated Water Resources Development 
Task Team Leader: E. V. Jagannathan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 6, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTNL 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);General agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Power (10%);Roads and 
highways (10%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
5.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to create an enabling environment for improved 
development and management of land and water resources of the Tana and Beles sub-basins to 
contribute to accelerated growth and sustainable socio-economic development.  This will be 
achieved in a phased program with initial focus on institutional capacity building and 
demonstrative investments on watershed and flood management; and creating enabling 
environment for private sector participation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
two-phased is proposed with the TBIWRDP-I addressing the initial phase. This phase will 
focus on:  
 
-
Setting up an institutional framework for integrated water resources planning and management 
in the Tana-Beles integrated sub-basin. The institutional framework will also  include the 
Page  2
development/strengthening of market institutions, reforms in extension and agricultural research, 
strengthening of legal and regulatory institutions and other agencies to promote economic 
linkages and private sector development; and institutions related to coordination of public 
investments such as roads, airports etc.    
 
-
Initiating activities in key areas of natural resource management such as watershed and flood 
management (flood preparedness and early warning of floods) in Tana sub-basin  
 
-
Promoting an enabling policy and institutional environment for private sector development 
and associated facilitation to enhance private sector participation.  
 
-
Planning/preparedness for major investments proposed to be made in the subsequent phase.  
 
The second phase ( as a follow-on project) will then focus on implementing the planned 
physical investments contributing to economic growth.  Success in the development of an 
enabling environment for economic growth and proper management of the region's key 
economic resource: water, will determine whether physical investments, to be carried out in the 
second phase of the program will contribute to accelerated growth.  
 
The project implementation will be premised on some of the guiding principles, e.g., (i) 
interventions should be bottom-up and demand driven based on local capacity; (ii) there should 
be strong private/public partnerships; (iii) planning should be participatory and development 
should be local (iv) there should be a strong element of capacity building. A strong stakeholder 
consultation process is planned during project preparation (the conceptual framework itself is a 
product of a series of stakeholder consultation at federal and regional levels).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The physical investments proposed for this project (Phase I) are concentrated in the Tana-Beles 
basin.  This includes physical investments in the Lake Tana catchment area for small-scale 
watershed management and small-scale community-level flood management interventions in the 
Tana-Beles basin.  The institutional capacity building may also include national and regional 
level institution strengthening.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Multiple agencies are proposed to be involved with implementing different aspects of the project.  
The purpose of this project (Phase I of the proposed program) is to build capacity in the 
institutions relevant for implementing the entire program.  The Water Resources Bureaus at the 
regional level will have primary responsibility for implementing the environmental and social 
aspects of the project, with monitoring function of the federal EPA and relevant sectoral regional 
entities. These institutions will also have primary responsibility for implementing resettlement 
plans (if required).  Further project preparation will clarify institutional responsibilities for 
oversight on other social issues, including that of indigenous peoples. The environmental and 
social assessment will look into appropriate structures and recommend accordingly.  The 
capacity of these institutions to effectively mainstream environmental and social issues is weak 
currently and the project proposes to strengthen this capacity.  The strengthening of basin 
planning and management capacity would also help address cumulative impacts of development 
in the Tana-Beles basin and ensure that these are sustainable, with significant local benefits.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao (SASES) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project (Phase I) is primarily designed to strengthen institutional capacity 
supported by small-scale investments in watershed and flood management.  These are not 
expected to have significant adverse environmental and social development impacts. The 
preparation of the watershed and flood management projects is already underway (including 
detailed environmental and social assessments built in).  A detailed social assessment of flood 
affected communities around Lake Tana has been completed.  These studies will be 
amalgamated into an overall Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) that will be conducted 
for this project (to be financed by PHRD).  Since physical investments under Phase-I will be 
small-scale, community-driven and not known precisely in advance, an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed as part of the ESA.  During 
preparation, this framework will also be applied to some initial first-year proposed locations to 
develop any required management plans.  The findings of the ESA will also be incorporated into 
appropriate operational manuals.  It is expected that the ESMF will maximize social and 
environmental opportunities and effectively manage environmental and social development risks 
under the project.This would include appropriate consultation with various stakeholders during 
the scoping and draft recommendation stages.  Any policy and institutional development 
improvements to better manage impacts of public and induced private sector investments will 
also be examined in these studies. The ESA will also outline the kinds of strategic and 
investment-related environmental and social assessments that will be supported in Phase-I to 
better prepare for Phase-II, including capacity gaps and institutional responsibilities.  The ESA 
will factor in the sustainable development/management/use of the Lake?s resources, and help 
conceptualize a long-term program of data collection and analysis on environment and social 
aspects to strengthen the knowledge base for Lake management.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The ESA will examine if the proposed activities of the project (Phase-I) will trigger the 
Natural Habitats OP and propose any mitigation measures required.  The ESA will also outline 
TORs for studies required during Phase I for preparation of Phase II activities that may have a 
significant impact on Lake Tana Natural Habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project may induce the increased use of pesticides in the project areas where irrigation 
related to catchment management is to be enhanced or developed.  This would require mitigation 
in the form of a significant emphasis on Integrated Pest Management and Integrated Nutrient 
Management demonstrations, training/extension services and related market development. A 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be developed that describes the necessary measures. The 
PMP, in addition to pest and pesticide management issues related to agriculture productivity and 
diversification, will also address vector management issues that may be caused by 
storage/irrigation schemes.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The project activities are not currently expected to have significant impacts on physical 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
cultural property.  However, these will be further assessed during the Environment and Social 
Assessment.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The project area includes the Beles basin; however, it is not known yet if any physical 
investments would be made in the Beles basin in this project (Phase I). This area is inhabited by 
pastoral and hunter-gatherer groups.  However, at this time, we do not have adequate information 
to make an informed decision about triggering the policy.  The planned ESA will explore this 
issue in detail and suggest appropriate approaches to address identified special needs of such 
groups. The completed social assessment for the flood activities in the Tana area has confirmed 
that there are no IP groups in that area.  The ESA would also indicate if any investments to 
benefit the local potential IP groups in the Beles basin could be considered under the Phase I.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy is considered triggered due to potential land acquisition for small-scale watershed 
and flood-management investments. A Resettlement Policy Framework will be developed as part 
of the ESA as exact project locations for these small-scale investments are unknown currently.  
As part of project activities, any detailed RAPs needed for proposed activities in Phase II will be 
developed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The Tana-Beles basin is a part of the Nile Basin.  This would require appropriate riparian 
notification as required by this policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) with an appropriate Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) including a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
would be conducted for the project.  The studies are expected to be initiated in Oct, 2006 and 
be completed by March, 2007 with an early interim report by January, 2007 as an input into 
the QER.  The social assessment for flood interventions around Lake Tana has been 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
completed and the assessment for watershed activities is underway.  Consultations would be 
held through the conduct of the ESA and disclosures (in-country and to the infoshop) will be 
done before appraisal (around May, 2007).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr E. V. Jagannathan 
08/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/22/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
08/11/2006 
Comments:   
