Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2637 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/29/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P101556 
Project Name: Electricity Access (Rural) Expansion Project Phase II 
Task Team Leader: Luiz T. A. Maurer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project?s development objective is to establish a sustainable program for expanding 
population access to electricity, both in small and medium sized communities located in rural 
areas, and to provide basic electricity services in off-grid locations, thus supporting a broad-
based economic development and helping alleviate poverty.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This project involves US$ 130 million to support the next three years of GoE?s UEAP 
electrification program, as well as the provision of basic services such as lighting to households, 
schools and clinics in remote communities, the so called ?bottom of the pyramid.? The project 
would have the following components:  
 
(a) 
Electrifying 300 rural towns (US$115 million) by extending the grid to (i) connect about 
175,000 customers in a 2-3 year period, with additional connections expected thereafter, 
representing a population of about 800,000 inhabitants; (ii) electrify commercial and some 
industrial users (such as town water supply infrastructure, irrigation systems, schools, health 
centers, laboratories, and telecommunication centers); and (iii) provide efficient street lighting. 
Page  2
Part of those funds may be used to co-finance rural electrification ADB projects under the 
umbrella of UEAP, to strengthen collaboration and capture synergies among those institutions.  
 
(b) 
Deploying off-grid electrification packages (primarily for lighting purposes) (US$8 
million) targeting 120,000 household customers and social services (clinics, schools, etc.) in 
remote areas, using advanced, cost-effective technologies. About 600,000 people should benefit 
from this program.  
 
(c) 
Financing the deployment of 1.5 million energy efficient compact fluorescent lamps 
(IDA = US$ 4 million) in rural areas directly benefited by UEAP, as well as to replace existing 
incandescent bulbs among other customers in Ethiopia, as part of the effort to regularize 
connections on a country wide basis. Part of those funds may be allocated to foster the 
development of recycling centers for lamps to be replaced.  
 
(d) 
Capacity building and studies - (IDA = US$ 2 million) consisting of (i) analysis of target 
markets, products, funding and distribution channels to provide lighting services to the ?bottom 
of the pyramid;?  (ii) determine the nature and scope of public services and facilities to benefit 
from some form of electrification in more remote areas (iii) develop study to assess the costs and 
benefits of a larger deployment program of CFLs both in rural areas recently electrified and 
among customers being regularized, including options for recycling incandescent lamps and 
CFLs.  
 
(e) 
In addition, the US$10 million OBA grant should help reduce barriers to entry by 
supporting EEPCo to resume its 5 year credit scheme, to increase the pace of connections where 
the grid is available. This will also involve the distribution of CFLs to poor indirect customers to 
be regularized and metered.  It is estimated that this grant should be able to benefit 300,000 
customers.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will operate at various locations throughout Ethiopia, notably in (i) rural towns and 
at locations joining rural towns to the existing electricity network; and (ii) in areas unlikely to be 
served by grid (UEAP) of off-grid electrification in the short or medium run   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower?s institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be evaluated during project 
preparation, as part of the EA process, and will build on the Borrower?s compliance under the 
ongoing GEF Energy Access project and EAREP I, which includes similar rural town 
electrification activity and off-grid electrification components.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is expected that there may be some potential negative impacts arising from the physical 
works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is likely that there will be some resettlement/compensation as a result of the physical 
works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/14/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An ESMF and an RPF are to be prepared by end-January. They will be disclosed prior to 
appraisal.  The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz T. A. Maurer 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
