Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/01/2007 
Report No.:  AC2731
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P101473 
Project Name:  Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Yitbarek Tessema 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (85%);Sanitation (15%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  10.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
9.00
19.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The Development Objective of the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project is 
"increased access to sustainable water supply and sanitation services in Addis Ababa and 
four secondary cities".  Accordingly, the project is designed to:  
 
(i) 
Produce more water for all customers and extend the distribution network to 
unserved areas.  
 
(ii) 
Improve the operational efficiency of the participating water utilities by reducing 
non-revenue water and improving financial management.  
 
(iii) 
Strengthen the autonomy of existing water boards and introduce performance 
based contracts with operators.  
 
(iv) 
Outsource selected activities to private sector providers to increase capacity and 
attract more investment.  
 
(v) 
Construct public sanitation facilities in low income areas, finance priority 
elements of municipal sanitation plans, and promote improved hygiene and sanitation 
practices.  
 
Page  2
In achieving these objectives, labor intensive construction methods for small diameter 
distribution piping and improved services for low-income areas will be adopted.  
 
As a result of the proposed project, up to 4 million urban residents in Addis Ababa and 
four other cities where the project is implemented will have increased access to potable 
water, and households in low-income areas will have improved sanitation facilities.  In 
Addis Ababa water production is 70 liters per capita per day, of which only 50 lpcd 
reaches consumers due to water losses. In secondary cities only 20 of 30 lpcd produced 
reaches consumers. Production in these cities should be at least 110 lpcd in Addis Ababa 
and 50 lpcd in secondary cities.  The project aims to increase water availability through 
source development, treatment expansion, and network extension, and service 
connections; and improve efficiency by reducing non-revenue water; improving financial 
and customer management; catchments protection; and instilling awareness of water 
conservation in its customers.  
 
The project will increase access to improved sanitation facilities, mainly for low income 
urban residents.  In so doing, the project will also provide improved drainage and reduce 
un-controlled and unhealthy sewage flows.   
 
3. Project Description 
C.  Project Description  
 
The project is designed (i) to produce and distribute more water to reduce the alarming 
gap between the supply and demand for water in Addis Ababa and four other secondary 
cities; (ii) to improve operational efficiency in all five cities by reducing non-revenue 
water, and improving financial management, billing and collection, and customer 
management; and (iii) to improve governance by the water boards and to introduce 
performance incentives for operators. The project design principle and structure were 
consistent with the initially conceived idea with much more refocusing and streamlining 
with government's WSS sector implementation framework. As a result the number of 
cities was limited to five and only among those with population beyond 100,000. Two 
major components one each for Addis and secondary cities and a third component for 
project management were included in the design as detailed below.  
 
Component 1: Addis Ababa Water Supply and Sanitation (US$ 85 million)  
 
1A.  Increased access to water supply and sanitation  
 
To address the water supply crisis in Addis Ababa, water production must be increased 
from 210,000 to 310,000 m3/day to meet basic services. This component will finance 
capacity expansion at the Legadadi reservoir and water treatment plant, and deep 
boreholes at selected sites within Addis Ababa and a new well field located northwest of 
the city. It will also finance the extension of the distribution network to unserved areas 
and new connections. Special attention will be given to low-income areas by involving 
communities in the planning process and improving drainage to control septage flows. 
The sewer system in the Kaliti catchment will be extended, and public sanitation 
facilities, managed by local service providers who charge a user fee, will be constructed.  
 
1B.  Improved operational efficiency and demand management  
Page  3
Given the high marginal cost of water in Addis Ababa and non-revenue water exceeding 
35%, operational efficiency must be improved and water conservation must be instilled in 
consumers. Improved financial management, billing and collection, customer 
management are also essential in establishing financially viable water companies that can 
pay the high cost of expansion. Financing under this sub-component will establish 
pressure zones and leak detection areas within the distribution network; and repairing 
leaks. AAWSA's financial management, billing/ collection, and customer-management 
system will also be improved, and awareness for water conservation will be created. 
Catchment protection measures will be taken at the city reservoirs.  
 
1C.  
Institutional Reform  
 
Funding would be provided for sector policy development and revisions in the legal and 
an institutional framework for water supply and sanitation, developing polices and 
measures for enhanced private sector participation and financing in this sector, and 
improving utility governance and efficiency.  Stakeholder consultation measures are also 
included in this component.  
 
Component 2: Secondary City Water Supply and Sanitation (US$ 32 million)  
 
2A.  
Increased access to water supply and sanitation  
 
Water production in the four secondary cities is 35 liters per capita per day, of which 
about 25 lpcd actually reaches consumers. In comparison, water production in cities of 
this size in other countries in Africa is between 75 and 100 lpcd.  On average, water 
production should be doubled in these cities. This component will finance increased 
water production as well as the extension of the distribution network, particularly in 
unserved areas and for new connections. Selected low-income areas will receive special 
attention by involving communities in the planning process for water distribution and 
public sanitation facilities. Financing will also be available for the construction/expansion 
of wastewater treatment ponds and piped sewerage in higher density commercial areas.  
 
2B. 
Improved operational efficiency  
 
The water utilities in the four participating cities perform reasonably well, but 
operational efficiency could be improved by reducing non-revenue water and improving 
financial management, billing and collection, customer management. Under this sub-
component the materials, equipment and costs associated with establishing pressure 
zones and leak detection areas will be provided, as will leak repairs in the distribution 
network and at service connections. Financial management, billing/collection, and 
customer-management can also be improved.  
 
2C.  
Institutional Reform  
 
Funding will be provided to refine enabling legislation to provide more autonomy to the 
Water Boards and to develop procedures and codes of conduct. Operator contracts with 
performance targets and performance incentives would also be developed and tested.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2million).  
Page  4
The project management will involve sector institutions at federal and regional levels, 
city administrations and utilities. Funding would be provided for costs associated with 
project implementation, to synthesize existing water and sanitation access data to 
determine baseline figures and to monitor progress under this project and in meeting the 
overall water supply and improved sanitation access goals under the MDGs. This 
component also includes training, workshops and other capacity building measures and 
support for environmental and social management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
D.  Project location  
 
The project will be implemented in urban areas, namely, Addis Ababa, Awassa, Gondar, 
Jimma, and Mekelle cities. However, the exact locations of the planned investments have 
not yet been determined.  
 
E.  Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]  
 
The Borrower's institutional capacity for the implementation of the Bank's safeguard 
policies is currently limited. Therefore, the proposed project will support measures that 
will strengthen the Borrower's capacity to identify, assess and mitigate potential adverse 
environmental and social impacts and to implement and monitor appropriate mitigation 
measures.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Mr Frederic Giovannetti (AFTTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential safeguard issues associated with this project include (i) soil and water pollution, 
loss of vegetation, soil erosion, (ii) loss of livelihoods or access to economic assets due to 
the planned rehabilitation and construction activities, and (iii) an increase in water 
Page  5
abstraction. The scope of the planned investments will not incur any large scale or 
irreversible impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The planned project activities will not incur any indirect and/or long term impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project has been designed to support the operationalization of a broader growth 
strategy, interpretation of Ethiopia's Integrated Water Resources Management policy, and 
contribution to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and interim 
country goals. Hence, project alternatives were not discussed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the exact locations of the planned investments and their potential localized adverse 
environmental and social impacts could not be determined prior to appraisal, the 
Borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF);  and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF outlines the 
environmental and social screening process to be applied to future investments at the 
planning stage. The ESMF also includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) and Environmental Guidelines for Contractors. The RPF outlines policies and 
procedures to be applied in the event that future investment activities require land 
acquisition. Given the Borrower's limited capacity to address safeguard policy issues, the 
project will include support for the effective implementation of the ESMF and RPF.  
 
Since the project will rely on the performance of existing dams, the Borrower has 
carried out a Dam Safety Assessment in December 2006; the project will implement the 
recommendations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Water Resources, the Regional Water Resources 
Development Bureaus, the Water Boards, the Water Utility Operator, and consumers. 
The ESMF has been prepared in consultation with AAWSA in Addis Ababa, with the 
Town Water Boards of Jimma and Awassa, two secondary cities that would potentially 
benefit from the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project, with the Environmental 
Protection Agency (federal level), and with the World Bank Country Office. Staff 
involved in the operation of water systems in Addis Ababa, Awassa, and Jimma have also 
been interviewed. The ESMF includes provisions for public consultations during the 
screening process of planned investments as well as approval and disclosure of the 
screening results. The ESMF and RPF have been disclosed in Ethiopia and at the Bank's 
Infoshop on February 14, 2007.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/14/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/14/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/14/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/14/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
Page  7
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yitbarek Tessema 
02/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
02/28/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Frederic Giovannetti 
02/28/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms N. Jane Walker 
03/01/2007 
Comments:   
