Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3128 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/26/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P106855 
Project Name: ET- Quality of Education Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Gary L. Theisen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (60%);Secondary education (30%);General education sector 
(10%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  25.00 
 Education 
For 
All 
18.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 30.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
45.00
148.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the project is to improve the quality and diversity of instructional 
services offered to Ethiopian children in Grades 1-12 to produce higher levels of achievement 
across diverse segments of the population.  A secondary objective is to ensure that students who 
are disadvantaged by nature of their family background, disabilities or geographic location are 
provided with the specialized instructional programs and services that will allow them to 
compete academically with their more advantaged peers.  The project wide objectives are 
presented in log frame format in Annex 1.  The Project Appraisal Document will contain a log 
frame for each of the proposed project components.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Teacher Development Program (TDPI) is already well established with the support of 
Government and six Pooled Fund Partners. TDP1 started in 2003/04 and will continue until 
Page  2
2008.  TDP2 is planned for a five year period until 2012/13 as an integral part of GEQIP, 
benefiting from considerable and valuable synergies with the other GEQIP components.  
 
TDP I was very successful in establishing the basis for effective teacher and trainer training and 
for providing the human and physical capacity for its maintenance and development. In addition, 
TDP I made significant advances in increasing the capacity of individual teachers to teach 
effectively and to use modern teaching methodology. However, effecting beneficial change in 
the actual practice of teachers in their classrooms is a long-term process and the timeframe 
available for TDP I was not sufficient for this to be completely achieved. However, it is planned 
that in TDP II further training and retraining will take place to ensure that this shortcoming is 
made good. In addition, it is planed that teacher and facilitator training will be extended to cover 
Non-Formal, Special Needs and Early Childhood Education. TDP II will thus have 8 Priority 
Programs.  
 
The overall purpose of TDP II, as a component of GEQIP, is to increase the supply of effective 
teachers, trainers and facilitators. The planned objectives of this component by sub-component 
include:  
 
TDP1: Teacher Educators: Knowledge, expertise, motivation and conduct of teacher educators 
will be improved.  
 
TDP2: Pre-service and Selection: Teacher skills will be enhanced by extending the duration and 
quality of pre-Service teacher training, improved selection procedures for candidates and an 
improved practicum experience.  
 
TDP3: In Service: Pedagogical knowledge and capacity of teachers will be improved within a 
formal, better articulated structure of career-long development.  
 
TDP4: Teacher Education System: The organization and management system for teacher 
education will be improved.  
 
TDP5: English Language Improvement Program (ELIP): Quality of English language teaching 
and teaching of core subjects in English will be improved.  
 
TDP6: Non-Formal Education/Alternative Basic Education (ABE) Training: The quality and 
reach of Non Formal Education will be improved and the supply of effective facilitators will be 
increased.  
 
TDP7: Special Needs Training (SNE): Teachers will be trained in SNE screening and in 
strategies for teaching, the SNE Pre-Service and In-Service Teacher Training programs will be 
strengthened, and provision will be made for production and distribution of SNE Education 
Materials to Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs) and Cluster Resource Centers.  
 
TD8: Early Childhood Development: High quality instructional materials will be produced and 
an increased number of trainers and ECD teachers will be produced.  
 
Page  3
Curriculum, textbooks and assessment.    This component will include curriculum, textbooks 
and other teaching and learning materials, and student assessment including examinations.  The 
program will support the achievement of key objectives as follows:  
 
-
Develop a curriculum which is responsive to the economic and democratic needs of the 
country, international economic conditions, and which is of a better quality;  
 
-
Ensure that the core subjects are the basis for effective teaching and learning in other subjects;  
 
-Improve the teaching and evaluation methods of teachers, and to produce high quality teaching 
aids; and  
 
-
Improve the development, printing and distribution of teaching and learning materials; and to 
improve inspection, student assessment and examinations systems.  
 
Management and administration program (Map)  Over the five year period of the ESDP II, the 
lack of organizational and management capacity became evident as a major bottleneck in 
implementing effectively system wide primary and secondary education programs. The process 
of decentralizing the system revealed that skills and experiences possessed at the regional level 
had yet to penetrate sufficiently to woreda and local levels. The MAP component of the GEQIP 
will thus have the following objectives:  
 
-
Establish reporting systems, with the improved use of communications technology to facilitate 
more effective horizontal and vertical communications within Government and with 
stakeholders;  
 
-
Design and implement a more transparent, low cost and productive management and 
administration system;  
 
-
Improve the collection and use of system data for planning, evaluation and the formation of 
policy and programs;  and  
 
-
More effectively, efficiently and equitably deliver education services to the end user through 
decentralized planning, management and administration.  
 
The School Improvement Program (SIP) was established in 2006 by the federal government as 
a
pilot activity.  Under GEQIP, the program will be expanded and will build on the lessons 
learned during the pilot phase.  The objectives of SIP include:  
 
-
Improve student learning achievement outcomes;  
 
-
Ensure a democratic, participatory, open and accountable school management and 
administration;  
 
-
Facilitate greater freedom in school management and administration through decentralization 
of responsibilities, revision and clarification of roles; and  
 
-
Establish objective standards and procedures for ensuring accountability and authority at the 
sub-woreda level.  
 
School Grants Program (SGP).  The objective of this component is to provide local (school) 
authorities, including parent groups, access to discretionary resources with an explicit focus on 
improving access to and the quality of education services as priority needs are defined at the 
school level.  The provision of school block grants already exits in Ethiopia.  The MOE Blue 
Book outlines the levels of grant that schools should receive as 10 Birr per year for every Grade 
Page  4
1-4 child that is enrolled in school, 15 Birr per year for every Grade 5-8 child, 20 Birr per year 
for every Grade 9-10 child and 50 Birr per year for every Grade 11-12 child. The purpose of this 
grant is to cover schools? operating costs and augment non-salary expenditures.  
 
However, due to a lack of resources at the woreda level, in none of the woredas and schools 
visited by the JRM (2006) were the amounts obtained by schools, both in cash or in-kind, in line 
with the benchmarks prescribed in the ?Blue Book? of government standards.  In addition, the 
extent to which this policy is implemented across the country is highly variable ranging from not 
all in Benishangul-Gumuz to its consistent application in Amhara and Tigray, although not to the 
proposed level.  
 
This component will ensure that at least minimal levels of discretionary resources are available 
in all schools, but in exchange for standards of reporting and accountability.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ethiopia-the project is national in scope, covering all regions and woredas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/29/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
None required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gary L. Theisen 
10/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/26/2007 
Comments:  No safeguard specialist required if project remains as defned in PCN and ISDS. Later, 
should project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, 
consult ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
10/26/2007 
Comments:  No SGP Specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.Later, should 
project involves land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impact, consult 
ASPEN. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
