Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2457 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/24/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P098093 
Project Name: Productive Safety Nets APL II 
Task Team Leader: Trina S. Haque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 9, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (98%);Central government administration (1%);Sub-
national government administration (1%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Vulnerability assessment 
and monitoring (S);Other social development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
CANADA: CANADIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
(CIDA) 42.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)153.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
86.00 
 
IRELAND, GOV. OF 
6.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
357.50
645.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the overall PSNP is to contribute to improving the productivity 
and efficiency of transfers to chronically food insecure househoulds, reducing household 
vulnerability, improving resilience to shocks, and promoting sustainable community 
development.  This will be achieved through (i) the timely provision of adequate transfers to 
beneficiary households, thus allowing effective consumption-smoothing and avoiding asset-
depletion; and (ii) the creation of productive sustainable community assets, contributing to 
rehabilitation of severely degraded areas and increasing productivity for households in these 
areas.  
Page  2
The development objectives of APL I were to assist the Government to transition from a relief-
oriented to a productive and development-oriented safety net by (i) providing predictable, multi-
annual resources, (ii) replacing food with grants as the primary medium of support, (iii) making 
resources available for critical capital, technical assistance, and administrative costs, (iv) 
strengthening community involvement by supporting community targeting and local-level 
participatory planning as core principles of the program, and (v) relating public works activities 
to the underlying causes of food insecurity, especially with respect to soil and water conservation 
measures.  
 
The second phase of the APL (scheduled to begin in the first quarter of calendar year 2007 
pending satisfactory completion of the triggers for moving to the second phase) has as its 
overarching development objective to consolidate the progress made under Phase I, and to 
establish a system of assistance to chronically food insecure households which is well-targeted 
timely, adequate, financially sustainable integrated with worda development plans and 
contributes to the environmental transformation of program areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
APL II will continue implementation of the program components approved as part of APL I, as 
well as the various modifications planned or underway to further strengthen core program 
implementation. APL I currently comprises two components: (i) safety net grants for labour-
intensive public works (such as soil and water conservation, improvement of access roads, 
rehabilitation of health facilities, shallow wells, spring protection and development, small-scale 
irrigation and composting) and direct support.  
 
Analysis and consultations during the identification stage, together with an early QER 
(December 2005), and the PCN Review meeting (August 2006) indicated that meeting APL II 
objectives will require work in the following areas, which define the design agenda for APL II:  
 
(i) Strengthening governance and increasing transparency: The PSNP, implemented in a 
decentralized, low- capacity environment, requires strong checks and balances to protect the 
program from manipulation for personal ends or special interests. A project of this nature places 
significant pressures on local administrations to ensure a fair and transparent distribution of 
program resources, with the program likely to come under increasing pressure and scrutiny in 
this area. The recent review of program targeting indicated that, in this environment, the program 
has done well to ensure that program resources are targeted to the poorest households. It also 
indicated, however, that the current appeals process could be further tightened to guarantee 
timely and objective treatment for those who might have a grievance, and that more information 
should be available to the public at local level on program objectives, targeting criteria, and 
appeals procedures.  
 
In addition, the current mix of community/ administrative targeting may need to be reinforced 
with elements of self-targeting as a way to reduce pressures on local administrations and 
communities. In this regard the terms of reference for a study are being finalized that will 
provide further information on (i) prevailing rural wages for unskilled labor and the extent of 
available employment at these wages in program areas, as well as (ii) time-use data for target 
Page  3
households with various demographic profiles. The study will provide greater indication of the 
degree to which the current wage provides any  incentive for non-target households to seek 
inclusion, the opportunity cost of participation for target households, and the degree to which 
work requirements under the program could be adjusted to discourage program demand among 
food-secure households. Key considerations to keep in mind as adjustments to the program are 
explored, will be the essential role of the PSNP to smooth consumption of critically vulnerable 
households and the need to avoid public works participation displacing household participation 
in other productive activities.  
 
At a broader level, sustaining local and international support for the program in a contested 
political environment and with competing demands for scarce development resources requires 
not only good performance but also transparency that subjects the program to public scrutiny. 
The PSNP needs to demonstrate that it is functioning as designed, and that it is generating the 
results that it promises. Towards these ends, project preparation will support means to further 
strengthen transparency of the targeting process and resource allocation decisions (e.g. 
widespread publication/communication of rules, program data in public domain), local 
accountability in service delivery (e.g. citizen's report cards), and the application of grievance 
procedures (e.g. frequent follow-up of any mis-targeting allegations). The Institutional Support 
component under APL II will also focus on assisting the program to produce more timely 
information through its M&E system, prepare and implement a multi-media communication 
strategy and implement a full impact evaluation to address questions of effectiveness.  
 
(ii) Improving efficiency and predictability of transfers: Preparation will focus on four areas in 
this context. First, emphasis on early planning and resource programming will continue to 
improve the predictability of program resources for woredas and allow better integration of 
program activities with woreda budget and development planning. Second, the focus on 
identifying and addressing key gaps in logistic capacity will continue (personnel, transport, 
computers, and generators), drawing on pilot experiences where possible for building capacity, 
for example, instituting mobile accounting teams. Third, options to harness technologies, such as 
the use of low-cost cell-phone technology, to reduce the transaction costs of delivering cash to 
beneficiaries, will be explored. Fourth, the pros and cons of providing ?PSNP beneficiary cards? 
will be explored. These cards would signify eligibility in the PSNP for more than one year, once 
the household has been identified as being eligible. Multi-year eligibility in the program would 
provide much-needed assurance of assistance to the household, enabling it to take on more risk 
in productive activities and to invest more. Fourth, the issue of utilizing established micro-
finance institutions (MFIs) in the delivery of transfers will be revisited.  
 
An additional area to be supported under APL II will be the implementation of pilot programs 
that provide an appropriate alternative to public works for pastoralist communities in Afar, 
Somali and eastern Oromiya Regions. For 2006 the Government has brought Afar inside the 
Program and provided Direct Support for these beneficiaries, while detailed design work is 
undertaken on a fully-fledged safety net sub-program appropriate for pastoralist areas. Until such 
time, Direct Support will continue to be the PSNP delivery mode for these populations.  
 
(iii) Catalyzing environmental transformation:  Sustainable land management and 
environmental rehabilitation is expected to take on an increasingly central role in PSNP 
Page  4
implementation. The bulk of PSNP resources support labor-intensive public works that have a 
strong focus on soil and water conservation and small-scale irrigation and represent an important 
contribution towards graduation. Evidence both from Ethiopia and from other countries shows 
that it is possible for these activities to become a vehicle for significant environmental 
transformation and enhanced productivity. A recent review of the public works program 
indicated, that while the quality of public works projects was generally good, there is a need to 
improve the integration between bottom-up and top-down planning, and focus on providing 
high-quality technical support. There is also a need to strengthen the implementation of the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to ensure that the design of the 
Public Works reflects good practice in the avoidance and/or mitigation of negative 
environmental and social impacts.  The enhanced involvement of Natural Resources 
Management personnel in program implementation will be explored under APL II, as will the 
use of appropriate technologies to promote better planning and monitoring of public works. 
Discussions have also started on how to better promote inter-regional learning and sharing of 
best-practice, which will become a focus of APL II.  
 
(iv) Financing instruments for drought risk management: Without ensuring a predictable and 
timely response to drought, the possibility remains that chronic food insecurity will increase as a 
result of transient shocks. The emergency appeal system, which is still the only system in place 
for responding to transient shocks outside the PSNP, falls short of providing this response. The 
debate over a more appropriate portfolio of financing instruments for responding to drought is 
therefore coming to the fore of the policy debate in Ethiopia. The team is working with WFP to 
develop a strategy based around a coordinated portfolio of drought financing instruments. The 
instruments under review, which would build on the base provided by the PSNP would be (i) an 
Ethiopia specific contingency fund; (ii) a contingent credit with the World Bank/ IMF, and (iii) 
weather-based insurance instruments. The goal would be to sequence the instruments in such a 
way so that an emergency appeal would only be needed in the most extreme, or "outlier" events. 
The initiative seeks to use the Ethiopia Agricultural Drought Index (a weather-based index 
developed for Ethiopia's pilot weather-based insurance contract) to allow quantifiable triggers to 
be used across these different instruments. The optimal combination of these in response to the  
severity of any given drought shock would make up Ethiopia's drought-risk management 
strategy. Additional IDA financing would be needed to operationalize this component, but IDA 
commitment to the reform agenda would leverage significant additional resources from donor 
partners.  
 
(v) Medium-term financial sustainability of the PSNP: At the outset of the PSNP, Government 
had indicated that the program would be operational for only five years, after which chronic food 
insecurity would have been addressed. While neither the Bank nor other development partners 
agreed with this assessment, it was felt that initiating the reform process of the safety net system 
was the immediate goal, and that issues of duration of the program and financial sustainability 
could be addressed at a later stage. With the start of APL II, these questions become of 
immediate relevance. This is especially true since the PSNP faces a large overall financing gap 
starting with Year 4 of implementation (i.e., 2008). It is thus proposed that efforts be undertaken 
in the course of APL II design and early implementation to mobilize longer-term commitment 
and financing from both existing and new PSNP partners to enable the program to continue at 
least for the next eight years (resulting in a ten-year commitment overall). To achieve this, the 
Page  5
PSNP and FSP will jointly need to demonstrate their effectiveness. The Bank is also signaling its 
ongoing commitment to the PSNP with the proposal to extend the support to the PSNP with the 
addition of a third phase of support for 5 years.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Public works activities will be carried out in rural areas of Ethiopia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Ethiopia has adequate EIA legislation covering individual projects with significant impact. Since 
the community projects are determined during the course of the project, for the purposes of the 
first phase of this project (APL I), an ESMF was produced by Government for APL I and 
disclosed.  
 
It was noted during the recent APL I Public Works review that although woreda staff had in 
many cases received ESMF training, not all projects were being screened as required by the 
ESMF. It was also noted that monitoring of ESMF implementation had not yet been instituted by 
woreda or Regional authorities.  
 
In response, the following measures are being taken for APL II:  
 
(i) 
Staff of the Regional Environmental Protection Authorities, who have a key role in the 
ESMF procedure, and the woreda Environmental Focal Points, will participate in the awareness-
creation and training courses for the PSNP Public Works, which includes ESMF II training; This 
trainIg will be provided by teams drawn from MoARD at Federal and Regional level, with 
technical assistance from the Natural Resources Management personnel of MoArd and WFP.  
 
(ii) 
The provisions for monitoring implementation of the ESMF, including identification of 
the parties responsible for implementation and monitoring, will be reviewed jointly with the 
MoARD and re-designed to ensure implementation in APL II, taking into account existing 
capacities and any capacity-building requirements.  
 
It is considered that with revised roles and responsibilities, and supported by awareness-
creation and training in ESMF implementation and monitoring, the woreda technical staff will 
have the capacity to undertake the basic environmental screening required by the ESMF for 
individual sub-projects. Since it is not intended that the PSNP will include public works 
necessitating a separate EIA, it is considered that with adequate awareness-creation and training, 
the Regional Environmental Bureaus have sufficient capacity to review and determine, in the 
exceptional cases that may arise, where an EIA may be required, and to make arrangements for 
such an EIAs if necessary. Such an EIA would be conducted using BoARD staff with support 
from MoARD and other stakeholders as required.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTH3) 
 
Page  6
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Most of the sub-projects, though intended to impact the environment positively, will have the 
potential for negative environmental impacts if not designed and implemented following good 
practice. Thus given that there will be a large number of such projects, OP 4.01 is triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
This policy is triggered under the assumption that successful small-scale irrigagtgion projects 
will lead to greater agricultural acitvity which may require pest control management efforts. A 
pest management manual is being made available under the Pastoral Community Development 
Project which can be utilized here.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
OP 4.11, which applies whenever OP 4.01 applies, is taken care of by being integrated into 
the ESMF screening process. The policy would be ?triggered? only in the unlikely event that a 
?chance-find? is encountered during project implementation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
This policy is triggered because of the small-scale irrigation projects expected in watersheds 
of three international waterways. For APL I, Government and the Bank notified the concerned 
countries in accordance with this policy, covering the five-year period of APL I and APL II. 
Since water abstraction rates are within the notified levels, there is no need for further 
notification for APL II.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/13/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
An ESMF was disclosed for APL 1.  The ESMF disclosed for APL 1 will be modified for 
APL 2, reflecting the following:  
 
-
Procedural changes already incorporated in the APL I ESMF Operational Summary;  
 
-
Guide for Integrated Pest Management in Small-scale Irrigation Projects as specified in 
the ESMF I is to be finalized and disclosed, in conjunction with the MoARD, and covering 
the potential use of pesticides in pastoral communities as appropriate;  
 
-
The Government's Medical Waste Management Guide for Rural Health Clinics as 
specified in ESMF I has been recently disclosed under the Protection of Basic Services (PBS) 
operation and is to be re-disclosed.  
 
-
Any additional sections required for extending the PW programme into pastoralist areas;  
 
-
ESMF implementation monitoring procedures will be reviewed, roles and responsibilities 
clearly identified, and re-designed as needed.  
 
A
modified version of the ESMF for APL 2 will be produced and disclosed. The sector unit 
has agreed to accept transfer of Safeguard's responsibility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Trina S. Haque 
08/23/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/24/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
08/24/2006 
Comments:   
