Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2877 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/29/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P091077 
Project Name: ET-Road Sector Dev. Stage III Proj. (APL3) in support of Govt's RSDP 
Task Team Leader: Yoshimichi Kawasumi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Central government administration (9%);Sub-
national government administration (1%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
225.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
161.68
161.68 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Transport System: Ethiopia?s transport system is one of the least adequate in the world to 
support an efficient production and distribution system to meet the above goals. The transport 
infrastructure in Ethiopia comprises a road network estimated (end 2005) at 37,018 km, out of 
which Federal roads constitute 18,612 km, while Regional roads are 18,406 km, as well as a 781 
km railway line from Addis Ababa to Djibouti (about 709 km within Ethiopia), a national 
merchant marine; and air transport facilities including two international airports, seven major 
domestic airports, and over thirty other domestic runways and airstrips.  
 
Road Transport Infrastructure: Road transport is the dominant mode that carries about 95 
percent of the country?s passenger and freight traffic and is the only form of access to most rural 
communities. Despite considerable efforts to expand the Road Network over the past few 
decades the country still has one of the lowest road densities.  
 
Page  2
Government Strategy: The Government has attached a high priority to the road sector in its 
overall economic development program and poverty reduction strategy. In 1997, a major 10 year 
RSDP was launched in order to address the limited coverage and poor state of the road network, 
as well as, the growing transport requirements of the country.  
 
In 1997, Government of Ethiopia (GOE) launched a major 10-year Road Sector Development 
Program (RSDP: 1997-2007) to address the limited coverage and poor state of the road network, 
as well as, the growing transport needs of the country. The Program was launched with 
significant donor support to create adequate capacity in the road sector, and to facilitate the 
economic recovery process by restoring the condition and expanding the essential road network. 
The program also sought to develop a strong management and technical capacity to manage the 
road network, in order to address key outstanding sectoral issues. With the completion of the 
RSDP Phase I, at the end of June 2002, the GOE embarked on the RSDP II.  
 
The objectives of the project, which would remain unchanged, are to increase the road transport 
infrastructure and improve its reliability, strengthen the capacity for road construction, 
management and maintenance, and create conditions conducive to private sector participation in 
the road transport sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The APL3 includes:  (i) Main roads upgrading including Gondar-Debark (107 km), Gedo-
Nekempte (134 km) and upgrading of Aposto - Bore - Negele (268 km); and (ii) Rural Roads 
construction, Yalo-Dalol (149 km). The cost of APL3 is estimated at US$ 346.7 million 
including related technical assistance.  
 
Road Upgrading and Construction  
 
&#61656; 
The upgrading of the Gondar - Debark gravel road (107 km) to hot asphalt mix 
surface road as 7.0m wide carriageway with shoulders 1.5m wide each. This road is located 
largely in Amhara National Regional Sate in the northern part of Ethiopia, and forms part of one 
of the major south-north road links in the country.  
 
&#61656; 
The rehabilitation of the Gedo - Nekempte section (134 km) of the Addis - 
Nekempte paved road as 7.0m wide carriageway with shoulders 1.5m wide each. The road has 
high socio-economic importance in serving as a major link to major parts of Oromiya and 
Benshangul regions traversing mostly flat terrain.  
 
&#61656; 
The upgrading of the Aposto - Bore - Negele gravel road (268 km) to double 
bituminous surface treated road as 7.0m wide carriageway with shoulders 1.5m wide each. It 
traverses parts of SNNPR, Oromiya and Somali regions and is the main access route for the 
development of the Sidamo, Borona, and Dolo areas in South-East Ethiopia, mostly along 
agricultural and farming areas.  
 
&#61656; 
The construction of Yalo - Dalol road (149 km).  The proposed road connects the 
Woredas of Yalo, Magale and Ab-Ala and their capitals to each other and to the neighboring 
Page  3
Tigray Region, offering an excellent access to market for the Afar livestock and salt.  The road is 
proposed to construct as a gravel regional/rural road with 7.0m wide carriageway.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Aposto ? Wendo ? Negale (Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples State and Oromia), 
Southern and South-Eastern). Agriculture is the predominant economic activity of the region.  
 
Gedo-Nekempt, Oromia Region/State (South-East), Agriculture is the predominant economic 
activity of the region.  
 
Gondar ? Debark, Amhara Region/State, (North East). Agriculture is the predominant economic 
activity of the region.  
 
Yalo ? Dalol, (Afar Region/State and Tigray Region/State). The Afar region is inhabited by 
pastoral people, cattle breading, is the main economic activity of the state. In the part of Tigray 
traversed by the road, a combination of cattle breeding and agriculture, are the main economic 
activity.   
 
E. 
 Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under RSDP1 and 2, the borrower laid the foundation for sound environmental and social 
management within the roads sector in Ethiopia. As part of the RSDP I EA recommendations, an 
environmental monitoring branch (EMB) was established under the ERA. Under RSDP II, the 
Branch was transformed to an Environmental Monitoring and Safety Branch (EMSB). The 
EMSB consists of: one environmentalist, three sociologists, one ecologist, one hydrologist and a 
health officer. The health officer and one of the sociologists work permanently on HIV/AIDS 
prevention. The EMSB has been mainly engaged in reviewing EIA and RAPs prepared by design 
and EA consultants. Environmental monitoring activities are also being undertaken by the 
EMSB. Also, on the legal aspect, as an outcome of the continuous sector dialogue with the client, 
the Government proclaimed a new (July 15th/05) law governing compensation and involuntary 
resettlement; Proclamation No.455/2005.  
 
Individual Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) for the first year's road program (4 roads) 
has been prepared, likewise, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). Environmental Management 
Plans (EMPs) and RAPs will be reviewed, cleared and disclosed prior to Appraisal.  
 
APL3 will continue to support EMSB to implement EMPs and the RAPs prepared for each of 
the proposed road projects. The program will also strengthen management capacity of the unit 
through training and logistical support. Supervision of project operations will include a social 
scientist and environment specialists. Project progress reports shall include social development 
outcomes   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The potentially adverse impacts include: soil erosion, temporary and permanent loss of land 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and property, the spread of HIV/AIDS, disturbances in the water quality, noise and dust are 
presumed to induce adverse physical environmental impacts during road construction work.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Construction and rehabilitation of the four roads will have an impact on some settlements of 
people living and working along the roads. For the purpose of resettling and compensation of the 
affected people, four individual Resettlement Action Plans have been reviewed, cleared and will 
be disclosed prior to project appraisal.  Total number of households affected by resettlement 
and/or compensation: is 3,477 at this point, along a total length of 643 km of roads.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/10/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard studies (EIAs, RAPs and RPF)completed 12/15/2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yoshimichi Kawasumi 
03/28/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
03/29/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
