Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3052 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P106559 
Project Name: Protection of Basic Services - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Trina S. Haque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 2, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (50%);Health (20%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (10%);Agricultural extension and research (10%);General public 
administration sector (10%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (S);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S);Other communicable diseases (S);Social risk 
mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
170.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
919.70 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 120.00
1,039.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The original development objective of the PBS project which would remain unchanged is to 
protect the delivery of basic services by sub-national governments while promoting and 
deepening transparency and accountability in service delivery.The proposed additional grant of 
US$170 million would mainly finance the costs associated with completion of Component 1 
–
the Sub-national Basic Services program and Component 2 – Health MDG Performance Facility, 
supported by the project.  An additional activity under Component 1, the Local Investment Grant 
(LIG) Pilot, would also be funded to scale-up the project’s impact and development effectiveness 
in the delivery of basic services by funding more and better capital investment projects by local 
governments.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The Grant supporting the Protection of Basic Services Project was approved on May 25, 2006 
and became effective on June 2, 2006. The closing date is currently June 30, 2008. Of the total 
Grant amount of SDR 149.6 million (US$215 million equivalent), SDR 136.9 million or 96% 
has been disbursed.  The proposed additional financing of US$170 million would largely finance 
the costs associated with the completion of Component 1 
–
the Sub-National Basic Services 
Program, and Component 2 – the Health MDG Performance Facility.   The proposed Additional 
Financing would also add a new activity related to the delivery of basic services, termed the 
Local Investment Grant (LIG).  While the existing Component 1 reimburses Government for 
recurrent costs related to basic service delivery by regional ad local (woredas) governments, the 
LIG would finance a pilot effort to increase both the quality and quantity of capital investment 
by local governments and thereby scale up the Project’s impact and development effectiveness in 
the delivery of basic services.  The existing project components would be retained, with a new 
subcomponent for the LIG, added as Component 1b. The additional financing would support 
Components 1, 2, and 3 as described below:  
 
Component 1 of Basic-Services Subprogram includes two sub-component:  
 
Sub-component 1a “Basic Services Sub-Program”, will continue to support the delivery of 
basic services provided by regional and local governments. Additional resources would be 
provided to regions and local authorities (rural and urban) via the Federal block grant transfer 
system based on agreed plans for delivery of basic services to help address resource requirements 
for sub-national delivery of basic services for the Ethiopian Fiscal Year 2000 (IDA FY08).  
 
Sub-component 1b “Local Investment Grant (LIG), a new activity of the PBS Project, will 
support the introduction, on a pilot basis, of a multi-sector specific purpose grant (SPG) from the 
Federal Government with the purpose of increasing the quality and quantity of capital spending 
by local governments. Since the SPG is a standard fiscal instrument in Ethiopia, the funds will 
flow through regular fiscal channels managed by the MOFED. Projects would be selected from a 
positive list of eligible capital investments from all the sectors covered by LIG. The proposed 
additional financing of US$30 million would provide funds to local governments over an initial 
period of two years. Funding to initiate the LIG window under Component 1 would expand the 
mechanisms available to better achieve the original PDO. Good progress in implementation 
permits this more comprehensive and advanced approach to local service delivery to be 
introduced at this time.  
 
Component 2 on the Health MDG Performance Facility Sub-Program will continue to finance 
those critical inputs for primary health service delivery subprogram that cannot be efficiently 
funded at woreda level through the block-grant supported under Component 1. It will  continue 
to support three types of activities: (i) procurement and distribution of critical health 
commodities; (ii) capacity building; and (iii) strengthening of procurement and logistics.  
 
Component 3 on Governance Systems on Financial Transparency and Accountability Sub-
program will continue to support activities at the Region/City Administrations, woredas and sub-
woreda levels to enhance transparency around public budget procedures (budget preparation, 
expenditure and audits); and foster broad engagement, strengthened “voice” and client power of 
Page  3
citizen representative groups and citizens more broadly on public budget processes and public 
service delivery.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented throughout the country by local government authorities in 
collaboration with respective sector specialists operating at the local and regional levels.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity for addressing safeguard issues under the additional 
financing will be evaluated during the pre-appraisal/appraisal missions.  Actions to address any 
identified weaknesses will be discussed and agreed with the Borrower at this time.  
 
II.  KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT  
 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
1.
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
The environmental classification of the ongoing project remains a Category B.  
 
For Component 2: Health MDG Performance Facility. Project implementation will involve 
medical waste and use of insecticides which raise safeguard issues. The physical design of health 
centers and health posts have provisions for proper disposal of liquid and solid waste in addition 
to small incinerators for burning contaminated materials used by health centers.  Insecticides are 
used indoor and the potential for contaminating the outside environment is limited in scope. . In 
addition vector management guidelines have been introduced and this is in use since 2003. The 
guidelines are being updated to capture the recent developments. No significant negative impact 
is anticipated as long as agreed safeguard measures are implemented.  
 
The additional LIG subcomponent would support construction of small-scale public works sub-
projects through the multi-sector specific purpose grant (SPG) from the Federal Government. 
These public works would be identified and managed by woreda governments and are expected 
to be similar in scale and scope to those implemented in a number of other Bank projects in 
Ethiopia. A PHRD funded consultancy identified possible environmental and social safeguard 
requirements for these public work subprojects. An Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) in conjunction with a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)has been 
completed. The safeguard procedures will be inputs to the Project Implementation Plan and will 
include a set of innovative Technical Design Guidelines for over two dozen subprojects types. 
These Guidelines will serve as a common practical tool at the local government level to improve 
technical implementation of the eligible public works inclusive of environmental and social 
considerations.  
 
The ESMF and RFP described above are new. The parent project did not have an ESMF/EA 
nor an RPF. The Project only had a health care waste management plan which was disclosed in 
the Info Shop as the EA.  The project did not have any involuntary resettlement issues. The new 
LIG activity, however, does trigger the safeguard policy on involuntary resettlemen, and for 
which a Resettlement Action Plan has been completed.  
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area:  
 
No long-term impacts are anticipated as long as the provisions for minimizing impacts are 
implemented as designed.  
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.  
 
The focus on local decentralized service delivery has been recognized with subsequent 
challenges in improving capacity for planning, construction and supervision at this local level. 
Through synergy with several other Bank projects, the team has identified national level capacity 
building needs for woreda and local planning through appropriate institutions and these will be 
solidified over the next year. Regular supervision to ensure adherence to the safeguard guidelines 
help minimize the possible adverse impacts.  
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.  
 
For Component 2.  Measures adopted as part of the PBS operation will continue to be 
implemented.  The original Amharic version of the Government’s Guidelines on the Handling 
and Disposal of Waste in Health Facilities (September 1997) has been distributed widely to 
health facilities providing such services, while an English translation has been disclosed in the 
World Bank’s Infoshop (February 2006). The Government has also prepared and adopted the 
following guidelines: (i) Injection Safety Guidelines to reduce infections through contaminated 
needles; (ii) Vector Management Plan, in response to the significant scaling up of IRS activities 
addressed in the ongoing PBS project as well as a prerequisite to insecticide procurement; and 
(iii) Guidelines for Malaria Vector Control, introduced and in use since 2003.  
 
The Health facility construction designs include provisions for proper handling of liquid and 
solid wastes generated by health units  and small burning facilities are installed for taking care of 
contaminated and hazardous materials.  Health facilities are provided with autoclaves to sterilize 
medical instruments and other materials. An environmental sanitation expert located in health 
centers takes the responsibility for supervising the implementation of safety policy by health 
facilities.  
 
For the new LIG Sub-Component:  
 
Main environmental and social impacts of the LIG. The main environmental and social impacts 
associated with the project will result from the construction and/or rehabilitation of small scale 
investments in the transport, waste, health and irrigation sectors. Impact and mitigation 
checklists are provided in the ESMF as a reference guide for identifying and managing these 
impacts.  
 
Subproject preparation, screening, review and appraisal process. The ESMF outlines the 
screening procedures, reporting systems, and responsibilities to be adopted by the MoFED 
during LIG implementation. The tools and mechanisms provided include: (i) steps to be taken for 
Page  5
screening subprojects; (ii) terms of reference for an annual environmental and social audit of the 
LIG; (iii) Technical Design Guidelines on the environmental and social impact of potential sub-
projects; (iv) compliance mechanisms; and (v) descriptions of roles, accompanied by terms of 
reference.  
 
Mitigation plans. As part of the assessment process, the Technical Design Guidelines have been 
prepared for over two dozen subproject types. These will assist local planners,  officials and 
contractors implement appropriate mitigation measures for specific subprojects. If identified as a 
requirement of the sub-project through the screening process, a Resettlement Action Plan, will 
also be prepared.  
 
Legislative framework. The key environmental policies exist which provide the overarching 
framework for environmental management include: the Constitution of Ethiopia, the 
Environmental Policy of Ethiopia, and the National Conservation Strategy. A number of 
proclamations and supporting regulations are also applicable:: Proclamation No.295/2002 for the 
establishment of Environmental Protection Organs; Proclamation No.299/2002 for 
Environmental Impact Assessment; Proclamation No.300/2002 for Environmental Pollution 
Control; and Proclamation No. 455/2005 on expropriation and compensation.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.  
 
Local governments and communities are the major stakeholders. The civil works funded under 
the LIG subcomponent are vetted through the local government planning process that engages in 
direct community participation for identifying potential projects. Local woreda authorities, 
through sector specialists scope the potential projects and include them in annual workplan 
requests. Disclosure of the ESMF and RAP will be in country, via notices in the media regarding 
the availability of these documents at the country Infoshop.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Kenneth M. Green (AFTS3) 
Mr Gebreselassie Okubagzhi (AFTH3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Health MDG Performance Facility will involve medical waste and use of insecticides 
which raise safeguard issues   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The new LIG activity triggers the safeguard policy on involuntary resettlement.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/20/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
For the new LIG Subcomponent, the ESMF and Resettlement Action Plan have been 
prepared and will be disclosed prior to appraisal. Timetable for launching and/or completing 
any additional safeguard studies that may be needed will be discussed and agreed with 
Government during the pre-appraisal mission.  
 
Regarding Component 2, status of safeguard-related studies and guidelines are described in 
Section II.A4 above.  
 
The Sector Managing Unit has accepted the transfer of safeguard responsibility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Trina S. Haque 
07/17/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
07/17/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
