                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC2017


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/14/2006

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Fiji                               Project ID: P099308
Project Name: FEA Renewable Power Development (RDP) Project
Task Team Leader: Antonie De Wilde
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15,     Estimated Board Date: January 11, 2007
2006
Managing Unit: EASEG                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Renewable energy (100%)
Theme: Climate change (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          33.50
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER                                                      8.50
                                                                      8.50


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The development objective is to assist the Fiji Government in meeting the current and future
demand for electricity in Fiji in a financially and environmentally sustainable manner.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project is likely to consist of the following components:

 Investment: This component will finance part of the renewable power generation schemes of
about 60-65 MW. In particular it will finance the three components listed below. The
investments proposed during our reconnaissance mission were:
 -      Rehabilitation of the Wailoa Power Station. The Wailoa Power Station, commissioned in
1983, is the main generation element of the Monasavu Hydro-electric development. The power
station comprises 4 x 20 MW generators driven by Pelton turbines with a nominal static head of
around 618 m. The refurbishment will include but not limited to: (i) increased turbine output, (ii)
generator refurbishment and (iii) improved automation and control. Total cost is estimated at
US$22.5 million. The foreign exchange component to be financed by IBRD is US$18 million.
  -     Waivunu biomass power plant. The total cost of the biomass power plant, transmission
lines, distribution substations, land acquisition, etc. is estimated to be US$12 million, of which
US$7 million is to be financed by the Bank. Current plans, which are still subject to change, is to
use a thermal fired boiler. The exhaust from the plant will meet all local environmental
requirements regarding chemical contents. Particles will be removed using electrostatic
precipitators and collected to be used (after treatment)as fertilizer. The Waivunu biomass power
plant is being developed by the FEA, who will own the plant and will be responsible for its
preparation, implementation, operation and maintenance. The project site is located at the
property of Fiji Hardwood Corporation (FHC), on the southern coast of the main island of Fiji,
Viti Levu, about 50 km west of Suva.
  -     Four Biomass Power Plants in Vanua Levu. The following strategic locations have been
identified in the Savusavu and Seqaqa area: (a) 1-2 MW plant located adjacent to the Savusavu
Copra Mill and the Lumber Processing sawmill. This would utilize all the Copra Mill residues
and sawmill residues from Lumber Processing and Hanshine, which is another sawmill in the
proximity. The waste heat generated from the plant can be used for kiln drying at Lumber
Processing; (b) 1 MW Plant located east of Savusavu towards Tavueni which will be adjacent to
a Palm furniture sawmill which is being constructed at the moment, near the end of the grid to
provide voltage support and reduce the distance to coconut plantation residues; (c) 1 MW Plant
located close to the junction which forks out to Seqaqa and Bua. This plant will be located
adjacent to an existing sawmill and will be utilizing residues from the same; (d) 1 x 750kW plant
in Seqaqa, north of Savusavu. This plant is located near a forest area and will utilize waste
residues from the forest floor and preliminary processing. This will encourage growth in the
Seqaqa area and also create a local industry for biomass supply. The total resource available is
expected to be around 3,000 tons . The total cost of this sub project is US$9.34 million. The
foreign exchange component the IBRD will finance is US$7 million.

D. Project location (if known)
-     The Wailoa Power Station, commissioned in 1983, is the main generation element of the
Monasavu Hydro-electric development scheme in the north of Vitu Levu.

 -    Waivunu biomass power plant. The project site is located in at the property of Fiji
Hardwood Corporation (FHC), on the southern coast of the main island of Fiji, Viti Levu, about
50 km west of Suva

 -     Four Biomass Power Plants in Vanua Levu . See the description of the location above
(Para C)

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Borrower's capacity for implementing World Bank safeguard policies is deemed to be
strong. For the Nadarivatu Scheme, they demonstrated to have a strong EIA and social
safeguards capacity. This will be applied to the projects to be financed by IBRD

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Bruce M. Harris (QAG)
   Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASES)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes            No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    The Borrower's capacity for implementing World Bank safeguard policies is deemed to be
strong. FEA in preparation of the proposed projects has invested in a thorough EIA for the
Nadarivatu Hydropower Development project and received clearance for the Department of
Environment. An EIA will be prepared for each biomass plants to be financed under this project.
The key environmental issues that will be addressed under each EIA will include: (i) the source
of the fuel to ensure that the project does not lead to any deforestation, (ii) installation of PM
control equipment that would ensure compliance with the discharge and ambient quality
standards, and (iii) installation of the continuous monitoring and recording system for PM
emissions. A public consultation will be held on each EIA, which will be disclosed at the
Infoshop and in Fiji. Each EIA will be cleared by the Bank.

     In addition, due to a recent court ruling regarding compensation for landowners effected by
the Monasavu project (which was financed by the World Bank), they have followed all the
required regulations related to land issues and obtained agreements from 100% of the affected
landowners. In the meantime, the proposed project has been scaled down and they restarted
negotiations with individual landowners, landowner societies as well as with the Native Land
Trust Board.

      Following the recent elections and government re-structuring, the former Department of
Environment has been upgraded to a fully fledged Ministry of Environment and this project will
provide capacity building support to the new MoE to ensure adequate capacity over time, for
environmental management of the renewable energy sector.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                       X
     As mentioned above timber waste will primarily originate from plantations. Communities
which want to participate in the project will need to operate under a sustainable forest
management plan. Activities are being screened through the ongoing EIA process to determine
if the forestry policy is triggered.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                          X
     Safety of Dams OP4.37 is triggered because the investments we are financing in Wailoa
depend for their function on the use of water stored and provided for by the existing Monasavu
Dam. Therefore, FEA will undertake a Dam Safety review and prepare a Dam Safety Measures
plan to ensure the Dam continues to be operated safely.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/21/2006

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   No specific studies needed

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                   Mr Antonie De Wilde                                                       12/08/2005
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                                        07/13/2006
      Comments: Bekir Onursal signed for Glenn S. Morgan.
    Sector Manager:                     Ms Junhui Wu                                                              07/14/2006
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
