Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2440
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Fiji 
Project ID:  P099308 
Project Name:  FEA Renewable Power Development (RDP) Project 
Task Team Leader:  Antonie De Wilde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 12, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 7, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
34.88 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
29.84 
 
AUSTRALIA: AUSTRALIAN AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 3.60
33.44 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
&#61607; 
The objective of the Project is to assist the Borrower to continue to meet 
the growing demand for electricity in the Republic of Fiji at lower cost by further 
developing a reliable diversified sustainable energy portfolio.  
 
To contribute to mitigating climate change through the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions in line with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate change.   
 
3. Project Description 
The World Bank will finance the development by FEA of two generation units utilizing 
biomass and the expansion of the Wailoa Power station, which was originally financed 25 
years ago with Bank funding.  
 
a.  
Wailoa expansion  
 
The Wailoa Power Station, commissioned in 1983, is the main generation element of the 
Monasavu Hydro-electric development. The power station comprises 4 x 20 MW 
generators driven by Pelton turbines with a nominal static head of around 618 m. The 
Page  2
proposed expansion comprises duplication of the penstock, which would provide an 
additional 8 MW and 20 GWh. It also involves the installation of a fifth unit with 21 MW 
capacity. Total cost of duplication of the penstock and expansion of the power house is 
estimated at USD 30.4 million. The foreign exchange component to be financed by IBRD 
is USD 21.3 million.  
 
b.  
Deuba biomass power plant  
 
The proposed site for the Deuba biomass power station with a capacity of 3 MW is 
located within the existing Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA) Deuba power station 
compound. This is near the Waidradra settlement in the Deuba region, approximately 50 
km to the west of Suva. The Deuba biomass power plant is expected to operate as base 
load generation to augment the electricity generation for the Viti Levu grid. The existing 
33kV line and the 6.25 MVA 33kV/11kV transformer at Deuba has sufficient capacity 
for both the existing Deuba diesel generators and the proposed biomass power plant. The 
power plant requires 26,000 tons of feedstock with a moisture content of 25 percent per 
year. This is supplied by FHC, which is in the process of being certified by the Forestry 
Stewardship Council.  
 
c. 
Savusavu biomass power plant Vanua Levu  
 
The proposed Savusavu 2 MW power station will be located adjacent and north of 
Lumber Processing Sawmill in the Valaga Bay area. The site is approximately 7.5 km 
north from the Savusavu town centre along Savusavu West Coast Road. The maximum 
continuous net electrical rating of the Savusavu power station will be 2 MW. The plant 
will require 22,000 ton of timber mill waste with a moisture content of 25 percent. The 
main supply of wood waste comes from coconut trees and will be supplied by road truck 
transport from the Lumber Processing mill located close to the proposed powerhouse site.  
 
The total cost of the two biomass power plants is USD 19.8 million. The foreign 
exchange component the IBRD will finance is USD 13.8 million.  
 
d. 
Capacity Development Plan  
 
The Bank is working together with FEA and AusAID to develop a Capacity 
Development Plan, with a particular focus on the three areas described below where FEA 
currently lacks in technical capacity. This sub-project is being funded with grant 
financing of USD 3.6 million over a period of four years.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Monasavu hydropower scheme is located east of the central highlands of Viti Levu, 
Fiji?s largest island (approximately 10,400m2), and South East trade winds consistently 
provide rainfall to this side of the main divide. The scheme has been developed by 
intercepting various tributaries of the Wainimala catchment and diverting them to the 
Monasavu Reservoir; some of the diversions generate power by mini-hydro schemes. 
Water from the Monasavu Reservoir is diverted to the Wailoa River through the Wailoa 
Page  3
Power Station. Both the Wailoa and Wainimala Rivers are part of the Rewa River, which 
flows to Nausori on the south eastern coast.  
 
Viti Levu?s highland peaks range from 600m to 1200m above sea level. The area used 
for the hydro site has elevation ranging from 150m above sea level at the Wailoa River to 
over 900m at the surge shaft. The site is in the vicinity of the border between the 
provinces of Naitasiri and Nadroga/Navosa, and the districts of Nagonenicolo (Naitasiri) 
and Nadrau (Nadroga/Navosa). It also crosses over the lowland/highland boundary of 
600m above sea level. The proposed second tunnel route is located between the 
Monasavu Reservoir and the Wailoa Power Station as shown in Figure1 (the tunnel 
would convey water from left to right in the image).  
 
Figure 1 : Location of the Monasavu / Wailoa Hydropower Scheme  
 
Project Location and Scale of the Deuba Biomass Power Plant  
 
The proposed biomass power station is located on the southern central coast of Viti 
Levu, at the existing diesel fired thermal power station at Deuba. Current access to the 
site is from the Queens Highway, through Waidradra Road. The existing power station 
and substation are in close proximity to rural residences in the nearby Waidradra 
Settlement (Figure 2). The power station is located on the side of a local rise on the 
coastal plain. In constructing the site it was necessary to undertake substantial earthworks 
--  a consequence of which is that the power station is located in a quarry-like setting. 
Spoil from this operation has been used for the siting of the sub-station.  
 
An additional pile of spoil has been left unused. The surrounds of the FEA site are 
mowed grass with some minor areas of scrubby re-growth. This spoil will be utilized in 
forming up the site for this development. The generation facilities currently on site 
consist of six elderly diesel generators, only two of which are operational. The building 
used to house the generators will, as much as practicable, be utilized to house part of the 
new generation facilities. Three modern containerized diesel generator units have been 
located outside the building, as replacements for the old generators; these old . units will 
remain in place as standby generation capacity.  
 
Project Location and Scale of the Savusavu Biomass Power Plant  
 
The proposed biomass power station will be located in the Valaga Bay Industrial Zone 
to the north of Savusavu Township, on the south coast of Vanua Levu. The site is 
immediately adjacent to Transinsular Road and the coastal foreshore. The site is in close 
proximity to residences in the nearby settlements of Nabaci and Jerusalemi (Figure 3). 
The site is located on the narrow coastal strip at the base of the steeply rising ranges. In 
constructing the site, it will be necessary to undertake substantial earthworks to raise the 
site to the approximate level of the road. The site has been used for plantation and 
Page  4
agricultural purposes, and the surrounds of the site are grass with some minor areas of re-
growth.  
 
The site has been utilized in part as a coconut plantation. Some coconut trees are still 
present as are some areas of taro. At present the site is vacant. Land on either side of the 
site is used for lumber and copra production. A fuel farm, operated by BP, is located on 
the northern side of the copra mill. Offshore mooring and transfer facilities for re-supply 
vessels are located approximately 100 meters from the foreshore. Pearl farming 
operations are located several kilometers south of the site on the southern end of 
Savusavu town. The site is owned freehold by Coir Industries Ltd and is shown on 
Deposited Plan 7611. Discussions with the landowner regarding purchase of the land are 
at an advanced stage. Cooling water will be required from the foreshore area adjacent to 
the site. Since there is no confirmed timeframe on construction of the proposed 
government jetty at this area, it is assumed at this stage that a deep water intake will be 
required. For this purpose, a foreshore lease will be required from the land owners, which 
covers the cooling water intake.  
 
Figure 3: Savusavu biomass power plant site location.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists  
 
Bruce Harris, Senior Social Safeguards Specialist  
 
Hiroshi Ono, Senior Environmental Specialist (Appraisal stage)  
 
6.
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
Yes 
No  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)  
X  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  
X  
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (QAG) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
1.
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
Wailoa Expansion: duplication of the penstock. The EIA found: ?The key 
environmental impacts are considered manageable and relate entirely to the construction 
period. These include the various fugitive discharges of sediment, cement, tunnel water 
and other pollutants into small tributaries and the Wailoa River. Operationally, the 
changes to river flow and instream habitat are considered less than minor and mitigation 
and abatement measures are considered unnecessary. The impact from the expansion of 
the Power house and installation of the fifth unit the EIA concluded: ?The assessment of 
impacts of the installation of the second power house and fifth turbine and subsequent 
changes to the way that the Wailoa Power Station is operated in this report identifies that 
the environmental or social impacts are minor during operation, compared to the existing 
baseline environmental setting. ?  
 
In order to mitigate the impacts during construction, a CEMP will be developed and will 
address the following issues:  
 
Table 1: Summary of Mitigation Measures for Major Construction Activities  
 
Construction Activity 
Environmental management, mitigation, abatement and 
monitoring  
 
Drilling and blasting for tunnel construction 
&#61607; 
Contractors to adhere 
to international construction noise standards and standards relating to blasting  
 
&#61607; 
Ongoing project communications with the community  
 
&#61607; 
Routine blast schedule to be achieved and locals to be educated  
 
&#61607; 
Dust suppression using water  
 
Tunnel dewatering /  
Page  6
Groundwater diversion 
&#61607; 
Silt traps within the tunnel to trap solids  
 
&#61607; 
Settlement ponds ? removal of solids prior to discharge  
 
&#61607; 
Reuse of water where possible  
 
&#61607; 
Clarity turbidy monitoring in the receiving water during discharge events  
 
Concrete batching plant 
&#61607; 
Settlement ponds ? removal of solids prior 
to discharge  
 
&#61607; 
Reuse of water where possible  
 
&#61607; 
Monthly pH monitoring prior to discharge ? no discharge of water with pH 
greater than 11  
 
&#61607; 
Clarity / turbidity monitoring in the receiving water during discharge 
events  
 
&#61607; 
Spill management procedures  
 
&#61607; 
Dust suppression using water  
 
Spoil management and stockpiling  &#61607; 
Stormwater diversion above 
stockpiles  
 
&#61607; 
Stockpiles should be stabilized and located greater than 20m from a water 
course  
 
&#61607; 
Dust suppression using water  
 
&#61607; 
Soils / aggregate should be reused where possible in the development  
 
General construction noise 
&#61607; 
Contractors to adhere to international 
construction noise standards  
 
&#61607; 
Work hours to be within daylight hours, and not on Sundays  
 
&#61607; 
Ongoing project communications with the community  
 
Chemical, explosives and fuel storage and use 
&#61607; 
Bunding for 
containment and stormwater management  
 
&#61607; 
Secure storage  
 
&#61607; 
Spill kits and spill procedures  
 
Heavy vehicles and increased traffic 
&#61607; 
Ongoing project 
communications with the community  
 
&#61607; 
Notice of significant traffic movements in advance  
 
&#61607; 
Signage along the route to warn road users of specific traffic issues 
throughout the construction period  
 
&#61607; 
Control of speed of vehicles  
 
Vehicle maintenance and cleaning  &#61607; 
Single hardstand area  
 
&#61607; 
Run off treated via an oil and water separator  
 
&#61607; 
Spill kits and spill procedures  
 
Deuba and Savusavu Biomass Power Plants  
 
As in the case of the Wailoa expansion, there are no major impacts due to the operation 
of the biomass power plants. Most impacts will be during the construction phase, which 
are identical for both plants and described in detail below. The most important long-term 
changes to both sites concern cooling water and transport of biomass, and are described 
separately for each plant below.  
 
Page  7
Deuba Water  
 
The water for cooling will be drawn from the Waikalou Creek, approximately 1km east 
of the project site. The preliminary design has provided for the discharge of cooling water 
from a detention pond to a drainage ditch near the current front gate. This will protect the 
environmental values of Waikalou Creek and will prevent warmed water from entering a 
natural waterway. Preliminary studies completed by University of South Pacific have 
indicated that the drainage ditch has no permanent water quality or aquatic habitat values. 
The EMP has recommended monitoring the discharge water quality at frequent intervals 
using the ANZECC 2000 standards for maximum allowable levels for pollutants. It has 
been recommended that the discharge temperature of the cooling water, measured at a 
distance of 100 meters from the plant, should not be more than 5 degrees Celsius higher 
than the temperature of the intake water.  
 
Deuba Transport  
 
One of the main concerns raised by the community was the increased traffic. Once the 
power station is operational, heavy vehicle traffic will occur. It has been estimated that 35 
truck loads of wood waste will be transported to the site every day, or 4.3 per hour. In 
response to these concerns, FEA has agreed to acquire a 10m access easement through 
the existing Pacific Timber sawmill yard, adjacent to the Power station from Pacific 
Timber Development. In addition, it is agreed that transport will only take place during 
daylight hours.  
 
Water Savusavu  
 
Cooling water will be required from the foreshore area adjacent to the site. Since there is 
no confirmed timeframe on construction of a proposed government jetty at this area, it is 
assumed at this stage that a deep water intake will be required. For this purpose, a 
foreshore lease will be required from the land owners, which would cover the cooling 
water intake. Regarding the discharge, the design should ensure water will only be 
discharged to the bay once it has been cooled to acceptable limits. That limit has not been 
determined as part of the EIA, as it requires a more detailed understanding of the 
receiving environment and the proposed inputs. A baseline study is required both to 
facilitate setting of water quality targets and obtain a better understanding of the 
receiving environment. Application of Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for Fresh 
and Marine Water Quality (ANZECC 2000) to determine appropriate water quality 
targets recommended. Water quality targets include temperature, suspended solids, pH, 
and conductivity within an approved mixing zone at the cooling water discharge. It is 
recommended that these parameters are monitored at all times by automatic logger to 
ensure that discharge temperatures remain within allowable limits. Where practicable, 
only fuels and oils required for the operation of the facility should be stored onsite. 
Where this is required, it is recommended that storage should be in an appropriately 
bunded and secured area.  
 
Transport Savusavu  
Page  8
As in the case of the Deuba facility, it is recommended that wood deliveries be limited 
to daylight hours only, and a communication plan be implemented to provide information 
and an awareness campaign for the community, school children, teachers, and drivers 
before the start of project.  
 
Construction Impacts for Deuba and Savusavu sites  
 
The major impacts identified and the proposed mitigation methods are described in the 
table below:  
 
Aspect to be Managed  
Mitigation Required  
 
Compliance of construction works with any permit requirements, the Master 
Environmental Management Plan and good environmental practice.  
The project 
shall be subject to regular auditing by FEA. Audits shall be conducted, at least, on a 
fortnightly basis during earthworks. Once construction of the facilities commences 
auditing will be conducted monthly. The MEMP requires that the CEMP nominate and 
implement a schedule of internal auditing and inspection.  
 
Ecological: Minimization of ground disturbance.   Areas to be disturbed by works will 
be marked out on the ground. There will be no disturbance of soils or vegetation outside 
this envelope without the written authority of FEA.  
 
Erosion and Sediment Control: Management of erosion and potential for aquatic 
habitats to be impacted by sediment transport and deposition.  
Principles for 
earthworks management include:  
 
?
Reuse of soils on-site.  
 
?
Minimization of stockpiling.  
 
?
Minimization of soils and vegetation disturbance.  
 
?
Minimization of the disturbance envelope.  
 
?
Revegetation of exposed soils, including any stockpiles, as soon as the area is 
available.  
 
?
Works not conducted during the wet season.  
 
?
No stock piling of soils within 10m of a water course.  
 
?
All stock piles shall have erosion and sedimentation control techniques applied 
(such as seeding of stockpiles (if they are going to be in place for a while) and use of silt 
fencing.  
 
Social: Minimize potential for complaint resulting from noisy operations. 
 
Construction activities should be limited to daylight hours.  Residents should be 
kept informed of activities at the construction site, particularly if noisy operations are 
required.  
 
Visual: Reduce visual impacts.  
Planting of screening vegetation is required along 
the access road and around the southern and eastern boundary of the site.  
 
Waste: Manage site waste generation.  
Cleared vegetation should be retained for 
chipping as fuel for the power station or is burned at site.  General waste should be 
removed from the site for disposal at a waste disposal facility on at least a weekly basis.  
 
Water: Minimize potential for impacts on water quality and aquatic habitat. 
 
Measures for management of erosion and sedimentation issues are required.  Fuel 
Page  9
and oil spill recovery equipment is to be maintained at the fuel store.  Where possible, no 
fuels or oils are to be stored at the site during construction. Where it is necessary to store 
fuels, the store will be an appropriately bunded and secure facility that is located away 
from any watercourse.    Spill recovery equipment is required to be located with the fuel 
and oil storage. For the purposes of this project, a spill of more than 10 litres is to be 
considered significant. In the event of a spill of 10 or more litres, the contractor is to 
commence clean-up immediately. FEA are to be notified immediately.  
 
Air (dust): Minimize nuisance.  
Application of conventional dust control measures 
(i.e., watering) or the application of soil tacifiers should be undertaken.  
 
Transport (heavy vehicle and machinery movements): Minimize noise impacts, 
reduction of opportunity for dust generation.  
Signage indicating construction 
works and the presence of heavy machinery shall be utilized on the highway.  
Construction activity should be limited to daylight hours.  An information and awareness 
campaign should be implemented with the community, school children, teachers, and 
drivers before the start of project.  
 
Noise: Minimize noise impacts.  
Construction activity should be limited to daylight 
hours. The community should be kept informed of activities at the site, particularly when 
noisy works are expected.  
 
Archaeology: Incidental finds.  
Work to cease at that location  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
There will be no involuntary land acquisition by eminent domain or other means under 
the project, nor will there be any involuntary (or other) relocation of people, and for these 
reasons OP 4.12 is not triggered. However, there will be a need to acquire some land for 
the two biomass plants and there will be a need to lease some land for the new tunnel and 
penstock to upgrade the Wailoa power station.  
 
The land to be acquired for the Deuba and Savusavu biomass plants is freehold land and 
will be purchased under a willing buyer/willing seller arrangement. At Deuba, additional 
land will not be required for the power station site as the proposed power station has 
sufficient space within the existing FEA compound, with adequate room available for 
future capacity. However, a 10m access easement through the existing Pacific Timber 
sawmill yard will need to be acquired from Pacific Timber Development, title number CT 
24293. The need for this easement has already been discussed with PTB and there appear 
to be no obstacles to its acquisition. For the intake structure, approximately 50m2 of land 
will need to be acquired from Lot 1, DP1670 and from the local drainage authority as 
required, and, again, this is a willing seller/willing buyer transaction.  
 
At Savusavu, the land to be acquired is owned freehold by Coir Industries Ltd and is 
shown on Deposited Plan 7611. Discussions regarding the purchase of the land are 
advanced with the landowner. Land will be purchased for an access road that will run 
approximately 200 meters from the site of the biomass plant to the main coastal road. 
Cooling water will be required from the foreshore area adjacent to the site. Since there is 
Page  10
no confirmed timeframe on construction of the proposed government jetty at this area, it 
is assumed at this stage that a deep water intake will be required. For this purpose, a 
foreshore lease will be required from the land owners which cover the cooling water 
intake. This lease will be structured in a manner consistent with Fijian land law, which 
entails a clear and well established process of consultation and negotiation with native 
land owning groups (mataqalis) through the intermediation of the Native Lands Trust 
Board.  
 
At the site of the new tunnel and penstock for the Wailoa Power Station, the land will be 
leased from native landowning groups (mataqalis) through the same process outlined 
above. During construction, the construction camp will be located on land which 
constituted part of the Wailoa Power Station, and will not, therefore, require additional 
land purchase or lease. Mitigation of construction impacts will be covered under the 
EMP.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
 
Based on instruction from FEA and the Task team leader, who provided the consultant 
with instructions and a copy of the Bank?s ?Guidelines for Assessment of Dams and 
Preparation of a Dam Safety Measures Report,? the work has been carried out by a Dam 
Specialist (DS)  on staff with the EIA consultant; however, the specialist has not been 
associated with the design of the Dam. .  
 
Back ground: Description of the Monasavu Dam  
 
Monasavu Dam is located above the Monasavu Falls in the Central Highlands of Viti 
Levu, Fiji and impounds water for hydro-electric power generation at the 80MW Wailoa 
Power Station. The dam is owned and operated by Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA). 
Monasavu Dam is a rockfill embankment with a central clay core, 85m, and with a crest 
length of 465m. The spillway is a concrete ogee weir crest, with a concrete-lined chute 
and flip bucket discharging into an unlined channel in hard sandstone rock. The dam was 
designed by Sir Alexander Gibb and Partners of UK and the dam was constructed over 
the period 1978-1983.  
 
Key data from (2003b) are reproduced in Table 1 below:  
 
The dam break and consequence assessment undertaken in 2003 (2003b) assigned a 
hazard rating of ?Extreme? to Monasavu Dam, according to ANCOLD Guidelines on 
?Assessment of the Consequence of Dam Failure (May 2000)?. The comprehensive 
safety review (2003a) has assigned a ?Fair? rating for the dam according to the USBR 
SEED (Safety Evaluation of Existing Dams-1983), which defines the overall safety 
classification of a dam.  
Page  11
Status of the Dam and Safety Management  
 
During the site visit on 29/08/06, the DS found no major physical safety issues with the 
dam and it is believed that this was the case when the last comprehensive inspection was 
carried out by Meritec in 2003, as part of the 2003 safety review. The DS found some 
malfunctioning instrumentation and an overall lack of proper monitoring. However the 
principal maintenance issue is the vegetation on the dam faces. Vegetation on rock faces 
of dams degrades the rockfill and also obscures any signs of dam safety issues (e.g., 
seepage or excessive deformations). In general, the area extending 5m beyond the dam 
footprint should be cleared of vegetation. This would also permit easy access to the dam 
operators during inspections.  
 
While the DS found the DAM general in good condition, a number of important 
recommendations were made.  
 
Flood hydrology:  
 
All the recent Dam Safety analysis (1999 and 2003) has been carried out with Probable 
Maximum Precipitation (PMP) data based on the world?s greatest observed rainfalls. In 
both 1999 and 2003 studies, it has been recommended that flood hydrology, particularly 
PMP (Probable Maximum Precipitation), for Monasavu Dam be assessed based on 
meteorological and local stream flow data. With measured stream flow data over the last 
20 years or so, reasonable accuracy of flood estimates can be achieved. Furthermore, the 
2003 Dam Safety study found that the spillway is able to pass the preliminary PMP flood 
(non-meteorologically based estimate) with a freeboard of 0.7m. However, according to 
the report, the main limitation is that it is not known whether the preliminary PMP 
estimate is an under-estimate or over-estimate of the meteorologically derived PMP for 
the Monasavu catchment. The recommendation in the 2003 reports (Meritec 2003 a and 
b) is that PMP be estimated using the meteorological analysis. This has not been done. It 
is recommended that FEA will have this analysis carried out within one year on signing 
the loan agreement.  
 
Seismic Assessment  
 
According ANCOLD Earthquake Guideline (1998), which is very similar to other 
international guidelines, an extreme hazard dam should be able to withstand a 
probabilistically-derived seismic event (Maximum Design Earthquake-MDE) of 1:10,000 
without the uncontrolled release of the storage. All the works to date have been 
undertaken based on old seismic assessments up to an AEP:1:1000 (Note that the Peak 
Ground Acceleration (PGA) for 1:1000 is 0.26g). The 2003 study recommended that site-
specific seismicity be assessed for Monasavu Dam to cover a range of AEPs up to 
1:10,000  The Makdisi-Seed method has been broadened extensively and it would not be 
applicable for Monasavu because of the halloysitic material in the clay core. If a true 
picture of the behavior of the Monasavu dam is required, a dynamic stress analysis 
Page  12
should be undertaken to determine the strain levels and strength loss in the clay core (e.g., 
Vitharana & Terzaghi, 2005). It is therefore recommended that the following should be 
carried out:  
 
?
Undertake site-specific seismicity assessment by engaging a recognized 
seismologist such as ES&S Australia (ex-Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology)  
 
?
Following this, carry out a finite element analysis of the dam, incorporating the 
true behavior of the soil in the clay core.  
 
Dam Safety Emergency Plan  
 
The Dam safety Emergency Plan was found to be in good condition and comprehensive. 
It was recommended to continue to regularly update the plan with new phone numbers. It 
was also suggested to regularly brief emergency services, police and land owners on its 
contents and implications.  
 
Instrumentation  
 
During the site visit, it was found that majority of the instruments are not working 
and/or not being monitored. The de-airing system for the piezometers is malfunctioning 
and operators do not know whether they are doing the de-airing properly. PB Power has 
given an outline of the new instrumentation plan in their draft report for the Wailoa half-
life refurbishment. (The cost was estimated for this activity was around A$200,000). The 
location and the number / type of the instruments should be reviewed by an experienced 
dam?s engineer. It should be recognized that, given the age of the Monasavu Dam, FEA 
is developing an instrumentation plan to identify possible dam safety issues from various 
failure modes. Therefore, this review is very important. It is recommended that FEA 
closely instrument the top half to third of the clay core. Piezometers should be of the 
vibrating wire type, which can be read manually or remotely via mobile phones .It is 
recommended that the instrumentation plan should be developed by an experienced 
dam?s engineer, considering the above aspects.  
 
The Bank considers this an important component of the project and would request that 
the new instrumentation is in place within one year after signing of the agreement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The EIA identified that there were no major long term impacts for the proposed projects.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Deuba  
 
Originally, the site for the Deuba power station was located at Waivunu, next to the saw 
mills of the Fiji Hardwood Corporation. As this would possibly influence the 
management of the plantations, the site was moved to the already existing Deuba power 
station. This decreases the dependency of the biomass plant on one sawmill and the effect 
the project might have had on forest management activities.  
 
Page  13
Wailoa  
 
The design of the duplication of the penstock considered the option of using a surface 
tunnel. However the construction of the tunnel would be difficult --  but more 
importantly, the underground option reduces potential environmental impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As described above, the borrower has changed the location of the Deuba biomass plant 
location and has chosen for the underground alternative for the penstock.  
 
The borrower has one environmental officer on staff. As part of the capacity 
development plan, FEA will appoint an additional senior environmental officer who will 
be part of FEA?s management team.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key Players:  
 
Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA). FEA is the implementing agency and responsible for 
the supervision of the implementation of the EMP. As part of project preparation, 
community consultations with all affected communities have already taken place and will 
continue during project implementation.  
 
Ministry of Environment. The Ministry has approved the EIAs under the FEA 
Environment Act of 2005. FEA, the Bank and the Ministry of Fisheries and Forests will 
coordinate to have once a year an inspection of the timber used by saw mills supplying 
saw mill waste to FEA.  
 
Ministry of Fisheries and Forests: The Ministry has prepared a Draft Fiji Forest 
Certification Standard along the guidelines of the Forest Stewardship Council, selected 
by the multi-interest stakeholder National Forest Certification Steering Committee. The 
Standard has been formulated by elected representatives of the social, economic and 
environmental interest groups that formed the National Forest Certification Standards 
Committee in October, 2005. The Standard is currently undergoing public consultation 
and field testing before it will be submitted to the Forest Stewardship Council for 
accreditation. The Draft Fiji Forest Certification Standard states the level of performance 
required and the type of evidence that should be provided by the forest manager for 
verification by the Certification Body, to show the compliance of forest operations to the 
Standard. The standard is due for release at the end of 2006. Once implemented, Fiji?s 
logging and timber production industry will be actively managed in accordance with 
international market requirements.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  14
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/18/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/14/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/13/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  15
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonie De Wilde 
10/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hiroshi Ono 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bruce M. Harris 
10/09/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/12/2006 
Comments:  Signed by acting RSC: J. Quintero 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
10/12/2006 
Comments:   
