Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC1894
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID:  P089656 
Project Name:  Sustainable Energy GEF Project 
Task Team Leader:  Peter Johansen 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 31, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 11, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (40%);Renewable energy 
(40%);Micro- and SME finance (20%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Other financial 
and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.80 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.80 
 
US: AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (USAID) 
0.50 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
18.70 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
6.80
28.80 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is to develop a sustainable market for Energy 
Efficiency (EE) and Renewable Energy (RE) by supporting the development of an 
enabling framework, institutional capacity, and necessary financing mechanisms.  The 
Project aims to:  
 
(i) 
Change the current unfavorable investment and incentive conditions and create an 
enabling environment in Macedonia, that fosters the development of sustainable energy 
utilization (in this context defined as efficient use of energy and use of renewable energy 
sources) through providing financial, methodological, informational, and institutional 
support;  
Page  2
(ii) 
Support a large increase in EE and RE investment in Macedonia through 
development of a self-sustaining, market-based financing mechanism based on a 
principle of commercial co-financing.  
 
The specific project goals are:  
 
(i) 
The development and implementation of financially profitable EE projects, which 
can provide sustainable and increasing reductions in GHG emissions without relying on 
public subsidy; and  
 
(ii) 
Increasing the availability of financing for RE investments, enterprises and 
intermediaries through the establishment of a financial facility with a long-term time 
horizon, which will provide seed capital for debt co-financing of RE projects.  
 
The performance indicators used to justify Development Objectives ratings during 
supervision include:  
 
(i) 
Introduction of an enabling regulatory and incentive framework for RE based 
power and heat production (including tariff design, sub-laws on grid code, licensing and 
permitting procedures, training of stakeholders);  
 
(ii) 
Total number of RE projects reaching financial closure as a result of the 
Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (SEFF) including the capacity installed (MW) and 
amount of electricity and heat generated (MWh); and  
 
(iii) 
Total number of EE projects reaching financial closure as a result of SEFF 
including the amount of energy (kWh) saved annually against a baseline.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 - Market Framework (US$1.8 million of which US$1.0 million is a GEF 
grant).  This component covers the following areas:   
 
1.1
Capacity Building, Strategic/Legislative/Institutional  
 
1.2
Capacity Building, Technical/Advisory  
 
1.3
Monitoring, Information, Dissemination, and Administration  
 
Component 2 - Support to Utility-Based ESCO (US$1.3 million, of which US$0.8 
million is a GEF grant).  This component will support the development and startup of a 
utility-based Energy Service Company, under the umbrella of the Market and 
Transmission System Operator (MEPSO).  
 
Component 3 - SEFF (US$31.5 million of which US$4.0 million is a GEF grant).  The 
third component will be a financing facility consisting of a loan guarantee facility and a 
debt fund, on a co-financing basis with commercial institutions and the Macedonian Bank 
for Development Promotion (MBDP).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The sub-projects expected to be supported are: street lighting improvements, installation 
of heat exchangers and automatic temperature control and metering equipment in district 
heating systems (primarily at the building and secondary network level), improved 
thermal insulation of buildings, replacement of network pipes, fuel switching (including 
Page  3
conversion to natural gas), power factor correction measures, reconstruction of boilers, 
installation of small co-generation units, air compressors, economizers, steam traps, etc., 
as well as renewable energy (small hydropower, solar, wind, and biomass) installations.  
The sub-projects will vary in size, but the investment costs of an individual sub-project 
will normally not exceed US$ 400,000.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anders O. Halldin (ECSIE) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
It is expected that all Sub-Projects will be category B or C and that there will be limited 
environmental and social impacts. There is no resettlement, but there may be limited land 
acquisition issues.  If so, the ECSSD social specialist will be consulted. Any Sub-Project 
proposal resulting in a Category A-rating will be rejected by SEFF.  
 
An Environmental Management Framework Document (EMFD) has been prepared by 
the Recipient.  This outlines principal actions to be taken by the Recipient in regard to 
foreseen, but not yet identified, investments in energy efficiency improvements and 
renewable energy installations.  The EMFD also outlines how issues relating to public 
participation and disclosure should be handled. The project will not in any way include 
procurement of pesticides.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse social or environmental direct or long-term impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient has prepared an EMFD and will follow these framework procedures as 
part of the Sub-Project preparation.  The Recipient (Government of Macedonia) is 
implementing several projects with similar procedures.  Training will be provided to the 
PMU (SEFF) in order to ensure proper follow-up.  SEFF will include an experienced 
environmental specialist to ensure that both national regulations and WB Safeguard 
Policies are properly followed during Sub-Project preparation and preparation of EAs and 
EMPs for Category B projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders will be land owners, environmental NGOs and residents in areas in 
proximity to future RE plants.  The EMFD has been published on the website of the 
MSEP/Ministry of Economy January 12, 2006, and was advertised in the Macedonian 
press by the country-wide DNEVNIK newspaper on January 18, 2006.  Under the EMFD 
the relevant Implementing Agency will prepare an EMP for each Sub-Project and consult 
with stakeholders before final decision of Sub-Project implementation will be taken.  It 
should also be mentioned that all procedures will be reviewed by the Ministry of 
Environment and Physical Planning as well as by the WB supervision team.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/20/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/20/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  5
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter Johansen 
01/20/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anders O. Halldin 
01/10/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
01/20/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
01/26/2006 
Comments:  The operations manual will guide the FI to ensure that no sub-project that might raise 
international waters concerns will be financed. 
