Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC1894
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID:  P089656 
Project Name:  Sustainable Energy GEF Project 
Task Team Leader:  Peter Johansen 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 21, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (40%);Renewable energy 
(40%);Micro- and SME finance (20%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Other financial 
and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.20 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
2.50
2.70 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is to develop a sustainable market for Energy 
Efficiency (EE) and Renewable Energy (RE) by supporting the development of an 
enabling framework, institutional capacity, and necessary financing mechanisms.  The 
Project aims to:  
 
(i) 
Change the current unfavorable investment and incentive conditions and create an 
enabling environment in Macedonia, that fosters the development of sustainable energy 
utilization (in this context defined as efficient use of energy and use of renewable energy 
sources) through providing financial, methodological, informational, and institutional 
support;  
 
(ii) 
Support a large increase in EE and RE investment in Macedonia through 
development of a self-sustaining, market-based financing mechanism based on a 
principle of commercial co-financing.  
Page  2
The specific project goals are:  
 
(i) 
The development and implementation of financially profitable EE projects, which 
can provide sustainable and increasing reductions in GHG emissions without relying on 
public subsidy; and  
 
(ii) 
Increasing the availability of financing for RE investments, enterprises and 
intermediaries through the establishment of a financial facility with a long-term time 
horizon, which will provide seed capital for debt co-financing of RE projects.  
 
The performance indicators used to justify Development Objectives ratings during 
supervision include:  
 
(i) 
Introduction of an enabling regulatory and incentive framework for RE based 
power and heat production (including tariff design, sub-laws on grid code, licensing and 
permitting procedures, training of stakeholders);  
 
(ii) 
Total number of RE projects reaching financial closure as a result of the 
Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (SEFF) including the capacity installed (MW) and 
amount of electricity and heat generated (MWh); and  
 
(iii) 
Total number of EE projects reaching financial closure as a result of SEFF 
including the amount of energy (kWh) saved annually against a baseline.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 - Market Framework (US$1.0 million GEF grant).  This component covers 
the following areas:  
 
1.1
Capacity Building, Strategic/Legislative/Institutional  
 
1.2
Capacity Building, Technical/Advisory  
 
1.3
Monitoring, Information, Dissemination, and Administration  
 
Component 2 - Support to Utility-Based ESCO (US$0.8 million GEF grant).  This 
component will support the development and startup of a utility-based Energy Service 
Company, under the umbrella of the Market and Transmission System Operator 
(MEPSO).  
 
Component 3 - SEFF (US$3.7 million is a GEF grant).  The third component will be a 
financing facility consisting of a loan guarantee facility and a debt fund, on a co-
financing basis with commercial institutions and the Macedonian Bank for Development 
Promotion (MBDP).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The sub-projects expected to be supported are: street lighting improvements, installation 
of heat exchangers and automatic temperature control and metering equipment in district 
heating systems (primarily at the building and secondary network level), improved 
thermal insulation of buildings, replacement of network pipes, fuel switching (including 
conversion to natural gas), power factor correction measures, reconstruction of boilers, 
installation of small co-generation units, air compressors, economizers, steam traps, etc., 
as well as renewable energy (small hydropower, solar, wind, and biomass) installations.  
Page  3
The sub-projects will vary in size and physical location, but the investment costs of an 
individual sub-project will normally not exceed US$ 400,000.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anders O. Halldin (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
It is expected that all Sub-Projects will be category B or C and that there will be limited 
environmental and social impacts. The predominant majority of investments to be 
financed under the project will be implemented by private investors and the acquisition of 
private land, even where necessary, will be carried out on a voluntary, commercial basis.  
A
small proportion of investment portfolio supported by the project may be carried out by 
municipalities, and land acquisition of minor scale may result.  
 
The project may support the development or upgrade of small hydropower plants.The 
impact on water flow is expected to be insignificant since only run-of-river hydropower 
plants will be supported.  No dam exists on the upstream of the river where hydropower 
plants will be developed or upgraded.  Environmental impacts of other types of 
investment, such as street lighting, building envelop refurbishment, and building-level 
heating system, is considered to be insignificant.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Most adverse environmental impacts will be limited in scope and occur only during 
construction phases. These can be easily avoided or mitigated by proper planning and 
application of prevailing practices in the construction business.  For small micro hydro-
power plans, no dams will be built, and water will be diverted through a channel or pipe 
to the turbine and then be returned to the river without allowing any irrigational use.  
 
Page  4
The project may result in temporary loss of access during physical work.  No long term 
negative social impact is expected from future activities triggered by the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
While no, if any, involuntary land acquisition or resettlement is expected under the 
project, small proportion of investment may be carried out by municipalities.  Thus, and 
because not all specific investments are identified yet, a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) has been developed that sets out policies and principles that should apply on 
matters of land acquisition, physical relocation and permanent loss of access/ livelihood.  
 
Feasibility studies for investments financed by private investors will be randomly 
selected and reviewed, and all feasibilities studies for municipal projects will be reviewed 
by the Bank task team to confirm the absence of land acquisition.  In case involuntary 
resettlement is expected, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared as per RPF, 
and the Bank task team will provide guidance to the Recipient for the development of a 
RAP.  
 
An Environmental Management Framework Document (EMFD) has been prepared by 
the Recipient.  This outlines principal actions to be taken by the Recipient in regard to 
foreseen, but not yet identified, investments in energy efficiency improvements and 
renewable energy installations.  The Recipient has experience in implementing several 
projects with similar procedures.  Training will be provided to the PMU (SEFF) in order 
to ensure proper follow-up.  SEFF will include an experienced environmental specialist 
to ensure that both national regulations and WB Safeguard Policies are properly followed 
during Sub-Project preparation and preparation of EAs and EMPs for Category B 
projects.  
 
The International Waterways safeguard (OP/BP/GP 4.01) is triggered for the project. On 
April 7, 2006 the Bank, on behalf of the Macedonian government, sent notifications of 
the project and its details to Albania and Greece. The Bank has not received any 
objections to the project from these riparians.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders will be land owners, environmental NGOs and residents in areas in 
proximity to future RE plants.  The EMFD has been published on the website of the 
MSEP/Ministry of Economy January 12, 2006, and was advertised in the Macedonian 
press by the country-wide DNEVNIK newspaper on January 18, 2006.  Under the EMFD 
the relevant Implementing Agency will prepare an EMP for each Sub-Project and consult 
with stakeholders before final decision of Sub-Project implementation is taken.  
 
Page  5
The RPF has been disclosed in-country on July 03, 2006 and at the Bank's Infoshop on 
July 11, 2006.  In case land acquisition proves to be necessary and a RAP should be 
developed, the project affected people will be duly consulted and the RAP disclosed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/20/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/11/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Both EMFD and RPF have been disclosed both at Infoshop and in-country.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  6
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter Johansen 
07/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anders O. Halldin 
06/13/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
06/15/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
07/13/2006 
Comments:   
