Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/11/2006 
Report No.:  AC2291
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Gambia, The 
Project ID:  P077903 
Project Name:  Third Education Project - Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Meskerem Mulatu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (45%);Secondary education (25%);Tertiary education 
(10%);Adult literacy/non-formal education (10%);General education sector (10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.50 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
10.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)10.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
7.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
12.00
42.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objectives are to:  (a) Improve conditions for teaching and learning in basic 
education; (b) Strengthen capacity building and performance management for improved 
management and enhanced monitoring and evaluation; and  (c) Continue expansion of 
effective access to under-served communities.   
 
3. Project Description 
Improved conditions for teaching and learning:  Taking into account the difficulties in 
measuring real achievement gains over the relatively short implementation period, the 
project aims to look at indicators both of intermediate outcomes, and of outputs. 
Indicators for measuring progress on this component would include:  
 
•
Indicators of school performance for improved teaching/learning  
 
•
Indicators of teacher performance for improved teaching/learning  
 
•
Indicators of system performance for improved teaching/learning  
Page  2
•
Indicators of student performance  
 
•
Indicators of literacy learner performance  
 
17. 
Strengthened capacity building and performance management:  In the absence of 
a
much-needed civil service reform that would revise Government salary scales and 
performance monitoring, the education system has to strengthen the capacities of its 
personnel, and find an effective incentive system that would enable it to both reward and 
sanction them as necessary.  In addition, building on recent improvements in data 
collection and analysis, support would be provided for capacity building at central and 
regional levels in monitoring and evaluation, as well as in the use of data for policy 
formulation and implementation progress tracking. Therefore, the indicators would 
include:  
 
•
Indicators of organizational effectiveness  
 
•
Indicators of performance management  
 
•
Indicators of management improvements  
 
•
Indicators of monitoring and evaluation improvements  
 
18. 
Continued expansion of access to under-served communities:  Particular attention 
would be paid to the under-served populations, including girls, special needs students, 
and rural populations.  Indicators of improved access would include:  
 
•
Creation of additional school places in basic education to contribute to EFA goals 
(creation of 2,200 additional school places through the construction of 36 urban and 16 
multigrade classrooms, all of which would be accessible to physically disabled children).  
 
•
Expanded access to literacy courses, with particular attention to including 
illiterate women (6,000 learners of which a majority would be female).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Gambia (nation-wide)   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will have limited environmental and social impacts related to activities such 
as school constructions.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
If left unattended, potential long-term negative impacts of activities could include water 
pollution, air pollution, soil erosion, or loss of vegetation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project has been designed to support the Poverty Reduction Strategy of The Gambia, 
which gives priority to human development in general, and to basic education and 
literacy in particular. In addition, it responds to the pillar on enhanced equity and quality 
of service delivery, and improve public expenditure management and promote private 
sector growth. Given the relatively simple construction that this would entail, and the 
existence of a Resettlement Policy acceptable to IDA, this project was found to be the 
best approach with the least adverse impact.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the locations and potential negative localized impacts of the future school 
constructions were not known at appraisal, the Borrower has prepared an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) for the purpose of identifying and mitigating potential negative environmental and 
social impacts at the sub-project planning stage. The RPF outlines the policies and 
procedures to be followed in the event that land acquisition is required. The ESMF 
outlines the environmental and social screening process for sub-projects and proposes 
capacity building measures, including cost estimates. The ESMF includes (i) an 
environmental checklist to be applied/amended by qualified personnel as appropriate; ii) 
draft terms of reference for an environmental analysis, should one be required; iii) a 
summary of the Bank’s operational policies to ensure that these are taken into account 
during project implementation, as required.  
 
The ESMF furthermore includes provisions, including cost estimates, for environmental 
management capacity building to ensure effective implementation of the ESMF; these 
costs will be incorporated into the project cost tables. To ensure adequate monitoring of 
the implementation of the ESMF and the RPF , the Borrower institution responsible for 
environmental management, i.e the National Environment Agency, will be charged with 
the responsibility of supervising implementation and sharing their findings with the Bank 
and other interested parties.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Department of State for Education, the regional education 
offices, teachers, school heads, students, local communities as well as potentially affected 
persons. Consultations with all relevant stakeholders will take place as outlined in the 
ESMF, and through biannual surveys under the Community Scorecard.  
 
The ESMF and the RPF for the project have been disclosed both in-country and at the 
Bank’s Infoshop on March 31 and April 4, respectively.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/02/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/02/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  5
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Mulatu 
04/06/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
03/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alexandre V. Abrantes 
04/11/2006 
Comments:  Maurizia Tovo is acting for Alexandre Abrantes. 
