Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2044 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/24/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Georgia 
Project ID: P083110 
Project Name: East-West Highway Improvement Project - Phase 1 
Task Team Leader: Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 25, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 26, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other public sector 
governance (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.60
8.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main project development objective is to gradually reduce road transport costs and improve 
access, transit traffic and safety along the central part of Georgia's East-West corridor, through 
upgrading of a segment of the East-West Highway from Tbilisi to Rikoti and supporting private 
financing of the rehabilitation of the Rikoti tunnel.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would include:  
 
(i) Upgrade of about 10km between Agaiani and Igoeti from two lanes to four lanes. This 
section would be the first of a series of project aiming at upgrading from two lanes to four lanes 
the section of the EWH from Agaiani to Sveneti (approximately 34km);  
 
(ii) Support the Rikoti Tunnel Concession, inter alia through a Partial Risk Guarantee ;  
 
(iii) Provision of technical assistance and goods to support RDMED institutional strengthening 
and project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Georgia's East-West Highway corridor from Agaiani to Igoeti, and the Rikoti Tunnel.   
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
In the road sector the Ministry of Economic Development is responsible for the successful 
implementation of environmental studies with support from the Road Administration (RDMED) 
and the Transport Reform and Rehabilitation Center (TRRC). RDMED has a single but 
experienced staff member assigned to deal with environmental matters but their role does not at 
present extend to field supervision.  TRRC has significant experience with the implementation of 
Bank financed projects in the road sector and has had exposure to environmental matters as a 
result.  However the proposed integration of TRRC into RDMED carries a risk that this 
experience will be lost.  During preparation a program will be developed jointly with the 
Government to build capacity within RDMED and TRRC to ensure the longer term sustainability 
of this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Jane Olga Ebinger (ECSIE) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
Safeguard Framework has been developed under the Infrastructure Pre-Investment Facility 
that sets out the policies and procedures, as well as institutional arrangements, to prepare 
safeguard documents for this Project. At this stage however, it is proposed to complete an 
environmental screening for the entire Agayani 
–
Sveneti section of the East – West Highway to 
identify the need for additional baseline studies and to lay the ground work for the preparation of 
site specific EAs and EMPs during detailed design.  This environmental screening will also 
include an assessment of alternative alignments identified during the preliminary design study 
and will identify risks and issues to be addressed during project implementation.  
 
Follwoing on from this, for the first section, covered under the Project, from Agaiani to 
Igoeti an appropriate site specific environmental assessment/management plan will be prepared 
prior to appraisal. This section of road will include the rehabilitation of the current road and 
expansion of this road from two to four lanes within the existing right of way which is free of 
encroachment (i.e. no land acquisition or resettlement) and without major environmental issues.  
Since works are expected to be within the existing right of way, environmental impacts are likely 
to be of a temporary nature and related to actual construction.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
This will be examined through the Environmental Screening study that is being prepared to 
cover the entire road corridor.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The current highway is lined by mature trees for much of its length.  Site specific 
environmental assessments/ management plans will assess whether there is a need to cut any 
existing trees, and whether these trees form part of state forestry plans. Compensation measures 
will be identified as appropriate.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The environmental screening study will identify any known cultural property sites and site 
specific environmental management plans will include procedures to address any concerns 
identified through the EA or any chance finds that occur during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed and will cover the whole Agaiani 
–
Sveneti section to ensure consistency over subsequent phases. The RPF will set out policies 
and procedures to deal with broad social impacts, including possible land acquisition for the 
Igoeti – Sveneti section, demolition of kiosks and a few permanent structures, and HIV/AIDS 
issues. Follwoing on from this a site specific Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared for the 
Agaiani-Igoeti section of the road, if necessary.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/14/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
Safeguards Framework has been prepared and disclosed in November 2005 under the 
Georgia Pre-Investment Facility Project.  
 
An EA for the entire corridor and a resettlement policy framework will be prepared initially 
in parallel with feasibility studies for the corridor.  These are expected to commence in 
February 2006.  
 
As a follow on activity, a Resettlement Action Plan and Environmental Management Plan 
will be prepared for phase 1 (Agaiani - Igoeti section) and this is expected to be completed 
by May 2006.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
12/28/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/18/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards at PCN stage based on justification received for Category B; will 
revisit as preparation proceeds. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
01/23/2006 
Comments:  cleared 
