Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC2490
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P083110 
Project Name:  East-West Highway Improvement - Phase 1 
Task Team Leader:  Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other public sector 
governance (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.60
8.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are:  
 
(i) 
to contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and improve access, 
ease of transit, and safety along the central part of Georgia's East-West corridor, through 
upgrading a segment of the East-West Highway from Tbilisi to Rikoti; and,  
 
(ii) 
to strengthen the capacity of the government, RDMED and the local road 
construction industry to plan and manage better the road network.   
 
3. Project Description 
Upgrade the Agaiani to Igoeti section of the E60 Highway from two lanes to four lanes. 
The existing highway traverses rolling terrain throughout its entire length running 
between KP 43 and KP 55.  This is a significantly transformed landscape.  The existing 
road is paved with a width varying between 7 and 9 m, and a parallel embankment has 
already been prepared for an extension on the right hand side of this road (completed 
during the soviet period).  Several intersections are proposed with a new overpass and 
existing underpasses.  There are no design issues that would impact built up areas 
although some kiosks may need to be relocated.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project involves the expansion of the existing 2 lane road to a 4 lane road between 
the villages of Agaiani and Igoeti with the large majority of works being conducted 
within the current Right of Way.  
 
This project has been classified as a Category B project for Environmental Assessment 
purposes due to the fact that the project is proposed in a significantly transformed 
landscape with no significant or sensitive environmental receptors, in addition there is an 
existing embankement for the extension that was completed in the soviet period. There 
will be limited social impacts and no relocation of people is proposed.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Jane Olga Ebinger (ECSIE) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
An Environmental Review of baseline information, key environmental sensitivities and 
an analysis of alternatives has been conducted for this project as well as for potential 
future projects (Igoeti By-pass and the highway between Igoeti and Sveneti) to assist in 
planning and scheduling.  The Environmental Review also identified mitigation 
measures.  
 
A
section specific Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) to mitigate and manage impacts associated with direct or indirect impacts of 
construction is currently under preparation for section I (Agaiani to Igoeti) and a draft 
will be completed by October 25, 2006.  There will be subsequent consultation and 
disclosure of this EMP in line with OP/BP 4.  01.  
 
Page  3
There are no geo-hazardous processes or areas of active erosion in this section and no 
protected areas or sites of extreme value or sensitivity are crossed by the highway.  No 
sensitive surface water resources or dry gorges have been identified that could impact the 
road during flash flooding.  
 
The highway crosses several areas where the archaeological sites and monuments are 
located within the zone of the project impact including the areas surrounding the villages 
of Agaiani and Okami where 11 monuments and archaeological sites have been identified 
during the desk-studies and site visits. In line with OPN 4 11.03: Cultural Property the 
EMP currently under preparation will outline measures to avoid and/or minimize project 
impacts on identified cultural properties and will include procedures for managing chance 
finds during construction works.  
 
Plants in the strip of greenery that align the road are expected to be impacted during 
construction and the number of parasites and diseases may increase due to a decrease in 
plant resistance during construction.  Highway construction could also lead to a spread of 
pests, parasites, diseases, weeds or harmful microorganisms to adjacent orchards, crops, 
wind breaks or fragments of woods without proper management.  Mitigation and 
compensation measures will therefore be developed and outlined in the section specific 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP)that is currently being prepared.  
 
The Phase 1 of the Project will require the acquisition of 3ha of private land, which 
consists of 25 plots.  Most private land to be affected is not used for productive purpose, 
other than for grazing of domestic animals and for agricultural production of minor scale.  
No physical relocation of households or demolition of structure is expected. The exact 
number of households whose land will be affected will be determined when the 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is developed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the vicinity of the village of Agaiani in the flood plain of the River Ksani there are 
fragments of riparian forests that are protected under the Forestry Code including: aspen 
woods (Populus hybrida), willow woods (Salix australior), oak woods (Quercus longipes) 
and elm woods (Ulmus suberosa).  Small mammal species and mustelids (including 
endemics of the Caucasus and 4 endangered in Georgia) as well as bats included in the 
Red Data Book of Georgia have been observed in these forest fragments.  The River 
Ksani is a breeding ground for reophilous and non reophilous fish.  While the riparian 
forests and fish breeding grounds are not in the zone of direct impact they could be 
vulnerable to indirect impacts connected to construction activities such as quarrying of 
gravel and inert construction materials.  Potential impacts on areas protected under the 
Forestry Code will be addressed through the EMP (being prepared) in line with OP/BP 
4.36 Forests.  
 
The project (phase 1) may result in damage to private land during construction which 
may result in loss of income from harvest. Access to grazing land will be restricted 
during construction.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Economic Development is responsible for the successful implementation 
of these studies and will be supported by RDMED.  Within the RDMED, the Division of 
the Project Assessment, New Technologies and Environmental Protection within the 
Office of the Technical Policy is responsible for all environmental issues related to 
highway development.  This division will oversee implementation of the EMP by 
construction contractors.  
 
The capacity of the RDMED needs to be considerably strengthened to ensure adequate 
supervision of implementation.  Specifically it is proposed that additional support and 
training is provided to RDMED to monitor construction and ensure compliance with 
agreed EMPs.  
 
RDMED prepared the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as per Bank OP 4.12 that 
set out policies and principles of land acquisition and resettlement over the entire 
itinerary between Igoeti and Sveneti (including the proposed Igoeti bypass).  RAP will be 
developed during project implementation as per RPF and OP 4.12 to address social 
impact associated with the Phase 1 of the Project.   
 
Acquisition of private land and development/ implementation of RAP will be carried out 
by RDMED.  Since its capacity for land acquisition as per Bank safeguard policies is 
very limited, technical assistance will be provided for the capacity development of 
RDMED, so RDMED will be able to comply with Bank social safeguard policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include land holders and residents in the Agaiani - Igoeti area affected 
directly or indirectly be the project activities.  
 
Consultation with key stakeholders on environmental matters will be held early October 
2006 during the course of preparation of the EMP.  
 
The draft RPF has been disclosed in country and Infoshop. Copies of RPF were made 
available in local government offices, and the availability announced in local/national 
media. The comments received will be incorporated in the final RPF by mid October 
2006. 
 
A
public consultation meeting on land related issues will be carried out during when 
RAP is developed, and feedback will be incorporated into RAP.  A Notice board will be 
put up to inform local population of the project and a communication channel will be set 
Page  5
up to allow those with competing claims over land to be used to build road to put forward 
their claims.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/14/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
An Environmental Review has been prepared that identifies issues and proposes 
management measures and a site specific Environmental Management Plan is currently 
under preparation that will address management of cultural heritage and pest 
management issues in more detail.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed.  Its Georgian version has been 
disclosed in local government offices and its availability be announced by local and 
national media.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Page  6
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
No 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
09/26/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Jane Olga Ebinger 
09/14/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
09/18/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
09/26/2006 
Comments:  approved 
