Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.: 
Date updated:  August 24, 2006 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P096741
 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  Methane Leak Reduction from Gas Pipeline Project
 
Task Team Leader:  Jane Ebinger
 
Appraisal Date: August 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Carbon Finance 
Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement
 
Sector:  Energy and Mining (100%)
 
Theme Climate Change (P)
 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
PCF Amount (US$m.):  $40 million 
Other financing amounts by source: Millenium Challenge Corporation grant ($40 grant); BP 
grant ($1.1 million); EBRD ($0.4 million) 
 
Environmental Category:  FI  
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [ X] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ ] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ X ] 
2. Project Objectives: 
 
The project development objective is to reduce emissions of greenhouse gas from key points in 
the gas transmission infrastructure in Georgia; where leaks are very common. In addition, the 
project will support the development of an international market mechanism for “Emission 
Reductions” (ERs) under the framework of the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
3. Project Description: 
 
Methane is a potent greenhouse gas, and this proposed project will reduce methane leaks from 
the natural gas transmission system that would have otherwise been vented into the atmosphere. 
As a carbon finance project, GGIC the project sponsor will sell emission reductions generated 
from rehabilitation work on the pipeline system, financed by the
 
GGIC and the MCC, to the 
World Bank’s carbon funds.  
 
Methane emission reductions will be achieved by replacing corroded and leaking sections of 
pipe, changing seals, replacing worn valves, improving metering and monitoring capacities, and 
Page  2
-2-
upgrading the management capacity of GGIC’s staff. This will be supported through the 
installation of highly accurate meters, development of an emission reduction monitoring system, 
and the allocation of the required financial resources to make large system wide repairs. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
 
The project will focus on repairs to the gas transmission system in Georgia.  This pipeline system 
stretches from the border with Russia to the border with Armenia and extends to the west to the 
Black Sea.  The majority of works will be within the right of way of the pipeline system and in 
the earlier years will focus on rehabilitation of the north south transmission system. The project 
does not include any gas distribution networks. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Environment – Philip Moeller 
Social – Stan Peabody, Satoshi Ishihara 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 Yes 
No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
Rehabilitation works in the early years will focus on the north south transmission system where 
the pipeline and two sections specifically are considered to be in urgent need of repair, i.e. where 
pipeline integrity is at risk due to landslip, erosion and/ or the poor integrity of river crossings.  
An Environmental Review (ER) has been prepared that describes the environment issues and 
sensitivities along the entire north south route, including an appendix with the identification of 
sites likely to require special consideration.
 
Since the work to be performed represents rehabilitation of the existing system, most fall into the 
World Bank and MCC Category B on environmental assessment  and would be conducted within 
the right of way of the pipeline (see comments re. mapping below).  Special concerns relate to 
areas where the pipeline crosses rivers where there would be temporary impacts from activities 
Page  3
-3-
strengthening the support systems for the pipeline or from civil works crews and where the 
pipeline runs along or through specially designated protected areas.  In these cases the site 
specific EAs will need to ensure that impacts are minimized through the development of 
appropriate mitigation and monitoring plans.
 
The pipeline runs through a hilly region in the north, where herders graze livestock in communal 
land, to moderately populated areas near the capital city, Tbilisi, where significant encroachment 
on the right of way (ROW) of the pipeline is observable.  The precise demarcation of the ROW 
of the pipeline is, in fact, not well established and a mapping exercise is underway to address 
this.  It is expected that many private individuals will have competing legal claims to the ROW.  
In order to ensure safe operation of the pipeline, land need to be cleared above and around the 
pipeline and restrictions should be imposed on a permanent basis on the range of activities to be 
allowed in the ROW.  The GGIC will also purchase private land to build above-ground 
structures.  While the exact types and scale of impact is not known until the mapping exercise 
currently under way completes, it is considered that a significant number of households, 
especially in the densely populated areas close to Tbilisi, might permanently lose land or access 
to means of livelihood. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area: 
 
The majority of work represents rehabilitation of the existing system and environmental impacts 
are therefore expected to be temporary and related to construction.  For areas requiring special 
consideration site specific management plans will be developed to address potential impacts. 
 
In terms of social impact, the GGIC plans to improve and rehabilitate access roads to pipelines, 
which will also be shared by local population where allowed and contribute to improving local 
mobility.  The inflow of migrant workers expected during construction period may cause social 
disruption in local communities and trigger transmission of communicable diseases such as 
tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts: 
 
Where physical relocation of the local population is unavoidable to rehabilitate existing 
pipelines, such as where the ROW is encroached, the project will take maximum efforts to 
reroute pipeline alignments over public land or to re-route gas flows around these areas via 
existing pipelines. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
An environmental review (ER) has been prepared that outlines the potential environmental 
impacts and concerns as they relate to the north south pipeline route. In addition, since works 
will be completed in discrete sections over a number of years and since some of this works are as 
yet undefined, an Environmental management framework (EMF) that outlines the procedures for 
Page  4
-4-
screening, assessment and management of environmental impacts has been developed.  The EMF 
addresses national, World Bank and MCC requirements and will be applied to all works.   
 
In accordance with the EMF specific Environmental Assessments (EAs) will be prepared, and 
consultation and disclosure will take place as outlined in the EMF.  These EAs will include 
Environmental Management Plans covering both mitigation and monitoring.  The impacts 
resulting from temporary work activity, including noise, dust, and safety will be covered by 
specific terms in be included in all works contracts.  Most specific investments or sub-projects 
will correspond to Category B for Environmental Assessment though it is conceivable that one or 
more of these could fall in Category A.  The Bank will be closely engaged in screening to assess 
the appropriate category, as well in the review of environmental assessments and management 
plans prepared for this project.   
 
The GGIC has been carrying out a mapping exercise to determine land usage within the project 
affected areas and assess the types and degree of social impact that is expected under the project.  
In parallel pipeline inspection work to identify and prioritize the rehabilitation needs (at least for 
the first $40 million of investment) is being completed. These activities are due for completion in 
late spring 2007. In the interim a decision has been made to rehabilitate 6 sites considered to be 
high priority will this inspection and mapping work continues.  There will be no resettlement in 
any sites but some land acquisition is expected in 2 sites (one minor, the other affecting 12 
families).   
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed that sets out policies and principles 
for matters related to acquisition of private land and physical relocation of households.  The RPF 
will be updated once the mapping and inspection work is completed.  A Resettlement Action 
Plan (RAP) will be developed for each construction segment involving resettlement.  The RAP 
will put forward both detailed action plans to carry out land acquisition and resettlement and 
mitigation measures against other potential negative impacts, including both permanent and 
temporary impacts. 
 
GGIC established a health safety and environment (HSE) department in late 2005 that is 
responsible for the management of safeguard issues. While new to GGIC this department 
includes experienced staff.  Support in building the capacity of this HSE department has been 
provided through WB, BP and MCC activities supporting the preparation of this carbon finance 
project and underlying rehabilitation activities.  Continued support will be provided to GGIC 
through the MCC for environmental issues related to rehabilitation activities funded through the 
MCC Compact to ensure a sustainable program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
The primary direct stakeholders include the Georgian Gas International Corporation (GGIC) and 
its operation arm the Georgian Transportation Company (GTC), various government ministries, 
certain NGOS, and the donors.  The major government Ministries include:  the Ministry of 
Finance, the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Environmental Protections and Natural 
Resources, the Ministry of Economic Development, the Ministry of Culture, and the Ministry of 
Page  5
-5-
Agriculture.  The primary donor agencies include: the Millennium Challenge Corporation 
(MCC), the Millennium Challenge Fund Georgia (MCG), the World Bank, EBRD and BP.  
Indirect beneficiaries include both commercial and residential users of gas as well as public and 
private organizations that will associated with the rehabilitation process. 
 
The GGIC has established a HSE department that will be in charge of the planning and 
implementation of the safeguards screening process, the conduct of environmental assessment, 
and the conduct of involuntary resettlement under the project.  The MCG will provide the GGIC 
technical support for successful implementation of these safeguard issues.  The ER, EMF, and 
RPF have been disclosed in the INFOShop and copies of safeguard documents will be made 
available in local government offices.  Consultation meetings have been organized in two 
locations, including where heavy encroachment is reported and social impact is expected to be 
most significant. 
 
Inter-ministerial coordination will be carried out through an existing committee with both the 
MCG and the GGIC playing roles in the provision of information to the various stakeholders. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
May 31, 2006 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
June 15, 2006 
Date of submission to INFOShop 
May 31, 2006 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
May 30, 2006 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
June 15, 2006 
Date of submission to INFOShop 
May 31, 2006 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
n/a 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
n/a 
Date of submission to INFOShop 
n/a 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
n/a 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
n/a 
Date of submission to INFOShop 
n/a 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
The documents were disclosed in country through the Caucasus Environmental NGO Network 
(CENN)
 and were made available through GGIC’s website on June 15, 2006.  Disclosure of the 
above documents also took place in the rayon’s of Tbilisi (June 20) and Dusheti (June 21). 
Page  6
-6-
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report?  
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
As an FI project an Environmental 
Review (ER) has been prepared 
together with an Environmental 
Management Framework.  During 
project implementation site specific 
EAs (including management plans) 
will be prepared, as appropriate.   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
The above documents have been 
reviewed and approved by the 
Regional Safeguard’s Unit. 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
YES 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [ X ]          N/A [] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
At this stage it is not expected that 
the project will result in the 
significant conversion or degradation 
of critical natural habitats.  However, 
this will be confirmed through site 
specific EAs that will be prepared 
during the course of project 
implementation particularly where 
there is potential to impact river 
crossings and designated protected 
areas. Mitigation measures will be 
included in the site specific 
Environmental Management Plans.    
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Page  7
-7-
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
Consultations have been held with 
the Ministry of Culture in the course 
of project preparation.  At this stage 
it is not expected that the project will 
result in adverse impacts on physical 
cultural resources.  However, this 
will be confirmed through site 
specific EAs that will be prepared 
during the course of project 
implementation and mitigation 
measures and procedures to deal with 
chance finds will be included in the 
site specific Environmental 
Management Plans.    
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) has been prepared and 
disclosed for this project. 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
The RPF has been reviewed and 
approved by the Regional 
Safeguard’s Unit.  
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
Page  8
-8-
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's INFOShop?   
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Documents were disclosed on May 
31, 2006. 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
In-country disclosure: (i) 
announcement re. disclosure and 
consultation (June 1) together with 
invitations for disclosure discussion 
for June 20 in Tbilisi and June 21 in 
Dusheti; (ii) June 15, 2006 
announcement through CENN 
network and posting on GGIC 
external website. 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
-9-
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Jane Ebinger 
July 31, 2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Philip Moeller 
July 31, 2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Satoshi Ishihara 
July 31, 2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald Hoffer (signed by W. Pohl, Acting) 
Aug. 24, 2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Charles Feinstein 
July 31, 2006 
Comments:   
