Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2777 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Georgia 
Project ID: P094044 
Project Name: Second East-West Highway Improvement 
Task Team Leader: Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regional integration 
(S);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
41.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
18.00 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
1.00
19.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Second East-West Highway Improvement project (EWHIP) aims to achieve the following 
objectives:  
 
(i) To contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and improve access, ease of 
transit, and safety along the central part of Georgia's East-West corridor, through upgrading a 
segment of the East-West Highway from Tbilisi to Rikoti; and  
 
(ii) To strengthen the capacity of the government, RDMED and the patrol police to develop and 
implement a traffic safety program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
There will be three project components:  
 
(1) Upgrade of about 24km between Igoeti and Sveneti from two lanes to four lanes with the 
construction of two bypasses;  
Page  2
(2) Provision of technical assistance and goods to support institutional development for traffic 
safety and  
 
(3) Technical assistance to support project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project involves the construction of the Igoeti bypass and the expansion of the existing 2 
lane road to a 4 lane road between the villages of Igoeti and Sveneti with the majority of works 
being conducted within the current Right of Way.  
 
The project is rated as category A. The Igoeti bypass is identified as sensitive due to the 
presence of archaeological sites, potential erosion and land stability issues and natural (terrestrial 
and aquatic) habitats. The alignment will affect several small villages and isolated kiosks and 
buildings which will imply land acquisition and demolition of roadside structures.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Roads Department under the Ministry of Economic Development (RDMED) has expanded 
its environmental and land acquisition unit. The RDMED has been gaining experience in the 
Bank safeguard policies through the preparation and implementation of the First EWHI project. 
Training will be provided under the First EWHIP to the RDMED staff to integrate environmental 
and social concerns into road management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Review of baseline information, key environmental sensitivities and an 
analysis of alternatives was conducted for this project to assist in planning and scheduling. This 
study was commissioned under the First EWHI Project and it covers all three sections of the 
highway from Village Agaiani to village Sveneti. The Environmental Review was publicly 
disclosed in September 2006 and public consultation took place in October 2006. The final 
version was disclosed on October 23, 2006.  
 
A
specific Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) to mitigate and manage direct or indirect impacts associated with construction is currently 
under preparation for section II (Igoeti bypass) and section III (Igoeti to Sveneti). The drafts of 
these documents will be completed by July 2007.  There will be subsequent consultation and 
disclosure of the EIA and EMP in line with OP/BP 4. 01.  
 
There are no protected areas crossed by the bypass or highway, though surroundings of 
Igoeti bypass represent a habitat for several endemic floral species that entered in the Red data 
Book of Georgia.  
 
Several areas around Igoeti bypass and the sub
-
section of the existing motor road b
etween 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Igoeti and Sveneti closer to Sveneti carry high risk of geo-hazards due to landslide bodies 
formed on the steep slopes.  At one point of Igoeti-Sveneti section a strong flow of river Western 
Tortla gets pretty close to the existing motor road.  The road slope is not properly reinforced at 
this point that creates risk of collapse.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
There are no protected areas crossed by the bypass or highway, though surroundings of Igoeti 
bypass represent habitats for several endemic floral species that entered in the Red Data Book of 
Georgia, including Paeonia tenuifolia, P. carthalinica, P. majko, and P. caucasica as well as 
Hippophae rhamnoides, Amygdalus georgica, and Nitraria schoberi. Fragments of riparian 
forests are a home for mustelids and other small mammal species, including endemics of the 
Caucasus and 4 endangered species in Georgia as well as for bats entered into the Red Data 
Book of Georgia. Rivers Lekhura and Tortla are the most important habitats for conservation of 
reophilous and non-reophilous fish, as they represent breeding grounds for this ichtyophauna. 
While sensitivity of these terrestrial and aquatic habitats to project impacts is estimated to be 
medium, they could be vulnerable to a variety of construction activities and to operation of the 
rehabilitated highway unless proper mitigation measures are taken.  Specific measures for 
managing and mitigating the potential impacts during construction and operation of sections II 
and III of the highway will be identified and recommended through the EMP in line with OP/BP 
4.04 Natural Habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
In the vicinity of the village Igoeti and along the Igoeti-Sveneti section of the road there are 
fragments of riparian forests that are protected under the Forest Code of Georgia, including: 
aspen woods (Populus hybrida), willow woods (Salix australior), oak woods (Quercus longipes), 
and elm woods (Ulmus suberosa). Specific measures for managing and mitigating the potential 
impacts during construction of sections II and III of the highway will be identified and 
recommended through the EMP in line with OP/BP 4.36 Forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Plants in the strip of greenery that align the road are expected to be impacted during 
construction and the number of parasites and diseases may increase due to a decrease in plant 
resistance during construction.  Highway construction could also lead to a spread of pests, 
parasites, diseases, weeds or harmful microorganisms to adjacent orchards, crops, wind breaks or 
fragments of woods without proper management. Mitigation and compensation measures will 
therefore be developed and outlined in the section specific EMP.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The sections II and III both run in immediate proximity to important archaeological sites and 
monuments, 9 of which have been identified during the desk-studies and site visits around 
village of Igoeti and 10 more along the Igoeti-Sveneti section of the road. The EMP currently 
under preparation will outline measures to avoid and/or minimize project impacts on identified 
cultural properties and will include procedures for managing chance finds during construction 
works.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project is expected to require acquisition of about 60ha of land, of which 22ha are 
private land. A few handful of roadside structures, kiosks and restaurants will be removed. No 
physical relocation is expected. The RDMED has already developed t
he Resettlement Policy 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Framework (RPF) during the preparation of the first EWHIP (disclosed on October 23, 2006), 
and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be developed as per the policies and principles set 
out in the RPF and OP 4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/03/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EA and RPF covering the whole Agaiani-Sveneti were completed and disclosed on 
October 23, 2006 as part of the preparation of the First EWHIP, thus meeting requirements 
for appraisal of this project. The Consultant in charge of developping the EIA/EMP and RAP 
for this section has been appointed and should complete its work by July 2007, i.e. prior to 
the start of the works.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
02/28/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/05/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards at the Concept stage 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
03/05/2007 
Comments:  Cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
