Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/05/2006 
Report No.:  37699
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P098217 
Project Name:  Education System Realignment & Strengthening Program (APL #2) 
Task Team Leader:  Rosita Maria Van Meel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 25, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 9, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (95%);Tertiary education (5%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.78 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
4.95
8.73 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objective of APL 2 is to increase the quality and efficiency of primary 
and secondary education in Georgia through the implementation of the institutional and 
policy framework developed under APL 1, as well as the reconstruction of schools in dire 
physical condition. The key performance indicators of the project are, therefore, focused 
on the relevant measures of quality and efficiency.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Improving the Pedagogical Environment.  
 
The objective of this component is to support changes in curriculum content, teaching 
methodology, student assessment, initial teacher education and continued teacher 
professional development, building on the institutional and policy frameworks supported 
by APL 1. The specific objectives and activities of the two related subcomponents are 
discussed below.  
 
Subcomponent 1A: National Curriculum and Student Assessment System Development. 
The objective of this subcomponent is to improve the teaching content and methodologies 
in line with the national curriculum framework; to establish a system of student 
Page  2
assessment so as to identify difficulties in student learning and develop targeted programs 
accordingly; and to assist ITE institutions adapt their programs to take into account the 
changes in teaching standards, the national curriculum, and student assessment 
methodologies.  The National Curriculum and Assessment Center (NCAC) that will be 
responsible for implementing these policies has been established in 2006.  This 
subcomponent would develop the capacity of the NCAC in terms of the managerial and 
technical capacity of the staff; support the development, piloting and implementation of 
the national curriculum in almost all grades and subjects which will include the training 
of teacher trainers, the training of teachers, and other dissemination activities; support the 
development of a system of student formative assessment; and conduct sample based 4th 
grade student assessments in Georgian Language and Literature and in Mathematics.  The 
NCAC will also be responsible to support the reform of the ITE system and institutions.  
The Center will strengthen the technical capacity of higher education institutions 
involved in ITE through the provision of technical and materials to reform the ITE 
programs to meet the new standards for teacher certification and reflect the curriculum 
and student assessment reforms.  
 
For these purposes, the Project (including financing from the Government, Credit and 
Grant) would finance technical assistance; training; publication and dissemination; 
workshops and conferences; the acquisition of copyrights and translations, editing and 
printing of materials for a library in education science; a limited amount of goods and 
works for establishing the Center; and the operations of the Curriculum and Assessment 
Center.  
 
The MoES would be responsible for the policy decisions and overall monitoring and 
evaluation of the sector; and the NCAC would be responsible for the implementation of 
the program. The MoES would finance its policy unit to elaborate a strategy to address 
the challenges of the tertiary education system in a financially sustainable manner as part 
of the policy dialogue with the government on improving the efficiency and equity of the 
overall system and provide resources to improve governance structures and move to a 
credit course system.  A new higher education law has recently been passed, and reforms 
are starting but could benefit from adequate analysis and broader consultation.  
 
Subcomponent 1B:  Professional Development of Teachers.  The objective of this 
subcomponent is to improve the qualifications of teachers through the development and 
implementation of a teacher professional development system. The educational institution 
responsible for building the professional development system of teachers was established 
in August of 2006.  This subcomponent would develop the capacity of the Teachers 
Professional Development Center (TPDC) in terms of the managerial and technical 
capacity of the staff; develop standards for teachers including the dissemination of 
materials and holding of workshops and conferences; develop and conduct certification 
of both the existing and new teaching force; develop accreditation mechanisms for both 
ITE and CPD programs; and establish a registration system of teacher, teacher-candidate, 
and training programs.  For these purposes, the Project (including financing from the 
Government, Credit and Grant) would finance technical assistance; training; publication 
and dissemination of materials; a limited amount of goods and works; and the operations 
Page  3
of the TPDC.  The MoES would be responsible for the policy decisions and overall 
monitoring and evaluation of the sector; and the TPDC would be responsible for the 
implementation of the program.  
 
Component 2: Improving the Physical Learning Environment. The main objective of 
this component is to improve the school physical learning environment in schools in 
emergency conditions to complement the investments on improving the quality of the 
pedagogical learning environment and to demonstrate how the efficiency of the school 
network could be improved through the adoption of more efficient school building 
standards and through school consolidations.  In addition to the support for emergency 
schools, the main outcomes of this component under the National Program of the 
President will be: (i) there will be no children studying in school buildings that are 
determined to be in structurally unsafe or in educationally inappropriate buildings; (ii) a 
school network maintenance strategy will be adopted and made operational by the 
Government. The target is to spend 16% of the budget on maintenance.  
 
The Bank credit will be used to finance the construction, furnishing and equipping of 
about eight schools in different parts of the country each of which will, on average, be a 
consolidation of two existing schools.  The Ministry will provide a school bus to each 
new school to facilitate the merger process. National building standards for schools have 
been developed under APL 1, in line with the requirements of the new curriculum and 
will be applied in the design and construction of each school supported under APL2.  The 
construction of these schools would be implemented by the Municipal Development 
Fund (MDF) which has acquired expertise in construction and management of large scale 
projects.  
 
Coping with data constraints, the Ministry of Education has tried to be careful in 
determining which schools require reconstruction.  The Ministry conducted a survey of 
all schools except for those in Tbilisi (because data were already collected under the 
municipal reconstruction program in 2005), Adjara (because of separate investment 
program), and Abkhazian schools (they are separate institutional identities).  The 
Ministry determined that a school should be prioritized for reconstruction if: (i) it does 
not have a building, (ii) children are currently studying in wagons or other educationally 
inappropriate places; or (iii) engineers found the building to be structurally unsafe. In the 
later case, it was determined that the cost of school rehabilitation would need to be higher 
than or equivalent to rebuilding the school.  
 
As a result of this survey, 80 schools were identified for emergency rehabilitation.  
However, 42 schools have either been consolidated recently with nearby schools (and 
thus will not be rehabilitated) or will be constructed with other donor funding.  Of the 
remaining 38 schools, further priority is given to schools with over 300 students and 
where other nearby schools could be consolidated into. Based on these criteria 10 
candidate emergency schools have been identified. The MDF published the names of the 
10 schools including information on the locations and pictures of their respective 
conditions on the MDF-website www.mdf.org.ge/APL2.  In July 2006, an IDA team 
including a qualified construction engineer visited the 10 schools. Eight schools were 
Page  4
found to be in emergency conditions due to structural damage to the foundations and/or 
lack of adherence to safeguard regulations for schools in earthquake zones. Two schools 
in need of serious repair were found to be suitable for a rehabilitation program and were 
eliminated from the candidate list. However, before a final decision is made, a detailed 
expert review will be conducted on a complete feasibility study for each school to 
confirm that each school meets all of the eligibility criteria. To ensure that newly 
upgraded school infrastructure is maintained, the component will also support the 
development and adoption of a school maintenance strategy, including the necessary 
amendment of the General Education Law and the development of a school maintenance 
manual and training in the use of that manual to upgrade the capacity of school boards 
and managers in this area.  
 
The APL 2 is designed with the understanding that the Government will at the same 
time be implementing a major capital investment program that will rehabilitate at least 
1000 schools of the existing school infrastructure to an adequate level (repair of roofing, 
windows, doors, and ensuring that all heating, electricity, water and sewage systems are 
operational) and will completely rehabilitate 68 schools in 2006 in addition to addressing 
schools in emergency conditions.  
 
Component 3: Project Management. The objective of this component is to provide 
institutional support to MoES, PCU, MDF, NCAC, and TPDC related to the project 
related operations, financial audits and project monitoring and evaluation.  
 
1. 
To implement the objectives of this component, the Bank credit will be used to 
finance further development of the monitoring and evaluation system and project 
financial audits under the Ministry of Education and Science. The project will also 
finance operating costs of MDF (6% of the total disbursed amount by MDF for the 
purpose of APL 2), including the costs of staff salaries (excluding salaries of the 
Recipient?s civil service staff), communication, editing, printing and publication, 
translation, vehicle operation and maintenance, bank charges, local travel costs and field 
trip expenses, office rentals, utilities, and supplies.  
 
The government would finance operating costs of NCAC and TPDC.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Bank credit will be used to finance the construction, furnishing and equipping of 
about eight schools in different parts of the country that will, on average, be a 
consolidation of two existing schools.  The environmental safeguard was addressed due 
to the possible environmental impact of the school construction.The land upon which the 
schools will be built already are or will be properties of the schools and do not raise any 
resettlement issues.  Because the new schools will be a consolidation of existing schools, 
the concerns of the community/parents will be carefully assessed and addressed as part of 
the project design.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Page  5
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Credit will be used to finance the construction of 8 schools, all of them will replace 
schools in emergency status or schools operating in non-educationally appropriate 
circumstances.  The construction of the schools will trigger the environmental safeguard, 
because of the noise and other inconveniences associated with the construction, need to 
appropriately dispose of construction waste, use appropriate construction material and 
arrange for proper water and sanitation in the school. The school land already is the 
property of the school or will be provided by the local authorities.  There are no land 
acquisition issues. There are no settlements on the land and, therefore, the involuntary 
resettlement safeguard is not triggered.  
 
No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The future activities in the project areas will be the use of the school for education of 
children.  The long-term impacts of this use will be taken into consideration in the design 
of the school and particularly in the appropriate water and sanitation measures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only relevant project alternative which was considered was a school rehabilitation 
rather than school construction project (as discussed at the Safeguards meeting following 
the Project concept review meeting).  This alternative project design had much of the 
same environmental concerns as the current project design.  As part of the 'feasibility 
studies' planned for each school construction site, we will ensure that no additional issues 
arise, (i.e. no need for land acquisition and no resettlement issues). Because the Project 
design now includes school consolidation, the feasibility study will also include a 
Page  6
particular social component to assess and address any community/parents concern 
regarding the planned consolidation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower is undertaking a feasibility study of each school proposal, which includes 
an assessment of potential environmental impact in order to develop an appropriate plan 
for mitigation measures.  The borrower, supported by the Municipal Development Fund 
(MDF) (which has recently absorbed the Georgian Social Investment Fund (GSIF)), has 
completed an  assessment and planning for mitigation measures.  The environmental 
management framework (including draft environmental management plan) has been 
published in Georgia and the framework was discussed with key stakeholders.  The MDF 
and GSIF have experience in complying with the Bank's environmental safeguard policy.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Natural 
Resources, civil society organizations and communities in which the schools will be built.  
They were informed that the Environmental Management Framework was made  
available on the MDF website.  The meeting with the key stakeholders has been held and 
its minutes submitted to the Association. The School Boards will have an important role 
in supervising the construction of the schools, which will include compliance with the 
EMP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/22/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  7
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rosita Maria Van Meel 
09/20/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
09/19/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
07/12/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
09/22/2006 
Comments:  No additional comments at this time. 
