Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC2943
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P094044 
Project Name:  Second East-West Highway Improvement 
Task Team Leader:  Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regional integration 
(S);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
42.00
42.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Second East-West Highway Improvement project (EWHIP) aims to achieve the 
following objectives:  
 
(i) 
To contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and improve ease of 
transit and safety along the central part of Georgia's East-West corridor, through 
upgrading a segment of the East-West Highway from Tbilisi to Rikoti; and  
 
(ii) 
To strengthen the capacity of the government agencies (and particularly RDMED 
and the patrol police) to develop and implement a traffic safety program.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Upgrade of the Igoeti to Sveneti section of the E60 Highway from two to 
four lanes. This component comprises: (i) civil works for the construction of a new two 
lane carriage way along a 24 km section of the E60 highway from Igoeti to Sveneti, the 
construction of 4 bridges and the rehabilitation of the existing two lanes; (ii) consultant 
services for the supervision of the works; and (iii) the design of another section of the 
E60 Highway to be specified by the Government at a later date to help prepare a future 
project.  
 
Page  2
Component 2:  Road Safety and Transport Policy support. This component comprises 
specialized consultancy studies, technical assistance, training, and equipment as needed 
to strengthen the capacity of the Government, RDMED, the Patrol Police and others to 
develop and implement a traffic safety program along the E60 corridor. It also includes 
(i) consultant services for the revision of the civil aviation and maritime codes and (ii) 
new equipment for the modernization of communications and traffic management in the 
country's airports.  
 
Component 3:  Project implementation. The component will fund consultant services for 
TRRC , project audits and will finance incremental operational costs to support 
implementation of the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project involves the construction of the Igoeti bypass and the expansion of the 
existing 2 lane road to a 4 lane road from the villages of Igoeti to Sveneti between KP55 
and KP79.  Most land that should be used to accomodate the expanded road is within the 
existing ROW and the road can be expanded without land acquisition, except for the 
construction of interchanges and for connection of the Igoeti by-pass to the existing 
alignment by the Lekhura River.  
 
The project is rated as category A. The Igoeti bypass is identified as sensitive due to the 
presence of archaeological sites, potential erosion and land stability issues and natural 
(terrestrial and aquatic) habitats. A number of kiosks and other commercial buildings will 
be demolished.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): An Environmental Review of baseline 
information, key environmental sensitivities and an analysis of alternatives was 
conducted under the First EWHIP covering the whole section from Agaiani to Sveneti to 
assist in planning and scheduling and also to identify mitigation measures. The 
Environmental Review has been disclosed through the InfoShop (September 14, 2006) 
and in country (September 15, 2006) and consultation meetings were held in Agaiani, 
Okami and Berbuki on October 19, 2006 to discuss the Environmental Review. Questions 
were asked regarding the scope of the project, its design and construction, impacts on 
people in terms of traffic safety, damage to properties, land acquisition and compensation 
as well as employment opportunities.  No significant environmental issues were raised. 
The final version was disclosed on October 23, 2006. A section specific Environmental 
Assessment (EA) and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to mitigate and 
manage direct or indirect impacts of construction have been completed for Phase 2, have 
been disclosed mid September 2007 and the revised drafts incorporating the public 
comments have been received for final disclosure.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): The Environment Review concluded that there are no 
protected areas crossed by the bypass or the highway, though surroundings of Igoeti 
bypass represent a habitat for several endemic floral species that entered in the Red List 
and Red Book of Georgia, including Paeonia tenuifolia, P. carthalinica, P. majko, and P. 
caucasica as well as Hippophae rhamnoides, Amygdalus georgica, and Nitraria schoberi. 
Fragments of riparian forests are a home for mustelids and other small mammal species, 
including endemics of the Caucasus and 4 endangered species in Georgia as well as for 
bats entered into the Red List and Red Book of Georgia. Rivers Lekhura and Tortla are 
the most important habitats for conservation of reophilous and non-reophilous fish, as 
they represent breeding grounds for this ichtyophauna. While sensitivity of these 
terrestrial and aquatic habitats to project impacts is estimated to be medium, they could 
be vulnerable to a variety of construction activities and to operation of the rehabilitated 
highway unless proper mitigation measures are taken.  Specific measures for managing 
and mitigating the potential impacts during construction and operation of Igoeti By-pass 
and Igoeti-Sveneti section of the highway will be identified and recommended through 
the EMP in line with OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36): In the vicinity of the village Igoeti and along the Igoeti-Sveneti 
section of the road there are fragments of riparian forests that are protected under the 
Forest Code of Georgia, including: aspen woods (Populus hybrida), willow woods (Salix 
australior), oak woods (Quercus longipes), and elm woods (Ulmus suberosa). Specific 
measures for managing and mitigating the potential impacts during construction of 
sections II and III of the highway will be identified and recommended through the EMP 
in line with OP/BP 4.36 Forests.  
 
Page  4
Pest management (OP 4.09): Plants in the strip of greenery that align the road are 
expected to be impacted during construction and the number of parasites and diseases 
may increase due to a decrease in plant resistance during construction. Highway 
construction could also lead to a spread of pests, parasites, diseases, weeds or harmful 
microorganisms to adjacent orchards, crops, wind breaks or fragments of woods without 
proper management. Mitigation and compensation measures will therefore be developed 
and outlined in the section specific EMP.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The Igoeti By-pass and Igoeti-Sveneti 
section of the highway both run in immediate proximity to important archaeological sites 
and monuments, 9 of which have been identified during the desk-studies and site visits 
around village of Igoeti and 10 more along the Igoeti-Sveneti section of the road. The 
EMP currently under preparation will outline measures to avoid and/or minimize project 
impacts on identified cultural properties and will include procedures for managing chance 
finds during construction works.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The Project is expected to require the 
acquisition of about 9 ha of land, of which 7 ha belong to private individuals. A handful 
of commercial structures and kiosks will need to be demolished.  No physical relocation 
of household is expected. The expansion of road will increase the risk of traffic accident 
for school children who commute to a school from settlements across the project road.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
While the riparian forests and fish breeding grounds are not in the zone of direct impact 
they could be vulnerable to indirect impacts connected to construction activities such as 
quarrying of gravel and inert construction materials or to the operation of the 
rehabilitated highway.  
 
The project may require temporary occupation of private land to store construction 
material. Access to grazing land may also be restricted during construction. The Road 
Department (RDMED) will require contractors to negotiate the temporary use of land 
with land owners, and to install temporary access for the mobility of both people and 
animals.  Restoration measures against all temporary damage will be developed as part of 
EMP and implemented by contractors.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
"No project" scenario as well as four alternative routes for the realignment of this section 
of the highway were considered. Economic interests aside, "no project" alternative can 
not be strongly supported with environmental arguments either. Civil works to expand 
width of the carriageway had been launched and then abandoned without proper 
conservation back in Soviet times. The landscape was transformed and continues 
deteriorating since then.  
 
Page  5
Four alternative alignments for a segment of the highway were analyzed to identify 
economically and environmentally most preferred option. Much consideration was given 
to social implications as well, like potential impact of traffic noise on the communities 
residing along the highway and implications of highway routing for their agricultural 
practices.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Economic Development is responsible for the successful implementation 
of mitigation measures against environmental impact. See section 1 above for detailed 
mitigation measures that will be taken.  The Road Department (RDMED) has recently 
established a new unit responsible for land acquisition and environmental issues.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed during the preparation 
of the first East-West Highway Improvement Project (disclosed on October 23, 2006), 
which covers the section of the project road. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is 
currently under development as per the RPF and OP 4.12. No major gaps are found to 
exist between Bank safeguard policies and Georgia legislation, except that under the 
Georgian legislation, those land owners without titles or business owners without licenses 
are not eligible for compensation of lost assets or income. RDMED will first help land 
owners register at the Public Registry and meet Georgian legislations to acquire full 
ownership of properties, so RDMED is able to acquire land with full compliance with 
Georgian legislation. Compensation for asset loss will be provided at replacement cost.  
 
Kiosks that need to be demolished will be provided alternative space in the rest area to 
be set up near Igoeti bypass, without regard to legal status of business operation. Access 
roads will be installed at three other locations to provide access to existing restaurants 
and gas stand near the project road.  
 
A
local school, which is located at the opposite side of settlements across the project 
road, will be either relocated closer to the settlement or an overpass/ underpass will be 
installed for the safety of school children. Overpasses and underpasses are planned to be 
constructed at several distance over the project road, which is expected to improve road 
safety.  
 
RDMED has gained significant experience in resettlement planning through the 
implementation of FEWHIP. Training of the RDMED staff to integrate environmental 
and social concerns into road management, especially in the area of the implementation 
of resettlement plan, is provided under the First EWHIP. Additional TA will be provided 
to the RDMED so land acquisition will be carried out as per Bank social safeguard 
policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include land holders and residents in the Igoeti-Sveneti area affected 
directly or indirectly by the project activities. Consultation with key stakeholders on 
Page  6
environmental matters was held early October 2006 during the course of preparation of 
the EMP.  
 
The RPF has been disclosed in country and in Infoshop on October 23, 2006. The RAP, 
once developed, will be disclosed and consulted with the local population who will be 
affected by the project. Feedback, if any, will be incorporated into the final RAP. A 
Notice board will be put up to inform local population of the project and a 
communication channel will be set up to allow those with competing claims over land to 
be used to build road to put forward their claims.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/14/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/20/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/26/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/26/2006 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  7
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
No 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
08/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
08/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
08/21/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/23/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
10/23/2007 
Comments:   
