Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/31/2006 
Report No.:  AC2268
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P099808 
Project Name:  Avian Influenza Control & Human Pandemic Preparedness & Response 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Frauke Jungbluth 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.87 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
1.40
3.27 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective of the project is to minimize the threat posed to 
humans and the poultry industry in Georgia by HPAI and other zoonoses in domestic 
poultry, and to prepare for, control, and respond to influenza pandemics and other 
infectious disease emergencies in humans.  To achieve this, three areas would be 
supported by the project: (i) prevention; (ii) preparedness and planning; and (iii) response 
and containment.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 
–
Animal Health.  
 
(A) 
Strengthening National HPIA Preparedness and Prevention Capability  
 
A1: Strengthening the Regulatory and Institutional Environment sub-component will 
support activities aimed at aligning and strengthening the legal and regulatory framework 
that governs the national capability to implement the recommended disease detection, 
Page  2
control, prevention, containment and eradication measures in a uniform and effective way 
and in accordance with OIE standards and guidelines.  
 
A2: National Action and Contingency Plan sub-component will provide support to 
detail required activities on all levels and to develop the necessary detailed 
implementation guidelines and manuals for all relevant agencies and services.  
 
A3: Establishment of a National Compensation Policy and Fund sub-component would 
support the development of implementation arrangements (financing, fiduciary aspects, 
eligibility criteria, payment arrangements, flow of funds, etc.) for a compensation fund 
and ensure that all key players are sufficiently trained in conducting the compensation 
payments on the local level.  
 
(B) Strengthening Disease Surveillance, Diagnostic, and Containment Capacity  
 
B1: Strengthening the Disease Monitoring and Containment System.  Targeted support 
will be provided to strengthen the public veterinary services as to bring them in line with 
OIE standards.  
 
B2: Strengthening Diagnostic Capacity and a Disease Surveillance Network sub-
component would be targeted to strengthening the diagnostic capacity that needs to feed 
into the laboratory system.  
 
B3: Strengthening Animal Disease Information Systems.  Project assistance will be 
provided to improve the reporting of animal health information from the field and the 
flow of information among relevant agencies.  
 
Component 2 - Human Health Component  
 
(A) Enhancing Public Health Program Planning and Coordination. The project would 
provide support to detail required sections on the context and epidemiological 
underpinnings of an eventual influenza pandemic, the current legislative and regulatory 
basis for intervention, vigilance through routine surveillance and its implementation 
arrangements, case finding and ascertainment through serological testing and virological 
subtyping, prevention through immunization, symptomatic case management with anti-
viral drugs.  
 
(B) Strengthening of National Public Health Surveillance Systems  
 
B1: Improvement of Laboratory Networks. The project support would be targeted 
primarily to strengthen the diagnostic capacity. Under this sub-component, financing will 
be available to upgrade existing national reference laboratory in Tbilisi (NRL), including 
design, renovation and upgrade to Bio-Safety Level 3 (BSL-3) laboratory with 
Page  3
concomitant physical containment requirements (P3), required for virus isolation and 
sub-typing to determine various strains.  
 
B2: Improvement of Health Information Systems sub-component will support technical 
assistance and complementary investments needed to strengthen the areas of surveillance, 
communications, and information technology at the different levels of the health care 
system needed to support country’s preparedness and capacity to respond to avian 
influenza and other infectious disease outbreaks and to fast-track available treatments for 
the disease.  
 
(C)Strengthening Health System Response Capacity  
 
C1:Social Distancing Measures.  The project would support the implementation of 
immediate term responses -- the classic “social distancing measures”--such as school 
closings, backed up by a well-designed communication strategy.  
 
C2: Vaccination and Drug Therapy.  Vaccination remains the most effective measure to 
prevent and control a pandemic. Support would be provided for expanding regular 
seasonal flu vaccination as a vital step to prevent an outbreak among humans.  Also, 
support would be provided for the purchase and distribution of anti-viral drugs in 
accordance with WHO guidelines and arrangements, determine the susceptibility of the 
pandemic strain to existing influenza antiviral drugs and target use of available supplies; 
adoption of measures to avoid inappropriate use to limit the development of antiviral 
resistance and ensure that this limited resource is used effectively.  
 
C3: Medical Services.  Support would be provided for the development of plans to 
establish specialized units in selected hospitals and increase bed availability in case of a 
pandemic through more stringent triage for admission and earlier discharge with follow-
up by home health care personnel, development and/or updating of treatment guidelines 
and hospital infection control guidelines and measures, including antibiotic stocks, 
mobilization of additional health personnel, training of health personnel, provision of 
equipment, drugs, vaccines, and other medical inputs, diagnostic reagents, including kits.  
 
Component 3 – Strategic Communications.  
 
This component is designed to promote awareness and improved coordination of the 
execution of the contingency plans and the National HPAI strategy.  It is designed to 
safeguard human health and to facilitate surveillance and monitoring for outbreaks by 
improving public awareness and information.  Under this component, support would be 
provided for the development of strategies to promote public awareness and improved 
coordination of the execution of the national HPAI responses strategies and plans.   
 
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented nation-wide.  However, for specific components certain 
provinces are targeted where reference, regional and public health laboratories exist (for 
strengthening of animal and public health disease surveillance capacity) and/or where 
poultry production is heavily concentrated (for the purposes of virus eradication at the 
source and restructuring of the poultry sector).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project’s prevention-focused activities are expected to have a positive environmental 
impact as the Project's investments in facilities, equipment, and training for animal and 
public health workers and facilities will develop capacity to improve the effectiveness 
and safety over existing avian influenza handling and testing procedures.  This would be 
reinforced by the mainstreaming of environmental safeguards into protocols and 
procedures for the culling and disposal of animals during AI outbreaks, and for laboratory 
safety and appropriate waste management procedures.  The Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) will address the deployment of mobile incinerators, disposal by burial, use of 
disinfectants, and laboratory practices.  
 
EMP issues center on laboratories and animal carcass disposal.  However, limited 
upgrading of Georgia's laboratories is required and good expertise exists on the 
veterinary side.  the EMP covers lab waste handling and disposal issues and provides 
clear instrucitons.  The EMP also discusses the disposal form culling and burial of culled 
birds as both methods are likely to be used in case of an outbreak.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement Policy will not be triggered since aquisition of private land or 
relocation of households is not expected under the project.  
Page  5
The project's compensation fund should have adequate coordination mechanisms with 
local governments and transparent procedures and complaint mechanisms.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies is adequate.  The borrower 
will be supported by existing PIU’s for both the animal and human health components.  
All contracts will be appraised to ensure compliance with both Bank and Georgian 
requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
large disclosure meeting for the draft EMP was held on March 31, 2006 with a broad 
participation of stakeholder.  the list of participants is atatched to the EMP - key 
stakeholders include:  Ministry of Environment, Ministy of Agriculture, Ministry of 
Labor, Health and Social Affairs,UNDP, UNICEF, key environmental NGOs, producers.  
 
The EMP has also been posted on various governmental websites and been distibuted 
through a NGO electronic newsletter.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Frauke Jungbluth 
03/28/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
03/28/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
03/29/2006 
Comments:   
