Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2726 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/04/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P100619 
Project Name: Ghana Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: Ajay Kumar 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P092509 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
18.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
20.00
38.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main development objective of this project is to improve accessibility and affordability by 
establishing a high quality, high performance bus rapid transit system on a pilot corridor in the 
Accra metropolitan area, supported by appropriate facilities for pedestrians and bicyclists as 
feeder systems.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The SIL (Specific Investment Loan) has been chosen for this project.  The project would: (a) 
strengthen policy and institutional framework for managing, coordinating, planning and 
monitoring urban transport services in Greater Accra; (b) strengthen regulatory environment of 
the urban transport sector both to raise the standard of service provision (including higher 
standards of vehicle maintenance) and improve its efficiency and  productivity, thereby lowering 
rates of vehicle emission; (c) introduce prioritized bus schemes on pilot corridors and feeder 
Page  2
bicycle and pedestrian paths, thereby achieving modal shifts to more efficient and less polluting 
forms of public transport; (d) develop an integrated urban transport strategy and plans; and (e)  
 
establish and provide assistance to Greater Accra Urban Transport Authority to effectively 
operate, manage, plan and monitor an efficient delivery of urban transport system.  The specific 
components being considered are:  
 
Component 1.  Introduce a limited competition regime and procurement and evaluation 
capacity (estimated US$2.5 million).  This component would support development of a 
procedures manual for planning and designing a Bus Rapid Transit system, structuring and 
drafting of contracts for the regulatory authority, for the operators and the ticketing system and 
training of staff.  This would require establishment of a tendering authority and creation of legal 
entities capable of bidding for service contracts, to discipline the market and provide protection 
from wasteful competition.  
 
Component 2.  Develop a pilot BRT system and feeder NMT facilities (estimated US$27.5 
million).  This component would support constructing priority measures on pilot corridor(s) to 
support Bus Rapid Transit as an integrated system of facilities, equipment, services and 
amenities that collectively provide high quality, high performance rapid transit.  This component 
would also support construction of facilities for pedestrians and bicyclists as feeders to the BRT 
pilot corridors.  The project will produce and implement a package of measures based on demand 
management, efficient network design, bus priority measures and effective traffic engineering.  
 
Component 3.  Institutional Strengthening (estimated US$4.0 million).  This component would 
include support to set up the Greater Accra Urban Transport Authority, including training, 
capacity building and technical assistance to manage, plan and monitor performance.  The key 
activities would include: (a) dissemination of learning and experience to lead to wider 
application of sustainable transport solutions; (b)  secondments to the Tendering Unit of London 
buses that has been administering a "limited competition" regime for urban passenger transport 
for over a decade and designing twinning arrangements between Accra and London; (c) 
development of competence for tariff setting and service contract framework designs; and (d) 
introduction of a basis for effective competition in the bus transport sector through a system of 
route tendering.  
 
Component 4.  Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated US$2.0 million).  This component would 
include: (a) development of a comprehensive M&E framework for measuring (both 
quantitatively and qualitatively) the impact on various initiatives; and (b) development of a better 
data base and case study information on the impact of urban transport interventions on GHG 
emissions.  
 
Partnerships and co-financing with other international agencies.  A request for US$9 million to 
support this project is currently under consideration by the GEF Council.  The GEF support is 
requested to develop a sustainable institutional and operational basis to effectively manage the 
urban transport system and demonstrate the resulting benefits from implementation of a 
comprehensive traffic management program on a pilot corridor.  The particular focus of GEF co-
financing would be on: (a) setting up Accra urban transport authority; (b) introducing limited 
competition regime and procurement and evaluation capacity; (c) monitoring and evaluation, 
Page  3
particularly of the GHG emissions resulting from a change in the mode share; and (d) 
dissemination and field visits. The results of this experiment would lay the basis for a larger 
program covering other parts of Accra and other cities in Ghana, with the support of the Bank 
and other Development Partners.  Support will also be sought from the Emerging Africa 
Infrastructure Fund (EAIF), which is an investment of the Public Private Infrastructure Advisory 
Group and the PPIAF.  The funding of the short-term preparation activities is to be secured from 
the GEF Project Development Facility.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would focus on developing bus rapid transit systems along one or two two main 
corridors in the Accra metropolitan area. The project would also support construction of facilities 
for pedestrians and bicyclists as feeders to the BRT pilot corridors. The specific corridors and 
likely investments would be identified during the preparation mission, based on available right-
of-way, demand surveys and bus movements.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Roads and Transport and the Department of Urban Roads have environmental 
units.   The units are responsible for ensuring compliance with environmental regulation and for 
monitoring implementation of environmental management plans.  A training on Bank safeguard 
policies was organized in June 2004 in Addis  and attended by 3 staff from the Ministry of  
Roads and Transport and its departments.   The environmental units have the experience of 
including social and environmental considerations in the preparation of road projects.  
 
The capacity of the units will be reviewed and recommendations will be provided during the 
environmental and social impact assessment study.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental impact of the modal shift to buses and NMT will be evaluated and any 
advere impacts identified, as well as for the construction related impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Involuntary resettlement may result related to the construction of bus ways in Accra.  No 
land taking will be necessary, however, likely some vendors and road stalls have to be moved.  
Same might be the case along main roads, which would be improved, though no widening and 
new alignments are planned.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/29/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
During preparation mission in early 2005, the specific corridor for interventions would be 
identified.  The project concept design will be discussed and agreed with the Government. 
Environmental assessment studies will be prepared for all physical works supported by the 
project.  The scope and magnitude of the resettlement issues, if any, will be identified during 
the preparation mission.  The resettlement policy framework prepared and approved by IDA 
for the Road Development Project (2002), will be reviewed and modified to accommodate 
the needs of the urban project. Based on the findings of the ESIA, a resettlement action plan/s 
(RAPs) may be prepared.  The mission will also determine the need to review and revise this 
framework for this operation.  
 
The study envisaged is the Social and Environmental assessment of the Accra Bus Rapid 
Transit System.  The terms of reference for this study will be prepared during project 
preparation and consultants engaged to carry out the study.  The study will be carried out 
between April and August 2005. The ESMF and RPF will be disclosed both in the country 
and in World Bank info-shop prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ajay Kumar 
04/03/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/03/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
04/03/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
