Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2775 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/21/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P105092 
Project Name: Scaling Up Nutrition 
Task Team Leader: Evelyn Awittor 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50
0.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the improvement of the nutritional 
status of children under the age of two, and pregnant and lactating mothers in selected regions .  
The PDO will be achieved by (i) strengthening institutional capacity to bring cross-sectoral 
coordination and collaboration for effective and efficient management for results; and (ii) 
expanding outreach and delivery of basic health and nutrition services directly related to health 
and nutrition outcomes (e.g., promoting child growth through behavior change communication 
(BCC) at community and household level).  
 
Considering the short life of the project (3 years), the progress toward PDO will not be 
measured by nutrition status of children (e.g., prevalence of underweight), while it will be 
closely monitored through periodic growth monitoring as well as independent evaluation of 
selected samples.  Instead, the project achievement will be measured by availability of outputs 
from functional working committees (e.g., policy), coverage of growth monitoring and 
promotion (GMP) and behavior changes that are linked nutrition outcomes such as prevalence of 
exclusive breastfeeding and appropriate complementary feeding.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project will have two components; (1) institutional strengthening for coordination, 
implementation, and outcomes; and (2) basic health and nutrition service delivery.  The project 
will also promote and enhance a decentralized management system.  
 
Component 1.  Institutional strengthening for coordination, implementation, and outcome  
 
Sub-component 1.1.  Institutional strengthening at the community/district level will support two 
main activities: (i) activities that improve health sector ownership, stewardship and 
accountability of basic health and nutrition service delivery (e.g., building capacity of DHMT, 
convergence between the community-based and facility-based service delivery); and (ii) 
activities that mainstream the nutrition issues into cross-sectoral operations (e.g., building 
capacity of the District Assemblies (DAs)) and strengthen its linkages at the community and 
district level.  
 
Sub-component 1.2.  Institutional strengthening at the regional/national level will support the 
development of effective inter-sectoral coordination, ownership, accountability, and leadership 
for nutrition towards the establishment of a coherent national program (e.g., by establishing an 
inter-ministerial committee or ministerial committee under the MoH with the membership of 
relevant ministries).  This sub-component will support reforms towards reliable financing of 
child survival interventions and development/ revision of national policies and strategies, notably 
community based service delivery.  This sub-component will also support the activities that will 
enhance incorporation of health and nutrition into other sector programs such as development of 
curriculum for school health and nutrition education as well as M&E system (e.g. surveillance) 
as part of overall HMIS in the country.  
 
Component 2.  Basic Health and Nutrition Service Delivery  
 
Sub-component 2.1.  Outreach and community based delivery of basic health and nutrition 
services will support the scaling up of community-based basic health and nutrition service 
delivery including health and nutrition promotion through BCC and demand generation for 
essential health services such as immunization.  The services will be delivered by community 
health promoters who will be supported by community committees under the overall 
management oversight of the District Health Management Teams(DHMTs)/DAs.  Formative 
supervision will be ensured by a potential range of human resources at district level, namely the 
sub-district community nurses for health aspects.  While capacity building for all functionaries 
will be one of the key activities, NGOs will be called upon in areas where capacity is low.  
Performance based incentive system will be also tested.  
 
Sub-component 2.2.  National/regional support system for community based delivery of basic 
health and nutrition services will support regional and national level activities that (i) enhance 
effectiveness and efficiency of sub-component 2.1 (community based service delivery) such as 
development and implementation of IEC/BCC strategies; and (ii) strengthen management for 
results at the district level such as addressing the bottleneck of micronutrient deficiency control 
(e.g., enforcement of salt iodization).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a national program, but focus on selected regions.  Specific location will be determined 
later.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The Government of Ghana is familiar with the Bank safeguard policies, based on experience 
with other Bank-funded project, in which the Government successfully met the requirement of 
those policies. Example of ongoing project is the Health Sector Program Support Project II.  The 
same agencies will be involved in this project as implementing agencies of the Nutrition project. 
No safeguard reporting instruments are required for this project   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTS4) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/19/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This is a category C project so no safeguard reporting instruments are required.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Evelyn Awittor 
02/21/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
 
Comments:   
