Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2880 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P105424 
Project Name: Economic Management Capacity Building Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Christopher Juan Costain 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTFS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Project Component, is to support the Government perform its role as a 
facilitator for economic development through facilitating a reform initiative for improved public 
sector management and service delivery.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The most important undertaking in the new programme is that Government has announced a 
major initiative for reform of public sector pay and pensions (one of the major themes of the 
2007 Budget). This activity will include substantial actions such as the development of a pay 
administration framework, job and pay-scale evaluation (including a national survey), 
installation of a time and attendance system, a performance management system and an 
advocacy programme to support adoption of the initiative.  
 
Other activities, each important in its own right, include: organisational restructuring of the 
Civil Service and developing training programmes, service delivery improvement in public 
sector agencies, modernisation of records management, improvements to conditions of work, 
implementation of reforms in selected subvented agencies and the deployment of an ICT 
backbone within the Civil Service  to facilitate the execution of government programmes.   
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
Major implementation tasks and agencies will be located in Accra. However certain project 
components will address issues and institutions across the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguard policies are triggered by this project. If the project is modified so that policies are  
 
triggered, a further review of borrower's institutional capacity shall be instigated.  If it is 
determined that project modification will trigger any safeguard policy then appropriate 
assessments and documents will be prepared and the project re-categorized   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/01/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard policies are triggered by this project.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  3
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher Juan Costain 
03/29/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/03/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ann Christine Rennie 
03/29/2007 
Comments:   
