                                                                                                                                                                                                              43789


Authorized
                                                                                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                                                                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                                                                            Report No.: AC2775
          Disclosure


                    Public                                                                                  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/14/2007

                                                                                                            I. BASIC INFORMATION

                                                                                                            A. Basic Project Data

                                                                                                            Country: Ghana                                  Project ID: P105092
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Project Name: Nutrition and Malaria control for Child Survival
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Evelyn Awittor
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007        Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007
                                    Disclosure                                                              Managing Unit: AFTH2                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                            Loan
                                              Public                                                        Sector: Health (100%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):              25.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                    Authorized                                              Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                    0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.50

                                                              Disclosure

                                                                                                            B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
                                                                        Public
                                                                                                            The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the reduction of child mortality of
                                                                                                            children under the age of two in the target areas. The PDO will be achieved by (i) strengthening
                                                                                                            institutional capacity to bring cross-sectoral coordination and collaboration for effective and
                                                                                                            efficient management for results; (ii) expanding outreach and delivery of basic health and
                                                                                                            nutrition services directly related to health and nutrition outcomes (e.g., promoting child growth
                                                                                                            through behavior change communication (BCC) at community and household level); and (iii)
                                                                                                            providing the commodities for malaria control.
                                                                              Authorized

                                                                                                             The project will focus on outcomes and scaling up as a means of building the capacity for basic
                                                                                                            health and nutrition service delivery at the community level to complement the current child
                                                                                                            survival approach, namely High Impact and Rapid Delivery (HIRD). Considering the short life
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            of the project, the achievement of PDO will not be measured by child mortality (e.g., Infant
                                                                                                            mortality, under five mortality) or nutrition status of children (e.g., prevalence of underweight
                                                                                                  Public
                                                                                                            and stunting), while nutrition status of children will be monitored through periodic growth
                                                                                                            monitoring as well as independent evaluation of selected samples. Instead, the project
                                                                                                            achievement will be measured by availability of outputs from functional working committees
                                                                                                            (e.g., policy), and coverage rate of program and behavior changes that are strongly linked overall

objective (e.g., prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding and appropriate complementary feeding,
proportion of children sleeping under the bed net).

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project will have three components; (1) institutional strengthening for coordination,
implementation, and outcomes; (2) essential health and nutrition service delivery in selected
regions; and (3) malaria control. The project will also promote and enhance a decentralized
management system.

 Component 1. Institutional strengthening for coordination, implementation, and outcome
 Sub-component 1.1. Institutional strengthening at the community/district level will support two
main activities: (i) activities that improve health sector ownership, stewardship and
accountability of basic health and nutrition service delivery (e.g., building capacity of DHMT,
convergence between the community-based and facility-based service delivery); and (ii)
activities that mainstream the nutrition issues into cross-sectoral operations (e.g., building
capacity of the District Assemblies (DAs)) and strengthen its linkages at the community and
district level.
 Sub-component 1.2. Institutional strengthening at the regional/national level will support the
development of effective inter-sectoral coordination, ownership, accountability, and leadership
for nutrition towards the establishment of a coherent national program (e.g., by establishing an
inter-ministerial committee or ministerial committee under the MoH with the membership of
relevant ministries). This sub-component will support reforms towards reliable financing of
child survival interventions and development/ revision of national policies and strategies, notably
community based service delivery. This sub-component will also support the activities that will
enhance incorporation of health and nutrition into other sector programs such as development of
curriculum for school health and nutrition education as well as M&E system (e.g. surveillance)
as part of overall HMIS in the country.

 Component 2. Basic Health and Nutrition Service Delivery
 Sub-component 2.1. Outreach and community based delivery of basic health and nutrition
services will support the scaling up of community-based basic health and nutrition service
delivery including health and nutrition promotion through BCC and demand generation for
essential health services such as immunization. The services will be delivered by community
health promoters who will be supported by community committees under the overall
management oversight of the District Health Management Teams(DHMTs)/DAs. Formative
supervision will be ensured by a potential range of human resources at district level, namely
community health officers and sub-district community nurses for health aspects. While capacity
building for all functionaries will be one of the key activities, NGOs will be called upon in areas
where capacity is low. Performance based incentive system will be also tested.
 Sub-component 2.2. Support system for community based delivery of basic health and
nutrition services will support district, regional and national level activities that (i) enhance
effectiveness and efficiency of sub-component 2.1 (community based service delivery) such as
development and implementation of IEC/BCC strategies; and (ii) strengthen management for
results at the district level such as addressing the bottleneck of micronutrient deficiency control
(e.g., enforcement of salt iodization, and establishment of functional community-based health
planning and services).

 Component 3. Malaria control
 This component will support procurement and distribution of insecticide treated bed nets to
pregnant women and children under one during the national child health campaign and/or
through various community outreach programs.

D. Project location (if known)
This is a national program, but focus on selected regions. Specific location will be determined
later.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Government of Ghana is familiar with the Bank safeguard policies, based on experience
with other Bank-funded project, in which the Government successfully met the requirement of
those policies. Example of ongoing project is the Health Sector Program Support Project II. The
same agencies will be involved in this project as implementing agencies of the Nutrition and
Malaria Control for Child Survival project. No safeguard reporting instruments are required for
this project

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                           X
    The policy allows an exemption in the case of this project as the component will only deal
with procurement and distribution of permanent insecticide treated bed nets. The project will
follow the ITN vector control policy that is being updated by the government. The government's
vector control policy has all the relevant requirements of the Bank's Pest Management Policy.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X



Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: 03/20/2007

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
    This is a category C project so no safeguard reporting instruments are required.

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Ms Evelyn Awittor                                               03/13/2007
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Mr Warren Waters                                                03/13/2007
    Comments: No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should
    project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult
    ASPEN
  Sector Manager:                                 Ms Eva Jarawan                                                  03/13/2007
    Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


