Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/09/2006 
Report No.:  AC2281
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P093610 
Project Name:  eGhana 
Task Team Leader:  Mavis A. Ampah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 12, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (40%);General information and 
communications sector (30%);General public administration sector (30%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Other public sector governance 
(P);Technology diffusion (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00
4.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project aims to contribute to achieving economic growth in Ghana by :  
 
1.
Accelerating the development of an IT enabled services and local ICT private 
sector.  
 
2.
Leveraging the IT industry to contribute to improving efficiency and transparency 
of selected government functions through e-government activities relying on public 
private partnerships. To further enhance impact on growth, the project will focus on e-
government functions directly related to the Growth agenda.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will be focusing on supporting local ICT businesses and on ICT-enabled 
government transformation. The principal development outcomes anticipated from the 
project are:  
 
.
Increased employment and income generation in IT/ITES sector  
 
.
Increased competitiveness of the IT/ITES industry in Ghana and opportunities for 
local businesses  
 
.
Increased human capacity in IT/ITES sector  
 
.
Increase in IT/ITES led export revenue  
Page  2
.
Increased contribution of IT/ITES to GDP  
 
.
More effective, transparent and accountable government  
 
.
Increased engagement of the private sector with the government  
 
.
Policy supporting decrease in telecommunication cost  
 
Given the specific emphasis of Ghana???s CAS on monitoring and evaluation (M&E) as 
well as complex and innovative nature of the project, M&E function is of a paramount 
importance under the scope of this project. To ensure effectiveness and results orientation 
of M&E system it is proposed to:  
 
.
Adopt participatory approach to evaluation  
 
.
Design a results-based M&E system serving as a powerful tool for results driven 
management  
 
.
Invest in the capacity to perform M&E at the MOC and GICTED's  level  
 
.
Ensure ongoing M&E to provide timely feedback for program adaptation and 
scaling up.  
 
.
Outcome indicators for project development objectives and each component were 
designed through a participatory process involving project stakeholders.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be targeting Metropolitan Accra with some potential spillovers to other 
districts in Ghana.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Environmental category assessed for this project is C.  There are no major 
environmental issues associated with the eGhana project which is an ICT and e-
applications project and focuses on institution-building activities including 
Page  3
computerization and IT enabled management systems to facilitate public sector reform 
and policy, regulatory changes to promote development of a ICT industry.  
 
Under the e-Government component of the Project, the Government will finance the 
development of a government network (GovNet) which will link key Ministry and 
Department Agencies from the Ministerial Enclave and provide them high speed 
communications. It is expected that the installation of the fiber optic cable will only 
involve narrow trenches that will be opened, then backfilled as the installation proceeds 
and will present very minimal disruption in the Ministerial Enclave. Guidelines for 
development of the cable will be included in the Project Implementation Manual.  
 
Also as part of the e-Government component, it is proposed to include the establishment 
of a data center facility under the project.  This facility will be part of a PPP arrangement, 
and while the Government has communicated its intention to locate data center(s) on 
existing Government property, the exact location or mode of construction of the data 
center(s) will only be confirmed when the private sector partner is recruited for the 
project. The Government and the private partner may decide to locate the new data center 
in an existing building or in a new location.   If the data center involves location in a new 
building outside government premises, then location selection will be subject to No 
Objection from the World Bank.  Construction outside of existing government 
compounds would necessitate a review and possible revision of safeguards classification, 
and no construction would proceed until any safeguards instruments required under OP 
4.01 (e.g., an EMP) have been prepared by the borrower and approved by the Bank.  
 
The project is also providing support to the Government to secure a Transactions 
Adviser for the re-privatization of Ghana Telecom. While the possibility for retrenchment 
exists in most privatization transactions, it should be noted that the company has already 
undergone a first privatization exercise which involved some corporate restructuring 
including labor rationalization.  It has not been determined at this point whether the 
second privatization will follow a similar path, and in any case, the Bank's funding is 
restricted to Advisory Services and does not intend to fund any compensation. The terms 
of reference of the Transactions Adviser will include guidance on the treatment of any 
retrenchment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
NA   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
NA   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mavis A. Ampah 
06/05/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/06/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
06/05/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
06/09/2006 
Comments:  This is approved by me.  Thanks,  Philippe 
