Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/16/2007 
Report No.:  AC2895
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P101852 
Project Name:  Health Insurance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Alexander S. Preker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Compulsory health finance (100%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Other communicable diseases (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
24.00
24.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective is to strengthen the financial and operational 
management of the National Health Insurance Scheme.  The project will contribute to 
maintaining the National Health Insurance Scheme?s financial sustainability within a 
medium-term time horizon by: (i) strengthening the policy design and implementation 
capacity of the National Health Insurance System in addressing core ongoing policy 
issues related to contribution collection, risk equalization and provider payment 
mechanisms; and (ii) improving the purchasing functions of the NHIC, and District 
Mutual Health Organizations and improving the billing function of the provider network.  
In latter cases this will be achieved by training and the introduction of financial and 
operational management tools that will allow the NHIC, DHMIS, other purchasers, and 
provider network to improve the efficiency of their financial management.  
 
The beneficiaries of the Health Insurance project are (i) the National Health Insurance 
Council which will have improved processes for management oversight of the National 
Health Insurance Scheme and therefore greater control over the financial balance; (ii) the 
District Mutual Health Insurance Schemes which will have streamlined mechanisms for 
local level administration; (iii) the provider network including the Ministry of Health 
Institutions, GHS, CHAG, other quasi-governmental organizations and private providers 
which will have improved financial management and administrative mechanisms to 
improve management performance; and (iv) the Ghana Institute for Management and 
Page  2
Public Administration, the Kofi Annan Centre for Information Technology and other 
training centers that will provide training in executive leadership, management and 
information technology.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Policy Development ($1.6 million)  
 
Implementing an insurance system is an ongoing process.   Although Ghana has already 
introduced a National Health Insurance Scheme, it still faces a number of policy 
challenges to ensure that: population coverage will continue to expand; the premium 
structure is consistent with both equity and efficiency objectives; risk management 
systems provide adequate financial protection to prevent impoverishment at the time of 
illness; equalization programs ensure equity in both financing and access to services; and 
the way provider incentives to promote both quality care and efficient use of scarce 
financial resources.  The project would support further policy development and 
implementation in the following areas:  
 
A.1. Governance of NHIS implementation, including maintaining a pro-poor focus  
 
A.2. Communication strategies to manage public expectations and increase uptake  
 
A.3. Standardizing fee schedules and drug lists  
 
A.4. Performance based provider payment mechanisms  
 
A.5. System for handling fraud and abuse  
 
Component B:  Information and Communication Technology (ICT) ($8.7 million)  
 
The NHIS is already in the process of implementing an extensive ICT network platform 
that will support many of the core health insurance functions.  Additional support is 
needed to ensure that the provider network interfaces in an efficient and effective way 
with the planned NHIS ICT Network Platform.  This component will strengthen the 
?back office? of the provider network so that they will be able to carry out functions such 
as eligibility determination, tracking patients, bulk billing, and other standard accounting 
and financial management functions.  The component will also attempt to standardize the 
provider-insurance interface so that the NHIC does not have to deal with multiple 
inconsistent provider interfaces. The project would support development and 
implementation of the provider interface in the following areas:  
 
B.1. Providers? ICT strategy development  
 
B.2. Local Area Network development for larger providers  
 
B.3. Technical hardware not covered under ICT Network  
 
B.4. Software development for providers  
 
Component C:  Management Training ($4.7 million)  
 
Current staff working in the Ghana health sector and NHIS do not have the training or 
skills needed to run a modern health insurance system.  In some cases existing staff can 
be re-trained to perform the new management and ICT technical functions.  In other cases 
Page  3
staff who are not able to learn would need to be redeployed and new staff with 
appropriate skills will need to be hired.  There is also a need to develop capacity in 
monitoring and evaluation.  This component will strengthen the actuarial analysis 
capacity of the NHIC, financial management of premiums, payment mechanisms, 
liquidity management, utilization management and other related activities needed to 
secure the long-term financial sustainability of the health insurance system. The project 
would support training and capacity building in the following areas:  
 
C.1. Management training for providers and schemes managers who work with the 
NHIS  
 
C.2. Training in ICT with a particular focus on the technical requirement of the NHIS  
 
C.3. Core Analysis Capacity in health insurance related activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be at the country and district levels.  
 
The Borrower is experienced in following and implementing Bank Safeguard Policies.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander S. Preker 
04/04/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/04/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
04/16/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, 
should project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, 
consult ASPEN. 
