Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/06/2007 
Report No.:  AC2759
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P100619 
Project Name:  Ghana Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ajay Kumar 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P092509 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
18.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
20.00
38.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
(i) Improve passenger mobility in cities in Ghana, through a combination of traffic 
engineering measures, management improvements and implementation of Bus Rapid 
Transit (BRT) system; and  
 
(ii) Promote a shift to more environmentally-sustainable transport modes and lower 
transport-related GHG emissions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has five components, as detailed below.  
 
Component 1: Institutional Development.  (Total US$13.6 million, of which IDA: 
US$10.0 million, AFD: US$1.4 million; GEF: US$1.0 million; and GOG US$1.2 
million) This component would strengthen capacity of Ministries and agencies concerned 
with urban transport, transport operators, MMDAs (AMA, TMA, GWDA, GEDA, KMA, 
and EJDA), including strengthening of the Urban Passenger Transport Units (UPTUs) 
within each assembly and creating an Urban Passenger Transport Coordinating Group 
Page  2
(UPTCG) for the Accra and Kumasi MMDAs to plan, regulate, and monitor urban 
transport operations and services. This component would also support the work of the 
Project Advisory Office (PAO) and the institutional design study to transform it into a 
permanent Center for Urban Transportation (CUT).  Support would be provided through 
policy and institutional studies, training, technical assistance, operational support, and 
provision of equipment and vehicles.  
 
GEF will co-finance training, capacity building, and information dissemination, with a 
specific focus on MOLGRDE and the PAO. Specific actions would include: (a) support 
to the PAO in planning, route concessioning, operations, and monitoring and evaluation 
aspects of BRT, to maximize the effectiveness and sustainability of the system and other 
investments; (b) support to the MMDAs for planning and implementing urban transport 
policies and help remove barriers to better integration of land development and transport 
planning; (c) develop a Accra BRT Web site for broader dissemination and information 
sharing, and promote replication in Kumasi by information sharing and leveraging the 
demonstration nature of this project; (d) support MOLGRDE in strengthening EPA for air 
pollution and emissions management, and (e) support MOLGRDE in integrating land 
development and transport planning for better environmental management. The support 
will be provided in the form of capacity building (such as management support and study 
tours), studies, and goods (such as vehicles and equipment).  
 
Component 2: Traffic Engineering, Management and Safety.  (Total US$26.9 million, 
of which AFD: US$18.6 million; IDA: US$3.8 million; and GOG: USD$4.5 million). 
The subcomponents are (a) traffic management in the Accra metropolitan area; (b) area-
wide traffic signal control in Accra; (c) traffic management in Kumasi metropolitan area; 
(d) area-wide traffic signal control in Kumasi; (e) enforcement of traffic rules and 
education; and (f) design and supervision of works under sub-components (a) through (e).  
 
Component 3.  Development of a Bus Rapid Transit System.  (Total US$46.0 million, of 
which IDA: US$29.2 million; GEF: US$4.5 million; and GOG: US$12.3 million).  The 
subcomponents are as follows: (a) BRT infrastructure design and implementation 
(including segregated bus-ways, interchange facilities, and terminals and facilities for 
pedestrians and NMT).  The trunk route is 9.1 kilometers in length, with one BRT lane 
per direction, feeding two distributor loops in the central business district.   The trunk 
route has a terminal/modal interchange at the New Gbawe junction at Mallam, and modal 
interchanges at Ordorkor Junction, Darkuman Junction, Kaneshie Market, and CMB; (b) 
a
program of regular engagement with key stakeholders, and implementation of a public 
relations and media strategy for generating support and disseminating information on the 
BRT system; and (c) overall management and operationalization of the BRT system.  
 
GEF will co-finance the following barrier removal subcomponents: (a) incremental civil 
works, studies, and consultations to improve pedestrian and NMT access to the proposed 
BRT system; (b) BRT stations to enhance their attractiveness for consumers with choice; 
and (c) stakeholder consultations, public relations, and media strategy.  
 
Page  3
Component 4.  Integration of Land Development and Transport Planning for Better 
Environmental Management  (Total US$2.0 million, of which IDA: US$1.0 million; and 
GEF: US$1.0 million).  GEF?s co-financing would support MOLGRDE in updating the 
land development plans.  This would be a highly consultative exercise and would include 
a
review of the existing strategic plan, land use plan, regulations, institutional structures, 
standards, and procedures; the goal is to support urban growth that is more compatible 
with the development of transport infrastructure, leading to better environmental 
management. The development plan would be subject to a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA), especially as it relates to urban transportation (with emphasis on 
walking, NMT, and public transport).  The IDA would support capacity building of staff 
from the EPA, MMDAs, and the Town and Country Planning Department (TCPD) in 
integrated land development planning, transport planning, and environmental 
management.  
 
Component 5.  Project Outcome Monitoring (Total US$1.5 million, of which 
IDA:US$1.0 million and GEF: US$0.5 million).  The subcomponents are studies to 
support the monitoring of project outcomes through evaluation of (a) transport and social 
impact indicators, (b) environmental impact indicators, and (c) capacity development 
indicators.  
 
The GEF would co-finance the subcomponent that focuses on GHG emissions, namely 
sub-component (b). This would include calculation of direct GHG emissions from 
interventions such as BRT and NMT.  As a result, GEF would also rely on some of the 
outputs of subcomponents (a) and (c).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Metropolitan Accra, particularly, its main streets, is the focus of the project activities.  
The streets targeted are large, and have limited encroachment by permanent structures in 
the right of way. The selected Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) corridor is Winneba Road and 
Graphic Road from Mallam to the Accra CBD.  This is a six-lane road with a median and 
mostly clear of encroachments.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Transport management, rather than road construction, is the focus of the Ghana Urban 
Transport Project (GUTP). This project aims at improving the environmental 
performance of the Accra urban transport system. The transport sector is a major source 
of local and global air pollutants (PM, SOx, NOx, CO, CO2, VOCs, O3) that are 
responsible for poor health and other negative impacts. Road transport/infrastructure 
investments, however,  
 
always induce physical and social impacts, and particularly, in urban environments, 
which are socially dynamic. Therefore, the project has been rated category A. Chance 
finds are addressed in the ESMF. No salient adverse environmental or social impacts are, 
however, anticipated. The potential adverse environmental impacts of the project will be 
site specific to civil works and include: e.g., run off, soil erosion, noise and dust which 
will induce temporary pollution air quality.  
 
Anticipated adverse social impacts are: temporary/permanent land acquisition of trips of 
land, inducing relocation/resettlement, disruption of social and cultural cohesion and 
HIV/AIDS. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Environmental and Social 
Management (ESMF) have been prepared as part of the Accra Urban Transport Project. 
The two safeguards instruments were prepared, cleared and disclosed, in country and at 
Info Shop, prior to project appraisal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No cumulative adverse impacts are expected. The ESMF and the RPF have been into 
consideration mitigation measures related to longer-term impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The road alignments will be subject to public consultations and review by the 
environmental desks/units of the road agencies of the Ministry of Road Transportation as 
Page  5
well as the EPA. The detailed designs will be reviewed by the environmental desks/units 
of the road agencies. The right of way requirements, in some sections, may be 
reconsidered as necessary, to reduce impact on private properties and public amenities.  
 
Six corridors were evaluated for BRT.  The selection of the pilot BRT corridor was 
made to ensure minimal adverse environmental or social impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a 
Resettlement/Rehabilitation Policy Framework (RFP) were prepared and disclosed, prior 
to appraisal. The proposed civil works under component 2 will induce modest impacts 
and these will be addressed through the application of the ESMF and the RPF by 
incorporating clear environmental and social contract clauses and preparing an EMP and 
a
RAP, if necessary. Any subsequent EIAs and RAPs will be submitted to the Ghana 
Environmental Protection Agency and the World Bank for clearance, before in country 
disclosure and disclosure at Info-Shop.  
 
As part of the RSDP recommendations, environmental management desks/units were 
established at the three agencies (DUR, GHA, DFR) of the Ministry of Road 
Transportation. The DUR environmental management desk/unit will ensure the internal 
monitoring of the implementation of the ESMF and the RFP. The environmental 
desk/unit has been engaged in reviewing EIAs and RAPs prepared by design and EA 
consultants. Environmental monitoring activities have also been undertaken by the 
environmental desk/unit. The Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (GEPA) ensures 
the external monitoring. Progress in the implementation of the safeguards mitigation 
measures will be incorporated in the monthly progress report of the resident engineer.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The preparation of the ESMF and the RFP included consultations with stakeholders; local 
governments and administrations, NGOs, regional governments and sectoral 
administrations. The consultations focused on assessing the viability of the project, 
identifying potential areas of conflict between stakeholders and define areas of 
collaboration. Adverse environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures, were 
also discussed. The recommendations have been integrated into the ESMF and the RPF.  
The Ministry of Transportation disclosed the safeguards instruments prior to appraisal, 
make copies available at its head office and those of the agencies in Accra, and will make 
copies were made available to the local governments agencies and other stakeholders of 
the Transport Sector Development Program, of which GUTP is a subproject.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/01/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/10/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/24/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  7
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ajay Kumar 
04/04/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
04/04/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
04/04/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/04/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
04/04/2007 
Comments:   
