Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2530 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P101852 
Project Name: Health Insurance Project 
Task Team Leader: Alexander S. Preker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 10, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Compulsory health finance (100%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal of the project is to support implementation of the NHIS five year Business Plan.  
The Business Plan identifies the following goals:  (a) mobilizing fiscally sustainable resources to 
expand the coverage and the benefit package over time; (b) expanding the population base 
brought into the insurance risk pool; and (c) increasing access to quality services in the provider 
system especially for poor and vulnerable groups.  
 
The project will address issues discussed in the development issues section by focusing its 
project financing on the following activities: contribution collection system, risk management, 
purchasing of services from providers, institutional environment, regulatory framework, 
governance arrangements, and organizational structures.   Selection of these activities is based on 
Bank supported ESW and ILO modeling projections.  These activities are also consistent with 
our areas of expertise and expressed priorities of the NHIF.   It is possible that this will change 
once the five year Business Plan is completed and other development partners finalize their 
programs.  
 
If successful, by the end of the project: (a) managers will have new skills and tools to 
effectively and efficiently administer the NHIS; (b) the NHIS will be fiscally sustainable with 
Page  2
efficient, effective and transparent bureaucratic mechanism; and (c) greater numbers of the poor 
and vulnerable groups will have access to basic health care and a range of priority public health 
programs through improved health insurance coverage   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project consists of the following components to be implemented in collaboration with the 
MOH, GHS and other Development Partners:  
 
Component A: 
Policy Analysis and Design ($2 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to assist in refining specific policies and arrangements in 
accordance with the 2003 National Health Insurance Act and the GoG?s and Bank?s health, 
equity and fiscal sustainability goals for Ghana.  
 
This component will provide assistance to the MOH in defining the mechanisms for resource 
allocation and purchasing, revenue collection and pooling of revenues and risk sharing.  The 
specifics of the insurance package aim at a) increasing coverage to the general population, 
providing subsidies to the poor and benefits to meet the population?s health needs; and b) 
facilitating further expenditure analysis, including detailed modeling of revenue and expenditure 
flows, risk management and provider incentives.  
 
Component B:  Governance and Accountability Mechanisms ($1 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to reinforce and upgrade the organizational structures within 
the NHIS that are responsible for policy implementation and ensuring accountability of the 
finances and administration of the funds.  This involves defining the institutional linkages 
between purchasers and provider.  In addition, an accounting framework, conventions and 
auditing procedures will be defined to regulate the finances of providers, the insurance funds and 
the central administration.  
 
Component C:  Management and Administrative Capacity ($7 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to define the scope of management responsibilities and 
provide incentives, training and tools for managers to effectively and efficiently administer at the 
centralized level of the NHIF and decentralized level of the Mutual Health Insurance Schemes.  
This includes a) improving on administrative procedures (provider accreditation and record-
keeping), establishing actuarial modeling of current status analysis and reporting of insurance 
data for NHIF administration; b) developing capacity in actuarial sciences to secure medium 
term financial sustainability of the insurance system; c) developing capacity to assess the 
effectiveness of the health insurance reform and its performance against key criteria such as 
fiscal sustainability, equity and efficiency in the areas of financial protection, coverage, 
household consumption, access to health care and labor market effects.  
 
Component D:  Strengthen Purchasing of Priority Health Services ($5 million)  
 
Page  3
The objective of this component is to improve the efficiency of the health services provided 
through the National Health Insurance Scheme by strengthening the administrative mechanisms 
for purchasing.  This involves introducing tools for providers such as payment systems, 
contracting mechanisms, and oversight mechanisms to prevent abuse of funds for purchasing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be at the country and district levels.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower is very experienced in following and implementing Bank Safeguard Policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
None are required   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander S. Preker 
10/17/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/17/2006 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
10/17/2006 
Comments:   
