Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/06/2007 
Report No.:  AC2340
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P074191 
Project Name:  Ghana: Energy Development and Access Project 
Task Team Leader:  Paivi Koljonen 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P070970 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (60%);Renewable energy (17%);Central government administration 
(13%);Micro- and SME finance (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Climate change (S);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Other 
public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.60 
 
African Development Bank 
30.00 
 
Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund 
49.90 
 
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid 
6.00 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
9.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
12.00
119.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
.
Electricity consumers receive more reliable electricity supply and more consumers have 
access to electricity.   
 
3. Project Description 
.
The project has four components: (a) sector and institutional development; (b) 
transmission improvement; (c) distribution improvement; and (d) access expansion.  
Total project cost is US$215 million.  The financing plan includes co-financing from the 
Page  2
Swiss Government, GEF, AfDF, GPOBA and ACGF (the latter three to be confirmed 
before negotiations).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
.
Project is national in scope and covers rural as well as urban areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
.
No large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated.  The potential impacts 
are those typically associated with installation or upgrading of transmission and 
distribution lines, construction of substations, and installation and operation of solar 
home systems and run-of-river mini-hydro.  Disposal of lead-acid batteries is an issue 
that requires management.  Positive environmental and social impacts will result from 
improved efficiency of power transmission and distribution, use of renewable energy 
sources (solar, wind, mini-hydro), improved reliability of power supply, and increased 
access to electricity through intensification in and expansion of service areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
.
None.   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
.
Alternatives will be considered in development and environmental and social analysis of 
individual subprojects, using Ghanaian environmental assessment procedures because 
this is a use of country systems pilot project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
.
Environmental and social impact assessment and protection of physical cultural property 
will be carried out using Ghanaian law, regulations and procedures in this use of country 
systems pilot project; OP 4.01 and 4.11 have therefore been shown in the table above as 
not triggered.  The assessment of borrower capacity was made by Bank staff in 
partnership with African Development Bank. Gaps in capacity were identified, mainly 
lack of established environmental policy, procedure and staff in two of the three 
implementing agencies.  The Government is committed to filling these gaps by the time 
of project effectiveness.  Country systems are not being used to meet the requirements of 
OP 4.04 Natural Habitat, OP 4.12 Involuntary Resetttlement, and OP 4.37 Safety of 
Dams because they were not found to be equivalent.  The borrower has prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework to comply with OP 4.12.  The project legal agreements 
will include requirements for adherence to OP 4.04 and 4.37 if those policies are 
triggered by any proposed subprojects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
.
Key stakeholders are Ghanaian citizens and businesses, environmental NGOs, 
environmental and social development professionals and institutions.  They were 
consulted in a stakeholder workshop that was held in August 2006 for the purpose of 
obtaining comments on the diagnostic report for use of country systems.  The diagnostic 
report was disclosed in draft for the workshop, revised based on comments received, and 
redisclosed in final form in country and in the InfoShop on January 29, 2007.  Disclosure 
and consultation on individual subprojects will be carried out in accordance with 
Ghanaian EA regulations and procedures.  The draft RPF was disclosed in country and in 
the Infoshop on February 20, 2007.  If RAPs are required for individual subprojects, 
consultation and disclosure will proceed in accordance with the RPF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/20/2007 
 
Page  4
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Paivi Koljonen 
03/06/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/07/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
03/07/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/12/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
03/12/2007 
Comments:   
