Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/11/2007 
Report No.:  AC2825
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P105092 
Project Name:  Nutrition and Malaria Control for Child Survival 
Task Team Leader:  Evelyn Awittor 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (P);Other communicable diseases 
(P);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50
0.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve utilization of selected 
community-based health and nutrition services for children under the age of two and 
pregnant women in selected districts.  The PDO will be achieved by (i) strengthening 
institutional capacity of central, regional and district governments to bring cross-sectoral 
coordination and collaboration for effective and efficient management for results; (ii) 
creating demand for and expanding community-based delivery of selected health and 
nutrition services directly related to health and nutrition outcomes; and (iii) accelerating 
provision and promoting the utilization of long-lasting insecticide treated nets for malaria 
prevention.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is organized around three components which directly feed into the draft 
5YPOW and the 2007 POW; (1) institutional strengthening for coordination, 
implementation, and outcomes; (2) community-based health and nutrition service 
delivery in target regions; and (3) malaria prevention.  The project will promote and 
enhance (i) a decentralized management system that favors flexibility to local conditions 
within a large-scale operation, and (ii) a learning-by-doing which allows Districts and 
Page  2
communities to learn from innovative approaches developed under the decentralized 
flexible management system.  
 
Component 1.  Institutional strengthening for coordination, implementation, and 
outcome.  This component supports the following elements of the 5YPOW of the MOH: 
good governance and sustainable financing to improve productivity, effectiveness, 
efficiency, equity, sustainability, and accountability in the sector.  The specific objectives 
are (i) to develop effective inter-sectoral coordination, ownership, and accountability for 
nutrition towards the establishment of a coherent national program; and (ii) to strengthen 
the MOH and GHS to effectively coordinate implementation of the community-based 
health and nutrition program supported by the project.  
 
This component will finance technical assistance, training and workshops, and 
incremental operating costs to:  
 
-
Establish and/or build capacity of intersectoral coordination mechanisms (e.g., inter-
ministerial committee, technical committee, district assemblies, orientation and training 
of stakeholders);  
 
-
Develop and update various strategies and action plans that mainstream nutrition into 
the multisectoral development agenda at all levels (e.g., advocacy strategy, multi-sectoral 
nutrition policy, community-based service delivery strategy, and school health and 
nutrition curriculum);  
 
-
Develop strategies and mechanisms for reducing malnutrition and micronutrient 
deficiencies (e.g., development of public education models, development of small-scale 
fortification models, promotion of and the enforcement of salt iodization in intervention 
areas, and development of guidelines on appropriate mechanisms/strategies for twice-
yearly distribution of vitamin A supplements in a post-NID era);  
 
-
Design performance-based incentive systems for community-based health and 
nutrition service delivery; and  
 
-
Support the MOH/GHS, and the district assemblies to strengthen the M&E systems 
for efficient planning and management (e.g., operational research) of community-based 
health and nutrition service delivery.  
 
Component 2.  Community-Based Health and Nutrition Service Delivery.   This 
component supports the following elements of the 5YPOW of the MOH:  (i) healthy 
lifestyles and environment (regenerative health and nutrition); and (ii) health, 
reproduction, and nutrition services.  The objective is to scale up community-based health 
and nutrition services for children under two and pregnant women based on a 
community-level package of Essential Nutrition Actions (ENA).   The ENA will be 
strengthened with elements of (i) maternal care (i.e., antenatal, delivery and postnatal 
care), (ii) the (community) Integrated Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illnesses 
such as diarrheal diseases, acute respiratory infections, and fever, and (iii) household 
food production strategies such as back-yard gardening.  
 
This component will finance technical assistance, training, workshops, and goods for 
community-based health and nutrition services and service providers, incremental 
operating costs, and sub-projects to:  
Page  3
-
Build capacity of relevant central, regional, and district governments to plan, 
administer, and supervise the community-based health and nutrition interventions;  
 
-
Develop and implement effective program communication strategies for behavior 
change, a community-level package of ENA and training and supervision programs for 
community-based health and nutrition service providers (e.g., community growth 
promoters, traditional birth attendants (TBA), health care workers, etc); and  
 
-
Implement community-based health and nutrition Sub-project, including pilot Sub-
projects to verify the effectiveness of the performance-based incentive systems.  
 
Component 3. Malaria prevention.  This component supports the communicable disease 
control of the 5YPOW of the MOH.  The objective is to increase utilization of LLINs in 
order to reduce malaria related morbidity and mortality among children under five and 
pregnant women.  This component will finance technical assistance, goods, and 
incremental operating costs to:  
 
-
Procure and distribute LLINs to pregnant women and target children through 
campaigns and/or through various community outreach programs as well as during 
antenatal clinics and Child Welfare Clinics;  
 
-
Improve utilization of LLINs; and  
 
-
Improve the M&E capacity of the National Malaria Control Program including 
insecticide resistance monitoring and key operational research.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will implement community based health and nutrition programs in five 
regions (62 districts) and three other strategically chosen areas; All districts in Northern, 
Upper West, Upper East, Volta, and Central Regions and one district or sub-metro in 
Western Region, Accra, and Kumasi.  
 
Distribution of LLINs through a campaign in Year one will be nationwide; in Year two 
to four, distribution of LLINs through the regular facility based channels and various 
community outreach services will be limited to target areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of Ghana is familiar with the Bank safeguard policies, based on 
experience with other Bank-funded project, in which the Government successfully met 
the requirement of those policies. Example of ongoing project is the Health Sector 
Program Support Project II.  The same agencies will be involved in this project as 
implementing agencies of the Nutrition and Malaria Control for Child Survival project. 
No safeguard reporting instruments are required for this project  
 
There are no potential negative impacts from this project and therefore the 
environmental category is 'C'.   A safeguard policy, Pest Management (OP 4.09), is 
triggered as a precaution.  However, a separate pest management plan does not have to be 
prepared as long as the project follows WHO guidelines and limits itself to the use of 
WHO III insecticides.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Evelyn Awittor 
05/11/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr William Experton 
05/11/2007 
Comments:   
