Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/08/2007 
Report No.:  AC3136
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P105424 
Project Name:  Economic Management Capacity Building Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher Juan Costain 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 11, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTFS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To support the Borrower to perform its role as a facilitator for economic development 
through implementing a reform initiative for improved public sector management and 
service delivery   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will support increasing the capacity of the public service for 
accountable, transparent, timely, and efficient service delivery through reform of 
Ministries, Departments and Agencies and establishment of a sustainable pay policy and 
effective HR management framework in the public service   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Ghana, nationwide (predominantly Accra)   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  2
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Responsible Agency: Ministry of Public Sector Reform, 
 
PSC Building First Floor, 
 
Stadium Post Office, Accra, Ghana. 
 
Contact Person : Ms. Rebecca Aboagye, Chief Director  
 
Tel: (233) 21-684086; Fax: (233) 21-668262; Email: sikadodoo54@yahoo.co.uk   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  3
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher Juan Costain 
09/03/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antony Thompson 
09/04/2007 
Comments:  Category C; no safeguard instruments or actions are needed. If it is later determined 
that project modification triggers any safeguard policy then appropriate assessments & documents 
will be prepared. 
