Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
DateISD Prpare/UEted 2IFbrury 007Report No
Countries  Lao__People's_Democratic _Republic   PrDA  LaoID   PDR-  USS 31 5  ilo qiaet
Managing Unatit: MeASTE                   Seeio  oerTae Tor: Powen(-r (9c)GU nrlpulcamiitato  etoi1%
(aos) Project Ojcie
Intal broadert sens (he promposednrjcswudcnrbuetwrspooigreinlpwrtaetrog:eosrtnh
Withinoter Tafoementioned loge-tr OM1 oe&rd rmwrk8h      rpsdPoet hv h        olwnhe
immedisa ate dveopen objctive:2i0tobrn aforableCri-aedit elcricity amuto Cmboi' rvicso  apn hi
andSitng ren, trouh ipor ofpowr fomao IDR : Land Vienam US to suplyio affordablengit asdeecrctyt h
proinc faag  vninLo D    i hena term: whil ecetablishing a portio~Gneo ransmubisso ldinksthatio wouldr in0the
mendium-IntermhelintsSerctornvetnettCam odaand hiadtruhsuhr  a  D  oices  oe rd    mn   hmn
(Isi toi hep-oestablicshslod udeisPatchin  (Ecmitesgandy rcapbiitesy ineao'DR  thtwudenbeiNo? opiiX tsse
Opraivionmandtaclitategoy it participatonCinareginalatrade
CAS2 rjc Objectives.
In l inoaerwt thre main poboe -jectivsf h government'siNationaldsGrowthtand PoertyoEradiatio Strateg androthe dexistraing GAS,
ethebproposed poj ect wil support csustandedigrowt thrucigh impovd managemento ocrsboftherke drivers- regidonmcalnerto
ag. rojecet Deserpipiin tion   rascos
Weorahiheally,emethePolect ionvolvtestree G M  counrtraefnies ork,Cambodia,oLao PDroct landvietnam  Cambodibing thee
'eipimenit" ofvtpowernd Laetie i o PD bad rienoaframbtheg"sppliers" GeSPctrict trad (Cambodia)s provprises ofKinancing ofa
tandSmiLsiong lienes thromuthe iamp fpongrChain Land Stun Tang prViences tosupl Cabdaftordthe V rieta baned laotPDRt bordhers
egprovince, Sraand ar transmDRisin line beatween Xhleesetandisarngava whrich woul betefrtlnanaftr transmission line htwudi h
thaditwold-eF inl iterconniect Thiadand abodiaaniTalac through southern Lao PDR b  00 the XnceasetpoSrradenaline wouldhelpd
durin toheldr eseablshon.Th proposedin transissionlies ardcpbltes interconnections beWeLdenathe network andimare iots litnkdt
powperevcationan   fromiat Hios Lamtcpatin inareifornwhichadfeasblt.td spooe. h  rjcopnnsae
In thre wih kVe Transmbecisseo Syte that wouldmet Nariounda01 Gorwtherabdoucts inErcontinectThiland,Lao and  Caebodian inS
sother 1i- aos- pDR,c vill Astpeur "substatione -gXeongh Shrubstaimpone- STanagSubstaothon -e XesiezI- Srbegiona i-i Batin ax



Substation - Thailand in the West and - Cambodia in the South. It would involve construction of: ti) a 115 kV double
circuit transmission line of 25 km in length from Xeset Substation to Saravan Substation; (ii) a 115/22 kV, 2x2OMVA
Substation at Saravan, inclusive of 22 kV switching bays; and (iii) two 115 kV switching bays at the existing Xescl
S ubstattion.
Component L-3: Consulting Services: Project Design and Management for Components L-I and L-2: Consulting assistance
through individual experts (about 10 staff-months) would be provided under the proposed Project to assist EDL in design and
implementation.
Component L-4: Load Dispatch Centers: This component provides tor: (i) Consulting services for detailed feasibility
studies and design of the Load Dispatch System and subsequently for supervision of implementation; and lii) based on
priorities identified and co-financing available, construction of National / Regional Load Dispatch Center(s) as appropriate,
including the associated civil works, SCADA system and communication facilities for, load dispatching'. Current cost
estimates are for only an initial module of the system, which is required for both dispatching the national system as well as
for Lao's integration into the emerging regional electricity market. Substantial additional funding would be necessary. and
would be sought, to complement and complete. most appropriately in a stage-wise manner Lao PDR's full Load Dispatch
System.
Component L-5: Feasibility Study: Houay Lamphan Gnai Hydropower Project: Houay Laniphan Gnai (6.5 MW, 300 GWh
pa.). a priority project for Lao PDR, forms part of a group of hydropower projects in southern Lao PDR, that are proposed to)
be developed and interconnected f'or export and domestic use. This component would advance the project preparation from
pre-feasibility to feasibility stage. The feasibility study would include an assessment of environmtental and social impacts,
dam safety issues, review the application of Bank's safeguards policies, and make recommendations on mitigation measures,
according to Terms of Reference satisfactory to the Bank.
Componient: L-6; Technical Assistance for Colleclor Substation System: This component would support stidies on technical
feasibility and economic and financial viability of collector substations that would be designed to evacuate gcneration from
clusters of hydropower stations in the same river basins in Lao PDR in the most economic way. It would sUppotl studies on
solutions to associated technical, commercial, legal. ovwnership, financing and pricing issues in the context of national as welt
as GWMS Grid and regional power trade.
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The proposed GMS-PT (Laos) Project includes two 115kV transmission lines with one irom Xesetl Substation to Ban
Nadonkhouang Substation with 25 km, and the other from Ban Hat Substation to the Lao-Cambodia bnrder with 25.7krm
lengti. The construction of these two transmission lines will involve limited amount of land acquisition and resettlement,
which is mainly caused by acquiring land for building tower bases and clearing right of way (ROW) under the transmission
lines. Following the Bank policy on involuntary resettlement, two draft RAPs were prepared by Elcctricite du Laos (EdL)
based on impact suLrvey and proposed compensation policies.
According to the survey, the two transmission lines will acquire only 0.53 ha of land areas for the construction of tower
bases. Among total acquired land areas, 0.18 ha or 34% are paddy land, which would affect 189 households in 26 villages.
The remaining land areas are garden land, housing land, for-est, and scrub land. According to the RAPs, due to the selection of'
alignments, no structures and households will be relocated from the ROW, and no privately owned productive trees will be
affected in spite of clearanice requirement for ROW. In addition. during the construction of two transmission lines, certain
amount of temporary land occupation might be required, which is estimated at 51 ha including 23.5 ha for Xesetl to
Saravanh Line and 27.5 ha for Ben Hat to Lao Border LiDe.
The proposed two transmission lines are located in two southein provinces of l.aos, The Xesetl to Saravanh transmission line
is located in Saravan district of Saravan Province, passing through 15 villages. T'he transmissioni line of Ban Hat and
Cambodia border is located in Khong district from Champasak Province affecting 1I villages. There are 2,516 households
and 15.46S persons in these 26 villages. Among them, 189 households or 7.5% will be affected due to land acquisition of
tower bases for the transmnissioni lines.
Agriculture and forestry including rice cultivation. vegetables and othei- cash crops, animal husbandry, harvesting of nnn-
timber forestry products (NTFP) and fishing, are the matjor econormic sectors in Lao PDR. In the project areas, most people
arc relied on wet season rice cultivation as their- main source of income supplemented with livestock, fishing and NTFP. The
otither sources are seen as minor such as small business/services and daily employee/workers. Although both Khong and
Saravanh districts are not considered as poor districts, accordi   there ar-e still 17% of households are below the
Depending on the estimated cost, additional funding miay be required.
2



poverty line.
The sociatl economic survey indicated that there are ethnic minority villages along Xeset I to Saravan Line. It also indicated
that located along the major regional road, these ethnic minorities have a high degree of integration with the dominant
population, and potential impact caused by transmission lines, e.g. land acquisition for towers (20-30 square meters per
tower) and removal of'scattered trees, is very small. This social economic survey was reviewed by the Bank and it was
concluded that the Bank IP policy should not be triggered.
B. Clheck Environmental Category A [].B [X], C [1. FLt 1
Commipenits:
C. Safegutard Policies Triggered
Yes                 No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    [X]                 I     .
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               [ XI                 1
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   [I                  [XI
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.1 1 - OPN 1 1.03-)            [ X]I                [
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)         AI                                 I I
Indigenous Peopies (OD 4.20)                                 [1                 [XI
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                        []                  [XI
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4,37)                                I]                   XI
Proiects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)                   [                  [X]
Projects on International Waterwas (OP/BPIGP 7.50)          [XI                  [
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D.I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No major impacts are expected. Impacts of the project are described in Section A-4.
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No major indirect and/or long term impacts are anticipated.
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant); NA
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
capacity to plani and implement the measures described.
Resettlement Action Plan and Fnvironment Management Plan for the proposed transmission lines and the associated sub-
stations have been prepared and reviewed by the Bank, Implementatien of these plans will be monitored as covenants of the
proposed Grant. EDL has successful experience in environmental and social impacts mitigation with the previous and
ongoing projects finaniced by IDA, anid has adequate and proven capacity to plan and implement safeguard action plans
associated with transmission system activities. The GMS project office and the corporate Environmental Office at EDL
headquarters. and provincial environmental management committce comprising of provincial and district officials at
provincial level, would be responsible for itnplementation of resettlement and environmental safeguards. MEM has limited,
though growing. capacity in managetnent of safeguard issues. Safeguard capacities of both EdL and MEM are expected to be
further enhanced througli the Safeguard Capacity Building program to be implemented under the on-going REP I Project
1'inanced by IDA. As regards the feasibility study for the hydro project, it would include an assessment of environmental and
social impacts. dam safety issues, review Ihe application of Bank's safeguards policies, and make recommendations on
mitigation measures, according to Terms of Reference satisfactory to the Banik.
Lao PDR has satisfactory "chance finds procedures", developed during preparation of Nam Theun 2 hydroelectric project, for
protecting physical cultural resources discovered during civil works. These procedures will be applied and training organized
for the staff of the contractor, supeivision consultant, and EDL, through Institute of Cultural Research involved in
implementation of saleguards of physical cultural resources in NT2 Hydroelectric project.
Iv srujporritng the proposed project, ehe Ramik does not intend lo prejudice the fjual defereninzaion (of rhe parties 'claiis on Mie disputred
3



D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
From March 25ih to April 41', 2006 consultations were held in the following villages for the Xesetl to Ban Nadonkhuang
scgment: Nadonkhaung, Nathone. DongNong. Thongphapak Nai, Thongphapok Nok, Naxay Gnai, Naxaykokphao. Done
Khao. Dongko Tay, Dongko Kang, Dongko Neua, Baeng, Senevang-Nay, Beung Ngam, and Baeng Sexet. Participants of
the consultation included heads of villag,e and local organizations and authorities.
The EMP and RAP were disclosed to the public from September 2, 2006 at EDL's offices at Vicntiane; Nakokhpho, District
Saravan, Saravan; Bun-yor, District Parksc, Champasak. The EMP and RAP were also disclosed at the Bank's PICs in
Vientiane and Washington. Revised RAPs and EMPs were received in November 2006.
F. Disclosure Requirements    Date
Env ironmental Assessoitenr/A oidir/Mai-lag ceneut Plan/lOther:
Date of receipt by the Banik                 07/16/06   trevised November 2006)
Date of "in-country" disclosure              09/02/06   or Not Applicable
Date of'submission to InfoShop               ()8/24/06  or Not Applicable
For categcory A projects, date ot distributing the Executive Summary )f the EA to the Executive Directors  1...  or
Not Applicable
Resettleniex t A cti/o PlanlFr;ume ev rk/Policv Process:
Date of receipt hy the Bank                  07/16/06   (revised November 2006)                 Yes   No
Dale of "in-country" disclosure              09/02/06   or Not AppLicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               08124/06   or Not Applicable
Indigen otis Peoples Dei'elopinctif PIml/ramework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  xx/xxIO6   or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              xx/xx/06   or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               xx/xxfOG   or Not Applicable
Pest Manatagement Parpi:
Date ol' receipt by the Bank                 o. /.   .Or Not Applicable
Datc of "in-country" disclosure               .I. /. .... or Not Applicable
Date ot submission to InfoShop               ..1.1.or Not Applicable
Dain Safety Mahnageoieiut Pian.'
Date of receipt by the Bank                       ...   or Not Applicable
Date of iin-cotintry" disclosure              1...     or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               .. /_1...  ovr Not Applicable
11' in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why,    Yes   No
Section III - Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(TTo he filled itl when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
oPriP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report'!
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan'?
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank'?
OP 4.09 - Pest Mlanagement:                                                                     Yes   No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues'?
Is a separate PMP required'?
If yes, arc PMP requirements included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 1103) - C'ultural Property:                                                 Yes   No
Does the EA include adequate measures?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adserse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                                                   Yes   No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with the Indigenous
Peole'?
4



If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit'?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                                           Yes   No
Ilas a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?
if yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan / policy framework I
policy  process'?                                                                            _______
OP/BP 4.36- Forests:                                                                             Yes   No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been car-ied out'?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints'?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system'?
OP/IP 4.37- Safety of Dams:                                                                      Yes   No
f-lave dam safety plans been prepared?
Have the 'I'ORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
|as an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and ar-rangements been made for public awareness
and traini ng?
OP 7.50 - Projects on lItlertatidonal Waterways:                                                 Yes   No
Have the other r iparians been notified of the project'?
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has this been cleared with
the Legal I)epartment, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent'?
What are the reasons ftor the exception'?
Please explain:
Has the, RVP approved such an exception'?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                                            Yes   No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with
the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                                                    Yes   No
Have relevant safeguard policics clocuments been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and ]anguage that are
undetstandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs'?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                                          Yes    No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation
of the safeguard rneasures'?
Have safegua;-d measures costs been included in project cost?
Will the safeguard measUres costs be funded as part of project implementation'?
Does thc Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
retlected in the project legal documents?
Signed aznzd submitted by:                                     Name                  ^                t      2
Task Team Leader:                   Mohinder Gulati, Lead Energy Specialist           JOUttlJft4g>           -
Project SaIfeguards Specialist 1:   Bernard Baratz, Consultant (Envirenmental Specialist)  Ernam appi-oval ol7
Pr-nject Safeguards Specialist 2:
Youxuan Zhu. Consultant (Social Specialist)                   .  k./'3   'i h
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:
Approved b i                                              Name                                 Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Juan Quintero, Sr. Environmental Engine
Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Junhui Wu4 '  VVA,
Comments:                                                                                     2
5



