Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/02/2006 
Report No.:  AC1728
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guatemala 
Project ID:  P087106 
Project Name:  LAND ADMINISTRATION II APL 
Task Team Leader:  Frederic de Dinechin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Other rural development (P);Personal 
and property rights (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Legal 
institutions for a market economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
64.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Land Administration Program's overarching objective continues to be to (i) increase 
legal security of land tenure and (ii) strengthen the legal and institutional framework for 
land registry and cadastre services in the country. This is to be achieved through a 
participatory process for conflict mitigation and resolution that includes indigenous and 
non-indigenous communities.  
 
The project development objective is to foster the process of achieving land tenure 
security in seven new departments (Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Chiquimula, Escuintla, 
Izabal, Sacatepequez, and Zacapa) and the municipality of Palachum in the Department 
of Quiche, through the provision of efficient and accessible cadastral and land 
administration services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have four components: (a) cadastral and land regularization in eight new 
departments, (b) maintenance of cadastral information and municipal services, (c) legal 
Page  2
reforms and institutional strengthening, and (d) project management and monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
Component 1. It will finance pre-field-work activities (socio-economic diagnostic, 
geodetic and mapping worksnecessary for field surveys), communication campaigns, 
surveying of macro boundaries (for example, inter-municipal boundaries, communal 
lands, and protected areas), and parcel-level surveying and validation in urban and rural 
areas. As a result of these activities, RIC will issue cadastral notifications to inform the 
beneficiaries and the Cadastral and General Property Registries about the regular or 
irregular status of the parcels. A percentage of these parcels will be eligible for titling and 
regularization.  
 
Component 2. The objective of this component is to develop the framework at the 
municipal level to support the field surveys to keep cadastral information updated and 
incorporate it into initiatives for local development and territorial planning. This 
component will finance the establishment of RIC?s municipal cluster offices to cover the 
municipalities in the eight new departments, fieldwork to update the cadastral database, 
the development of the normative and technical framework for its maintenance, training 
to build capacity in the municipalities and for private surveyors and notaries, and 
implementation of land use plans based on the cadastral information.  
 
Component 3. The objective of this component is to improve the legal framework in 
Guatemala and strengthen the institutional capacity of the agencies involved in its 
application. It will finance (a) the formulation and promotion of legal and regulatory 
instruments linked to the cadastral and regularization process; (b) the strengthening of the 
institutions involved, including the training of their staff; and (c) the development of the 
technological platform and implementation of an integrated cadastre-registry 
computerized system.  
 
Component 4. This component covers the costs of the Project Coordination Unit (within 
RIC), monitoring and evaluation systems, including participatory evaluation mechanisms, 
independent evaluations and audits, and inter-institutional coordination activities. It will 
finance the provision of technical assistance, equipment, training, workshops, and 
incremental operating costs to ensure adequate project coordination and supervision, and 
will also support the development and operation of the Spatial Data Infrastructure.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This Phase II project is intended to complete a few remaining regularization activities in 
the Department of El Peten (the main focus of the Phase I project), and extend the 
systematic cadastre and associated land titling and registry activities to the departments of 
Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Chiquimula, Escuintla, Zacapa, Izabal, and Sacatepequez, 
and the municiplaity of Palachum in the Department of Quiche.  
 
Existing protected areas comprise nearly 17 percent of the combined land area of the 
project departments of Alta and Baja Verapaz, Chiquimula, Zacapa, Escuintla, 
Page  3
Sacatepequez, and Izabal. Prior to the parcel-level cadastral survey, the project will 
physically demarcate (with permanent markers called mojones) the corners of the land 
boundaries of existing protected areas within the project departments.  
 
The project area further includes lands with good agricultural potential, particularly in 
the Department of Escuintla (which has a relatively high percentage of Class I and II 
soils). These (already deforested)lands are often underutilized as extensive cattle 
pastures.  
 
Indigenous community lands are present in each of the seven new project departments 
(including titled community lands as well as municipal and other public lands 
traditionally used by indigenous communities). Most of these landholdings are still 
largely covered by native (primary or secondary) forest. In addition, 30 sites within the 
departments of Alta and Baja Verapaz and Izabal project area that are considered sacred 
to indigenous people of Mayan origin and to the Afro-hispanic Garifunas.  
 
Indigenous peoples account for about 64% of total population in the project area. There 
is a significant difference among the presence of indigenous peoples in the project 
departments. Alta Verapaz is the department with the highest level of indigenous 
population (93%), followed by Baja Verapaz (58%) and Sacatepequez (41%), while  
Zacapa, Escuintla, and Chiquimula have lower levels of indigenous population in their 
territories. The Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) developed during project 
preparation provides detailed description of the location, and socio-economic and land 
tenancy characteristics of indigenous peoples who will be benefited through the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The only significant environmental impacts from this project would relate to induced 
changes in land use by project beneficiaries--specifically, the extent to which project 
activities would lead to the conservation of forests and other natural habitats, versus 
deforestation or other environmentally problematic land use practices. On balance, the 
overall environmental impact of this project is expected to be positive, due both to (i) the 
environmentally generally positive features of improved land tenure security and (ii) the 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which seeks to enhance the project's positive 
environmental impacts, and to mitigate and monitor any negative ones.  
 
The proposed project will promote the conservation of forests and other natural habitats, 
both directly through the demarcation of protected areas in the project areas and 
indirectly through the regularization of private lands.  Cadastral surveying, conflict 
resolution, titling, and registration services would induce a series of behavioral changes 
among rural landholders; many of these would be environmentally positive, such as: i) 
longer-term land management, ii) reduced deforestation to prove use and possession, or 
from land invasions, iii) private reserve establishment, and iv) appropriate intensification 
of agricultural land use. There are some potential adverse environmental impacts 
(principally deforestation) that could result from improved land tenure security. The 
environmental impacts (positive and negative) associated with induced changes in 
landholder behavior will be monitored under the project. Where feasible, the potential 
adverse impacts will be mitigated through the project's Environmental Management Plan.  
 
SOCIAL:  
 
Indigenous Peoples:  The social assessment (SA) prepared by the Borrower confirmed 
that the project would positively affect indigenous peoples, thereby triggering OD 4.20 
(given that the Project Concept Note meeting took place before July 1, 2005, OD 4.20 
applies). Specifically, it is expected that the project would have a significant impact in 
regularizing land rights of indigenous populations and resolving conflicts between 
various land claimants. Working with indigenous communities in the project area, the 
Borrower prepared an IPDP which describes culturally compatible mechanisms for 
assuring that those communities are benefited by the project, and measures to avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts of the project on indigenous peoples, particularly the risk that 
their rights of ancestral possession may be disregarded in the process of implementation 
of the cadastre. The IPDP includes specific activities, timeline, budget and 
responsibilities for ensuring these benefits are realized.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project information campaigns will be conducted in Spanish as well as indigenous 
languages, mainly Q'eqchi, Poqomchi', and Kaqchikel. Following the successful 
experience of Phase I, the project will provide free and bilingual paralegal assistance and 
cadastral brigades will be composed of community members who have received training 
in conflict resolution. The team is exploring the possibility of including more alternative 
conflict resolution mechanisms and further strengthening CONTIERRA. For example, a 
"Mesa Regional de Conflictos de Tierra" in Alta Verapaz has already been established.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The EA includes a proposed Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which is intended 
to enhance the project's positive environmental impacts, as well as to prevent or mitigate 
the negative ones. The activities outlined in the EMP will be included within the project's 
Operational Manual, and other project legal and technical documents, as appropriate.  
These include:  
 
-
Demarcation of Protected Area Boundary Corners;  
 
-
Demarcation of proposed Protected Areas;  
 
-
Demarcation of Territorial Reserves;  
 
-
Demarcation of Archaeological and Other Sites of Cultural  Significance;  
 
-
Delineation of Natural Hazard Zones;  
 
-
Dissemination of Environmental Information; and  
 
-
Land Use Impact Monitoring.  
 
These elements are described in the EA and the Safeguard Annex to the PAD.  
Similarly, as described above in Section D.1, the SA and the IPDP prepared by the 
Borrower describe the mechanisms to ensure project compliance with the Bank's (social) 
safeguard policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Project preparation included extensive public consultation (about the project's 
environmental and other aspects) with a broad range of stakeholders, including national 
and local government entities, producer associations, indigenous and peasant 
organizations, and environmental and other NGOs (see the EA Report for details).  
Copies of the EA (in Spanish) are available on request from all RIC offices in Guatemala 
and at the Bank's InfoShop in Washington.  
 
Similarly, participatory social assessment was carried out during project preparation, 
including detailed interviews with key stakeholders in the project area, and three 
consultation workshops held in October and November 2005, in Coban, Rio Hondo, and 
Guatemala City. Three consultation workshops were conducted in November 2005 in 
Morales, Coban, and San Lucas. The consultation process continued in 2006 with the first 
IPDP consultation phase. Additional consultations are scheduled from October to 
Page  6
December 2006.  The IPDP has been publicly disclosed in Guatemala and the Bank's 
InfoShop in Washington.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/02/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/02/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
Page  7
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Frederic de Dinechin 
11/01/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
11/02/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez 
11/01/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
11/02/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
11/02/2006 
Comments:   
