Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/01/2006 
Report No.:  AC1937
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guatemala 
Project ID:  P094321 
Project Name:  Project to Support a Rural Economic Development Program 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Werbrouck 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (50%);Agricultural marketing and trade (25%);General 
transportation sector (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Indigenous peoples (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are (i) to improve the competitiveness of 
rural productive supply chains with strong indigenous participation; and (ii) to strengthen 
the institutional capacity of the public entities participating in the program though the 
adoption of a territorial management model with indigenous participation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project would have three components: (i) investments in productive supply chains; 
(ii) strengthening of territorial public management capacities for competitiveness; and 
(iii) management, monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Component 1:  Investments in Productive Supply Chains (US$ 53.6 million; IBRD 
US$27.3 million)  
 
The objective of this component would be to increase the incomes of the mostly 
indigenous rural population through time and space coordinated investments in favor of 
Page  2
productive rural organizations including:  market access, technical assistance, seed 
capital, financial services, and productive infrastructure investments in the Program area.  
 
To achieve this objective, this component would have the following subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1.  Entrepreneur Development Services (US$13.5 million of which 
US$5.4 million financed by IBRD) which will allow rural productive organizations to get 
access to markets and to link up with productive chains through market intelligence, 
technical assistance and seed capital.  The Ministry of the Economy (MINECO) 
–
Vice 
Ministry for the Development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises – assisted by 
private professional organizations would implement the subcomponent.  The 
subcomponent would: (i) finance consulting services for market intelligence and access, 
pre-investment studies, technical assistance in production, organization, administration, 
processing and commercialization, and formalization, certification and association of 
small enterprises; and (ii) provide seed capital to eligible producer organizations for 
investments and variable costs supporting the supply chain.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2.  Access to Financial Services (US$ 8 million financed entirely by 
IADB) of rural productive organizations by: (i) strengthening of the capacity of MINECO 
to help micro-enterprises to get access to financial services; (ii) technical assistance and 
incentives to intermediary financial institutions (IFI) to adjust their services to the needs 
of rural productive organizations; (iii) technical assistance to rural productive 
organizations to comply with the requirements of financial intermediaries; and (iv) a line 
of credit to eligible financial intermediaries at market interest rates.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3. Access to Productive Rural Infrastructure (public and collective) 
(US$16.4 million of which US$6.2 million financed by IBRD) by financing public rural 
infrastructure investments or collective investments needed to improve the 
competitiveness of the rural productive organizations participating in the program.  This 
subcomponent aims to provide productive infrastructure to support both the development 
of new supply chain partnerships and the improvement of existing partnerships.  This 
covers both: municipal economic infrastructure such as small irrigation systems, 
rehabilitation of existing roads and communications, construction of small public tourism 
infrastructure, business zones, telecommunication centers and markets, and improvement 
of electricity connections; as well as collective (private but owned by groups of people) 
investments in economic infrastructure such as storage facilities and distribution centers, 
both of which are needed to improve the competitiveness of supply chains.  The 
subcomponent is to be carried out by FIS.  The demand for such investments would be 
generated by the private sector (participating in supply chains) and/or by the 
municipalities in the program area.  The municipal investments would be financed on a 
matching grant basis with municipal authorities and each investment would be required to 
have a maintenance plan.  
 
Subcomponent 1.4: Information and communications technology investments (ICT) 
(US$16.0 million financed entirely by IBRD).  This subcomponent aims to improve 
access to and use of ICTs in the program departments and municipalities.  The 
Page  3
subcomponent will assist in building up key ICT in the program’s selected territories 
through the use of output-based aid (OBA) mechanisms and to enhance the productive 
use of ICT infrastructure and services by productive supply chains as well as by local 
development organizations and indigenous people.  The component would be carried out 
by the Ministry of Communications, Infrastructure and Housing (MINCIV) through the 
Telecommunications Development Fund (FONDETEL) and with the support of the 
Presidential Commission for Modernization and Decentralization of the State (COPRE).  
The component would cover: the extension of the provision of basic infrastructure for 
telephony and broadband internet connectivity to small municipalities in rural areas; 
technical assistance services for the implementation of the works program; and training 
and technical assistance programs to assist on the use of ICT for increased productivity.  
 
The above technical assistance and investments will be coordinated through the 
production of “business plans”.  These plans will be drawn up by the rural productive 
organizations and their commercial partners.  The business plans will stipulate the needs 
for entrepreneur development services, financial services, public and associative 
infrastructure and, where applicable, telecommunications.  These business plans will be 
evaluated on the basis of technical, economic, financial, social and environmental criteria 
by the Government and once they are approved they will also contain the commitments 
of the implementing agencies in terms of technical assistance and investments.  Hence the 
different elements of the component will be coordinated into single business plans.  
Those plans will be instruments of demand capture, for feasibility studies, approval and 
planning of the project financed investments, and monitoring and evaluation of the 
integral program.  Subcomponent 1.4 (telecommunications) will be implemented in 
priority in the Departments selected under the program to provide overall 
telecommunications support to the program.   
 
Component 2:  Strengthening of the territorial public management capacities for 
competitiveness (US$3.5 million – IBRD: US$1.4 million)  
 
The overall objective of this component is to introduce in the institutions involved in the 
program a new model of public management focused on territorial development.  This 
management model will be expected to influence national and sector policies as well as 
public investment priorities so that they can contribute in a more efficient way to 
mobilize the territorial resources as a function of the development of strategic objectives 
and competitive advantages.  Moreover, this territorial management model (TMM) will 
be based on participation principles and the development of public-private partnerships.  
These spaces of collaborative interchange constitute mechanisms favoring the collective 
ownership of local knowledge, the establishment of a local consensus for the 
development of territorial advantages and a long-term development strategy.  
 
The specific objectives are:  
 
Page  4
(i) 
To develop under SEGEPLAN a  new Territorial Management Model (TMM) and 
establish the institutional and operational basis to implement it;  
 
(ii) 
To incorporate the new model in public policies and investment programs;  
 
(iii) 
To give public and private actors access to key territorial information needed for 
decision-making processes; and  
 
(iv) 
To strengthen the capacity of those institutions that will be strategic for the 
success of the new model.  
 
The TMM would build on and better articulate already existing processes within 
SEGEPLAN, but under a new territorial approach, such as:  (i) the National System of 
Strategic Territorial Planning 
–
SINPET; (ii) the National System of Pre-investment 
Support- SINAPRE; and (iii) the National System of Public Investment - SNIP.  
Furthermore, these systems need to fit in with the processes of economic and social 
sector policy coordination and international aid orientation that also fall within the 
activities of SEGEPLAN.  
 
The component has four subcomponents:  (i) development of the TMM for rural 
development; (ii) implementation of the model in selected Departments; (iii) access to 
territorial strategic information through an integrated and decentralized territorial 
strategic information system; and (iv) disclosure, awareness and training.  
 
Component 3:  Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.6 million; IBRD 
US$1.0 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to ensure program management capacity is in place 
and that an effective monitoring and evaluation system is established and maintained.  
Towards this goal, SEGEPLAN would lead an Investment Coordinating Committee 
comprising representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the implementing agencies 
(SEGEPLAN, MINECO and FIS) and the Commission against Discrimination and 
Racism (CODISRA). Annex 6 provides detail on the responsibilities and arrangements).  
This specific component would finance a general management system, including 
monitoring and evaluation activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
In the departments of San Marcos, Huehuetenango, Solala, Quetzaltenango, Totonicapan,  
Chimaltenango, Sacatepequez and Alta Verapaz.  These account for 30% of the whole 
population and 50% of those who are extremely poor.  The majority depend on 
agriculture or on other rural activities for livelihood, much at the subsistence level.  Many 
areas in the selected departments are vulnerable to natural disaster.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Irma Yolanda Avila Argueta (LCSEO) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSFF) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental impacts are generally expected to be modest - no Category A sub-projects 
can be undertaken.  Social impacts are considered manageable - no sub-projects 
involving involuntary resettlement can be undertaken.  The project supports increased 
indigenous participation in productive rural activities, both planning and implementation, 
in order to raise incomes in a sustainable fashion. Indigenous peoples are mainly geared 
towards subsistence activities, with dependency on informal marketing channels and on 
remittances.  There is a strong distrust of government and of professional organizations 
and a lack of real partnerships in the supply chains.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
See below   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
See below   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A. INDIGENOUS PEOPLES DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK  
 
1. 
Since the objective of the Program is directly linked to Indigenous Peoples, the 
GOG has carried out an Indigenous People’s Development Framework under terms of 
reference agreed upon by the Bank.  The goal of this social assessment was to evaluate 
the program’s potential impact on the Indigenous Peoples,  to examine project 
alternatives where adverse effects may be significant and to prepare proposal to increase 
the involvement of indigenous people into the program.  
 
Page  6
2. 
The Framework provides information on the indigenous population in the 
Program area, summarizes the legal framework related to indigenous peoples, describes 
the positive and negative impacts that potential beneficiaries perceive from the Program, 
and proposes some organizational arrangements to ensure their access to the benefits of 
the Program.  The entire document is available in the project files, SEGEPLAN’s 
website, the Bank’s Infoshop and is summarized in this annex. 
 
3. 
Indigenous peoples represent 67.82% of the population in the Program area , with 
the highest proportions in Solola, Totonicapan and Alta Verapaz, where they represent 
more than 90%.  They belong to different Mayan groups, those whihc are the most 
numerous being Kiche, Q'eqchi, Kaqchikel, Mam and Tz’utujiles.  
 
4. 
The region is characterized by its:  (i) high rurality (67.39% of the population), 
(ii) high poverty levels (71.4% of the population is poor and 32.5% extremely poor); (iii) 
high land ownership inequity and subsistence farming (96% of the producers are 
subsistence farmers who own 20% of the land); (iv) lack of skilled labor and high 
informality (64.5% of the economically active population); (vi) high dependence on 
agriculture (57.5% of the economically active population), followed by commerce 
(29.1%) and textiles (9.7%); and (vi) high dependence on local markets.  
 
5. 
In order to describe the perception of potential beneficiaries towards the Program, 
15 randomly selected indigenous entrepreneurs were individually interviewed, and two 
focal group interviews in Quetzaltnenago and Coban were conducted. Under IADB 
financing a very extensive study and consultation process was carried out in the Solola, 
Totonicapan areas.  
 
6. 
In general, the potential beneficiaries agree with the Program’s objectives and 
type of activities.  The main positive impacts are:  
 
(i) 
the association of small producers will enable them to participate in the markets 
where they have not had any access until now and reduce their production and marketing 
costs;  
 
(ii) 
the association of small producers will allow them to carry out social proyects 
with the profits of the business activities;  
 
(iii) 
with the employment generation in the rural areas, there will be less youth 
emigration to the towns and the USA and will reduce crime;  
 
(iv) 
the project will increase purchasing power, access to education, reduce illiteracy, 
and will increase food security: (availability of food, purchasing power, nutritional 
behavior);  
 
(v) 
they will be able to participate actively in decision-making and in the 
development process of the municipalities;  
 
(vi) 
it will improve social integration by avoiding ethnic, political and religious 
friction; and  
 
(vii) 
it will create new opportunities for the indigenous people.  
 
Page  7
7. 
Indigenous peoples have some concerns about implementation, due to past 
experiences where the government didn’t comply with its commitments.  Employment 
andincome generation are very high on their agenda.  Specific areas which need to be 
addresed are:  
 
(i) 
Government to take into account their suggestions and wishes during design, 
execution and evaluation;  
 
(ii) 
Don't use the indigenous people just for furthering political interests;  
 
(iii) 
Don't pose high barriers towards indigenous participation (red tape, offices far 
from their locations and legal requirements that they cannot comply with, specially 
relating to credit and legal property);  
 
(iv) 
Don't impose productive techniques not in accordance with their traditions;  
 
(v) 
Reach communities located in distant rural areas, using local radios and local 
languages; and  
 
(vi) 
Program to last long enough and therefore support the necessary long term 
processes indigenous people need.  
 
8. 
Indigenous entrepreneurs also stated that some indigenous groups have a negative 
attitude towards some professional organizations of entrepreneurs (gremiales) and that 
there is a lack of real partnerships between producers and middle-persons (where supply 
chains are operating, they heavily depend upon outside individual entrepreneurs with 
weak links to the regions).  
 
9. 
In order to ensure access of indigenous peoples to the benefits of the Program, the 
framework proposes the following main recommendations:  
 
(i) 
To define participatory mechanisms with real decision making capacity and with 
the possibility to monitor the implementation;  
 
(ii) 
To give indigenous producer groups the possibility to select with whom to form 
partnerships;  
 
(iii) 
To put a strong emphasis on training and capacity building of indigenous 
organizations in entrepreneurial and administrative skills; and  
 
(iv) 
To recognize and take into account indigenous customs, their organizations, their 
language, their property rights and natural resources management.  
 
10. 
Finally, the framework proposes the following measures to increase participation 
and involvement of indigenous groups into the Project:  
 
(i) 
The geographical areas of the Project are chosen in fuction of the high presence of 
indigenous people;  
 
(ii) 
The eligibility criteria for participation in the project are biased in favor of 
indigenous people;  
 
(iii) 
The economic activities supported by the Project are activities in which 
indigenous people have comparative advantage (agriculture, textiles, artisan activities);  
 
(iv) 
Indigenous groups will participate in the management of the Project through:  
 
(a) 
The creation of a Project Management Board in which one indigenous 
entrepreneur participates.  
Page  8
(b) 
 
An Investment Coordination Committee which includes representation of 
the Commission against Discrimination and Racism.  
 
(v) 
Participation in the promotion, identification of clients, and social audits through 
the creation of indigenous guidance groups in three main cities of the program area 
(Quetzaltenango, Totonicapan, and Coban).  The role of these guidance groups is to 
provide information and involve indigenous producers into the Project and to help them 
with preparing proposals;  
 
(vi) 
Participation in the monitoring and evaluation of the Project through reporting to 
the national indigenous instances; and  
 
(vii) 
The Project has specific monitoring indicators referring to indigenous 
participation and involvement;  
 
11. 
Other measures to increase indigenous participation include: FIS staff will 
undergo specific training in cultural sensitivity; the invitations to submit proposals for the 
project (MINECO subcomponents 1.1-1.2) will be done in indigenous languages; 
SEGEPLAN will organize a specific program information campaign focusing on 
indigenous people.  
 
B. ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
 
1. 
In order to help ensure the environmental soundness and sustainability of the 
Program, an environmental assessment has been carried out by the GOG under terms of 
reference agreed upon by the Bank.  The assessment is available in the project files, 
SEGEPLAN’s website and the Bank’s Infoshop and is summarized in thisAnnex.  The 
assessment results have been presented to a group of environmental NGOs and 
institutions that have provided comments.  
 
2.
In order to have an overall environmental category B rating, the Program would 
not finance any category A projects proposed by the beneficiaries.  
 
3.
The Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) is the responsible 
agency for environmental supervision and enforcement in Guatemala.  The Government 
has introduced the following environmental categories:  A category A (high 
environmental impact potential or risk – not financed under this program), B1 (moderate 
to high impact), B2 (moderate to low impact) and C (low impact).  The project will 
follow the same categorization and will only finance investments of category B1, B2 and 
C.  
 
4.
The Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources has approved the 
environmental procedures of the Project.  
 
5.
The environmental procedures that subprojects proposed by beneficiaries would 
follow consist basically in:  
 
(vi) 
Subproject proposals (profiles) would include an environmental screening 
document (Initial Environmental Assessment - IEA). MINECO and FIS would review the 
proposed screening.  This IEA determines the possible environmental impact and the 
location of the subproject relative to fragile environmental zones or to territorial planning 
Page  9
zones.  In terms of impact, it classifies the subproject into categories B1, B2, and C.  
Annex 2 in the environmental assessment provides the environmental impact 
classification by type of project, work or activity.  
 
(vii) 
Infrastructure projects include improvement, rehabilitation and maintenance of 
rural roads; capacity increase, rehabilitation and maintenance of electricity generation 
and distribution; and construction of antennae for cellular phones and distribution poles.  
All these subprojects are to be classified under environmental category B1, B2 or C.  
 
(viii)  These works have also to be classified on the basis of the sensitivity of the local 
environment.  The environmental assessment provides a list of “environmentally 
sensitive zones” where the environmental risk is high (for instance in function of the 
biodiversity), and where even works of category B1, B2 would not be financed.  
 
(ix) 
After screening, subprojects of Category B1 and B2 will be subject to 
Environmental Impact Analysis (EIA) to estimate the environmental impact and to 
introduce mitigation measures.  For category C subprojects, only sector specific 
environmental manuals will be applied.  
 
Proponents of category B projects would (assisted by the Entrepreneurial Services 
Provider) submit the EIA to MARN that would inform the public about the contents of 
the EIA and give 20 days to receive any observations or complaints.  It would also 
implement inspections and consultations as needed.  After this process MARN would 
make a final resolution approving or disapproving the EIA.  
 
6. 
Once approved by MARN, MINECO would establish an Environmental 
Verification Report that includes all activities involved in the environmental analysis and 
the mitigation measures that have to be implemented and budgeted for in the business 
plan of the proponents.    The FIS operational manual has been approved by MARN and 
would be used as a baseline to design the environmental procedures for the subprojects 
financed under MINECO.  
 
7.
The environmental impact of the ICT infrastructure improvement projects is 
expected to be limited in the construction phase and negligible in the operations phase. 
Environmental management obligations of the ICT service provider would be covered 
under the contract.  These obligations would be monitored by MINCIV.  
 
Pest Management  
 
8. 
The procedures for integrated pest management have also been established.  
Where the subproject would introduce new technologies that involve the introduction of 
insecticides and pesticides, the Unit for Norms and Regulations of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Food would have to review the proposed subproject on the 
basis of the following criteria:  
 
a. 
Respect for the norms and regulations of unprocessed agricultural products, 
animal health,  
 
b.
Integration of environmentally acceptable pest and insect control; and  
 
c. 
The type and quality of insecticides and pesticides.  
 
9. 
No subprojects will be supported that will use pesticides nor insecticides.   
Page  10
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Indigenous peoples in the selected departments are a key stakeholder group.  Wide 
ranging consultations took place in the preparation of the indigenous peoples 
development framework.  Indigenous peoples will be represented on the Management 
Board and on the Investment Cooridnation Committee under the program. In addition 
they, and other population groups in the selected departments will be involved in the new 
territorial based development planning process to be introduced through the project.  This 
is a participatory mechanism which increases the involvement of the population in 
investments and other decisions which effcet their livelihood.  
 
A
consultation with environmental NGOs was also organized and the recommendations 
of the meeting are included into the environmental assessment.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/12/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
Yes 
Page  11
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Werbrouck 
01/18/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez 
12/13/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Irma Yolanda Avila Argueta 
01/13/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
 
Comments:   
