Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2232
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guatemala 
Project ID:  P089898 
Project Name:  EDUCATION QUALITY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION 
Task Team Leader:  Joel E. Reyes 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 25, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (65%);Primary education (35%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Indigenous peoples 
(P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Objective of the Education Quality and Secondary Education Project is to improve 
primary education completion rates for over-age students, and increase access to a quality 
lower secondary education, especially for indigenous and low income non-indigenous 
students.  
 
The success of the project will be measured by the following Project Development 
Outcome (PDO) Indicators (the Impact Evaluation will compare 2006 baseline with the 
2012 project impact data collection on beneficiary and control regions, schools and 
students):  
 
-
9th Grade Gross Completion Rates (nationally and in targeted regions);  
 
-
Gross Enrollment rate in lower secondary education, grades 7--9 (nationally and in 
targeted regions);  
 
-
Increased intake (access) in grade 7-in modalities supported by the Project;  
 
-
Proportion of over-age students (13-15 year old) who complete primary education 
(in Integrated Basic Education Centers); and  
 
-
6th grade gross completion rate (nationally and in targeted regions).   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will support three components with inter-dependent objectives: (i) 
Primary Education Completion and Quality, (ii) Lower Secondary Expansion and 
Quality, and (iii) School-Based Management focused on Education Quality.  
 
Component 1. Primary Education Completion and Quality (US$ 9.47 Million): This 
component would support an integrated strategy for Basic Education (primary and lower 
secondary cycles) to increase primary education retention and completion of over-age 
students, and promote their continued education at the lower secondary education level.  
To contribute to long-term quality improvements in primary education, the component 
will also support proposed reforms to the Pre-Service Teacher Training system.  
 
Component 2. Access and Quality of Lower Secondary Education (US$70.87 million): 
This component would support integrated strategies to increase the quality and access to 
lower secondary education (grades 7-9).  It will include support for (i) the curricular 
reform of secondary education; (ii) strengthening and expansion of existing lower 
secondary education modalities; and (iii) strengthening education demand programs, such 
as scholarships and subsidies for enrollment, retention and graduation of low income 
students.  
 
Component 3. School Management in Support of Education Quality (US$ 20 Million): 
This component will advance the lessons learned on school management strategies 
implemented at the primary school level through the last decade in Guatemala. The focus 
will be on increasing the contributions of school-based management to the quality of 
learning.  Also, the supportive and supervisory role of Education Departmental Offices 
(DDE, Direcciones Departamentales de Educacion) will be strengthened by improving 
their decentralized functions in pedagogical technical assistance, school planning, result 
evaluation support and supervision, and administrative procedures.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project will be implemented in indigenous and poor non-indigenous areas of Guatemala. 
Inclusion and/or scope of infrastructure, investment has not been defined yet.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHH) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Social Assessment and Indigenous Development Plan (IPP)    preparation was 
completed, and contributed to the specific strategies to reach low income; rural and 
indigenous populations (see Annex 10). The 10 project-targeted regions-identified based 
on an index of education efficiency-have up to 70% of indigenous population.  
Indigenous specific-earmarked activities are detailed in Annex 10; in addition to 
earmarked investments, Indigenous Students will also benefit from other general Project 
investments.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The intercultural and Bilingual Viceministry and DIGEBI (General Directorate of 
Bilingual and Intercultural Education) participated actively in the elaboration of the IPP 
and will support its implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project design is taking into consideration recommendations and lessons learned 
from the Integrated Social Assessment carried out as part of project preparation in 2006, 
and other consultations carried out at the central, departmental and municipal levels since 
2000.  
 
Page  4
1.1 
Integrated Social Assessment  
 
An Integrated Social Assessment was carried out by a local independent consulting team 
under the coordination of the Technical and Bilingual Vice-Ministries of MINEDUC: 
DICADE, DIGEBI and DIGEEX. Results of the consultations were incorporated in the 
project design. A purposeful sample of 61 schools (28 primary, 22 lower secondary 
(basicos), and 11  upper secondary education schools (diversificados) were selected, to 
include both all-Spanish and Bilingual (Spanish-Indigenous language), public and private 
schools in 35 communities located in 7 Departments of Guatemala (Huehuetenango, Alta 
Verapaz, Totonicapan, Quiche, Jalapa, Suchitepequez and San Marcos). Some 608 
students, 212 teachers, 81 parents, 44 graduates of primary and lower secondary schools, 
and 57 school principals were consulted through focus groups or interviews.  
 
The assessment explored (a) alternative pedagogical modalities such as Guate-
Telesecundaria, Tutorial Learning System (SAT), School-home system (NUFED), the 
Association of Mayan Lower Secondary Education Centers (ACEM), Lower Secondary 
Technical school, and (b) alternative financing/ administration modalities: by central 
government (MINEDUC), by communal boards or COEDUCA (PRONADE), by 
cooperatives (tripartite financing: national-municipal-community), or by private 
financing (NGOs, Associations).  
 
The main objectives of the social assessment were: (a) mapping and social analysis of 
the education conditions of the rural and peri-urban primary, lower secondary and 
secondary schools, particularly of low-income over-aged youths of 13 to 18 years of age, 
at risk of desertion, multiple repetition, social or academic un-adjustment; (b) to analyze 
(i) the social feasibility of the strategies and modalities suggested by the project 
components for the non-Indigenous as well as the Indigenous schools taking into account 
the opinions, perceptions and preferences of stakeholders and beneficiaries, and (ii) the 
participation and social communication schemes for the project based on the present and 
potential social organization of the school communities in the different modalities being 
assessed.  
 
The main findings (conclusions) of the social assessment included:  
 
(i) Primary Education  
 
General conclusion  
 
The low level of education of parents impedes critical appreciation of academic 
deficiencies in Math and Language standards in primary school. Most parents think 
quality is acceptable, while reality shows that 40% of students fail these subjects in 
seventh grade. Additional reinforcement is recommended to avoid failure.  
 
Ethnicity  
 
-
Indigenous self-identification and the identification by others may vary greatly, 
thus, the importance of including the ethnic variables in the information systems, so that 
information can be adequately disaggregated. For example, in Suchitepequez, while 96% 
Page  5
of students self-identified as Indigenous, the Principal and teachers identified the student 
body as non-Indigenous because students neither wear the Indigenous costume nor speak 
an Indigenous language at school.  
 
Overage, repetition, desertion,  
 
-
Late entrance to preschool and overage is more common in Indigenous than in 
non-Indigenous areas. 58% of students in San Marcos, 37% in Quiche, 31% in Alta 
Verapaz, but only 4% in Japala (ladino) were over-aged. Some 6th graders interviewed in 
Alta Verapaz and Suchitepequez were 17-18 yrs old. Some of the parents' reasons to 
delay entrance to preschools are: (a) parents don't want young children walking to school 
alone; and (b) they don't like language shock at school.  
 
-
Over-aged students tend to suffer from low self-esteem and social inadequacy.  
 
-
Some of the reasons expressed by children for dropping-out or repeating a grade 
were: (a) poverty (they go to school without breakfast), (b) parents take children out of 
school for farming or migration to the lowlands, (c) some children do not have time for 
homework during seasonal agricultural work.  
 
-
First grade teachers have embraced the message to improve the repetition 
indicator, but they require guidance to keep quality standards.  
 
-
The highest repetition indicators were not found in the Indigenous communities, 
but in the East and Southern Coast of the country, where communities are non-
Indigenous.  
 
-
One of the biggest causes of desertion of school girls is teenage pregnancy. 
However, there is total absence of programs targeted to control the problem.  
 
(ii) Lower Secondary Education  
 
-
Costs incurred, i.e. uniforms, transportation, books, deter access to schools. Given 
the choice of wearing or not wearing a uniform, ladino students opt for wearing it (as a 
sign of distinction and status) but Indigenous girls continue to wear their traditional 
huipil.  
 
-
The gender gap of access to schools increases as costs in Lower Secondary school 
increase, making it more difficult for girls to finance LSS costs. Repetition and drop-out 
rates of those girls who attend LSS are lower for girls than for boys.  
 
-
Conventional schools (public) seem to be favored by parents over all because 
costs are lower, they have their own building, and they have more teachers. 
Telesecundaria is the next favored option because of its affordability and evening hours 
of operation, although the existing ones are ill-equipped.  
 
-
Most teachers are insufficiently trained. Only one third of teachers interviewed 
had a Teaching Diploma (high school) or three years of College approved. Cooperative 
Institutes are financially ill-prepared to attract specialized teachers. It is not uncommon to 
find primary school teachers teaching lower secondary, or a lower secondary school 
language teacher teaching sciences, or a secretary teaching a Language class (the latter 
are graduates from a 100-hours Training Program at the American Guatemalan Institute).  
 
-
The 2005 standardized tests for ninth graders show big deficiencies in NUFED 
and IGER systems and better results for Telesecundaria.  
 
Page  6
Recommendations were provided both for the general education system, as well as for 
the specific project design; these include:  
 
General Sector Recommendations:  
 
(i) Ethnic and educational variables  
 
-
Include the variables "pueblo (ethnicity)" and "mother tongue (L1)" in the 
information systems, so that data can be disaggregated.    
 
-
School education statistics should be publicized and discussed with teachers and 
parents, using comparators at local, municipal or departmental levels. Otherwise, teachers 
have a myopic inward classroom-centered view.  
 
(ii) Preschools  
 
-
In Indigenous areas, all the preschools should be bilingual, not Spanish, as 
children need the opportunity to make the transition from native language to Spanish in a 
non-traumatic fashion. Overage also occurs when parents delay preschool entrance until 
the child learns some Spanish before approaching the school.  
 
Project Specific:  
 
(i) Accelerated Primary Education Programs  
 
-
Disseminate clear guidelines for the accelerated program: ages targeted, flexible 
schedules (to account for students who work), facilities needed (some schools will need 
to build an extra classroom), duration, and expected participation of teachers and parents 
commitment.  
 
-
The demand of accelerated programs is uneven. Not all schools need it. Not all 
schools are ready for it.  
 
-
Teacher recruitment and training should be voluntary on the part of the teachers. 
Consider training other unemployed teachers available in communities.  
 
-
Teacher training should be paced: initial training plus follow-up in-service 
training to deal with local problems (bilingualism, students' lethargy after long absence 
from school).  
 
-
Careful selection and elaboration of materials is crucial.  
 
(ii) Lower Secondary Education  
 
-
Introductory reinforcement of remedial Math and Language courses at the 
beginning of seventh grade.  
 
-
Scholarships and subsidies should be targeted for traditionally excluded students 
for costs that would deter them from accessing schools (inc. uniforms, transportation, 
books)  
 
-
Telesecundaria is considered by parents as the best alternative to conventional 
schools with more potential to reach-out to isolated areas. It is recommended that, before 
opening new Telesecundarias, the existing ones be strengthened and equipped 
adequately.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/09/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Note:  The in-country disclosure of the IPP is being processed by the Ministry of 
Education (MOE) in Guatemala.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joel E. Reyes 
08/17/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
08/11/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
08/18/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
08/18/2006 
Comments:   
