Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:  
38376
 
Date ISDS Prepared: 
December 5, 2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guatemala 
Project ID: P103193 
Project Name: Guatemala Rural Electrification Project 
Task Team Leader: Cledan Mandri-Perrott 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: NA 
Managing Unit: IEF 
Lending Instrument: Trust Fund 
Sector: Infrastructure, Energy  
Theme: Energy Supply  
Trust Fund Amount (US$m.):US$ 7million grant by the GPOBA 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The proposed Global Partnership On Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) project aims to assist the Rural 
Electrification Program, 
Programa
de
Electrificación Rural 
“PER,” which is the Government initiative to 
expand electricity services in rural areas, and to expand electricity connection for approximately 
24,000 low income households (an average monthly income below $48) or nearly 120,000 people in 
remote rural areas by 2009. The project also aims to assist the Government in refining the OBA 
Trust Fund structure which is managed under an escrow arrangement to pay the electricity 
distribution concessionaires (
Distribuidora Eléctrica de Oriente, S.A.
 (DEORSA) and 
Distribuidora 
Eléctrica de Occidente, S.A.
 (DEOCSA), whose parent company is Union Fenosa International), based 
on specified outputs. 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The proposed project will assist the Government implement the PER to solve chronic electricity 
distribution issues in rural areas by providing financial and technical contributions.  The project 
intends to maintain the current OBA Trust Fund structure that is administered by a commercial 
bank and managed by the Technical Committee consisting of representatives of the Ministry of 
Energy and Mines, INDE and concessionaires.  GPOBA will make transfers to the OBA Trust 
Fund to subsidize up to 40% of total electricity connection cost.  The fund transfers are to be agreed 
between GPOBA and INDE on 40%/60% split respectively with a condition that INDE should 
Page  2
make its financial contribution prior to GPOBA disbursement.  Once the concessionaires, 
DEORSA and DEOCSA, execute the connection work, the Technical Committee verifies the 
outputs and authorizes the payment along with the INDE approval.  When the signed verification 
note is sent to the administered banks, the reimbursement to the concessionaires from the OBA 
Trust Fund will be triggered.   
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 
known) 
 
The project activities, including expansion of the electricity service, will be located in poor rural 
areas where 74.5% of the inhabitants earn less than $48 per month.  The targeted geographic areas 
include Huehuetenango, Quiche, Alta Verapaz and Petén.  Each of these states has significant 
indigenous populations and at least 14 different languages are spoken in the project area.  In order to 
ensure adequate free, prior and informed consultation, appropriate arrangements will be made (as 
part of the communication/outreach plans developed Government of Guatemala and approved by 
the Bank.) to communicate through appropriate means in appropriate local languages with potential 
beneficiaries.  
 
E.  Implementing Agency’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The implementing agency, Union Fenosa, is an international, private sector company that is the 
parent company of DEORSA and DEOCSA.  Union Fenosa has business relationships with IFC 
and MIGA as part of its investments in utility companies in developing countries, and has adequate 
measures in place to manage environmental and social issues specific to the project. These are 
consistent with the ongoing National Rural Electrification Plan which has been operational since 
2000.  
 
In addition to a well-developed environmental code of conduct, Union Fenosa also has a substantial 
body of social responsibility policies and programs. In 2001 and 2003 Union Fenosa collaborated 
with the CODESPA Foundation to implement "Professional Training Programs for electricity 
technicians" in rural parts of Guatemala, which trained approximately 500 young people from 
villages benefiting from the Rural Electrification Plan. These youth were then employed to maintain 
electricity networks that otherwise lacked means for maintenance. 
 
Moving beyond a “do no harm” mentality, Union Fenosa has signed the United Nations Global 
Compact, an initiative for an ethical commitment aimed at involving ten principles for conduct and 
action in the areas of Human Rights, Labour and the Environment, as an integral part of the 
strategies and operations throughout the world. It is also a member of the Forum for Ethical 
Evaluation (FORETICA), which works to promote ethical management and social responsibility in 
companies and organizations in general. 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP) 
Susanna Shapiro (LCSEO) 
 
Page  3
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes
No
TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X 
 
 
Category B Project.
 
The implementing agency's Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP), or similar document, will be the primary instrument for the assessment of the Rural 
Electrification Program, which has been in progress since 2000.  Assessing effective implementation 
of the ESMP, or similar document, will be a key objective of the appraisal mission.
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
X 
The Natural Habitats Policy is unlikely to be triggered by the Rural Electrification Program unless 
rights-of-way for the distribution lines cut across country in designated protected areas or large 
tracts of relatively undisturbed natural habitat, rather than following existing roads and rights-of-
way.  Approaches to selection of routes for the distribution system will be assessed as presented in 
the implementing agency's ESMP, or similar document.  Verification of implementation, and 
determination of application of the policy, will be a key objective of the appraisal mission.
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)  
 
X 
 
The Forests Policy does not apply, because all forest-related issues, if any, are more effectively 
addressed in the context of the Natural Habitats policy.
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X 
 
The Pest Management Policy does not apply because the implementing agency has a stated policy of 
using only manual methods of vegetation management on the rights-of-way.
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
 
X 
Will be determined during Environmental Assessment. 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X 
 
 
It is unclear whether the majority of beneficiaries of the project area are indigenous peoples, (in 
which case a self-standing IPPF will not be prepared but the principles and requirements of OP 4.10 
will be applied to the project in its entirety). This will be determined during appraisal. 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The issues that arise in this type of project are generally limited to accessing land to make 
connections (e.g. easements, rights of way for construction of transmission lines, land for building 
sub-stations).  Depending on the discussions with Government and the potential need for land 
acquisition, the team will trigger the policy if necessary and, if so, prepare the appropriate 
resettlement instrument.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50)  
X   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X 
 
The Safety of Dams (OP 4.37) and Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50) policies are 
neither applicable nor relevant to the Rural Electrification Program.  The Projects in Disputed Areas 
policy is not triggered because none of the Rural Electrification Program will be implemented in 
disputed territories. 
 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  December 20, 2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Due to the low complex nature of the project, there will be no safeguard reporting instruments.   
 
IV. APPROVAL
 
6LJQHG\03DQG\03VXEPLWWHG\03E\\1d\03
Name and Signature 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Cledan Mandri-Perrott 
 
$SSURYHG\03E\\1d\03
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
 
Program Manager: 
 
Patricia Veevers-Carter  
 
Comments:   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
