Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/26/2007 
Report No.:  AC2589
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea 
Project ID:  P065129 
Project Name:  GN-Village Comm Supp Program - Phase 2 
Task Team Leader:  Jane C. Hopkins 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (25%);Other social services (25%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
11.00 
 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
10.00 
 
LOCAL GOVTS. (PROV., DISTRICT, CITY) OF BORROWING COUNTRY
 5.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
28.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the Village Communities Support Program (VCSP) program 
remains the same. It seeks to strengthen local governance in rural Guinea and promote 
social and economic empowerment of the rural population, including women, youth and 
other marginalized groups. The long-term vision of the program is that, upon completion 
of the final phase, local communities and their representative local governments will have 
developed: (i) the capacity to identify, prioritize, plan, and manage their own 
infrastructure and service needs; (ii) the capacity to mobilize and use transparently the 
resources necessary to finance the establishment, rehabilitation, and maintenance of basic 
community infrastructure; (iii) the ability to oversee the implementation, operation and 
continued maintenance of community infrastructure either by contracting private firms or 
through the support of deconcentrated government services; and (iv) the capacity to 
sustain the development efforts and to enhance good governance practices.  
Page  2
Phase I (1999-2007) began a learning process for implementing decentralized rural 
development by supporting local infrastructure investments and institutional reforms. The 
project's development objectives were to (i) establish an operationally effective and 
efficient, decentralized system for local development, and (ii) increase access of the rural 
population to basic infrastructure and services.  
 
The development objective for Phase II (this project) is for Rural Development 
Communities (CRDs) to plan and implement local development activities in a 
comprehensive and inclusive manner, and to improve revenue performance to sustain 
their recurrent costs.   
 
3. Project Description 
Phase II of the VSCP expands the program geographically with the aim of reaching all 
303 CRDs in the country. The program will increase the range of eligible micro-projects 
to include socioeconomic infrastructure (rather than just basic social infrastructure).  
Planning processes will continue to implicate deconcentrated civil servants, and will 
strive to better implicate those at the lowest level (the sub-prefecture), in order to build 
skills amongst key institutions and individuals.  
 
Phase II will include three components: (a) a local investment fund); (b) capacity 
building for decentralized rural development; and (c) project management, monitoring 
and evaluation.  
 
Component A: The Local Investment Fund will be the mechanism for transferring funds 
to local governments to finance public socioeconomic infrastructure and capacity 
building activities identified on the basis of a participatory strategic planning process. 
The objective of the component is for CRDs to receive and manage funds transparently 
and in accordance with project guidelines. It provides an opportunity for local 
governments to take charge of local development challenges through experience with 
participatory planning, budgeting, financial management, and implementation of 
development activities.  
 
Component B: The objective of the Capacity Building for Decentralized Rural 
Development component is for CRDs to prepare their development and investment plans 
in an inclusive manner, with the adequate support from the associated prefecture and sub-
prefecture staff. The component will be attached to the Ministry of the Interior and 
Decentralization (MATD) with implementation entrusted to the National Directorate of 
Decentralization (DND). The capacity building activities under this component will 
address the technical and fiduciary skills needed at the different decentralized levels to 
implement local development activities.  
 
Component C: The Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation component 
includes: (i) support for the national coordination forum for the NPDRD, and (ii) support 
for the coordination and management of the Project.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope and will extend coverage, in a phased fashion, to all 303 
rural development communities (local governments) in Guinea.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is rated 'B' in the environment category. In conformity with the World Bank's 
Environment Assessment Guidelines OP/BP/GP 4.01 and the Government's 
environmental impact assessment legislation, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) was carried out and disclosed prior to appraisal, along with the ESA 
and RPF, on November 20, 2006. The ESMF provides guidelines for screening and 
identifying mitigation measures whereas the RPF was prepared to provide guidelines in 
case involuntary resettlement is triggered as a result of project implementation, even 
though it is not anticipated that the project will lead to population displacement. A Pest 
Management is not required since the  agricultural component of the project was dropped 
and no pesticides will be used.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main issues would be related to social inclusiveness, access to resources, and the 
cumulative effect of micro-projects, that may individually have manageable impacts, but 
cumulatively have significant impacts. These issues are addressed in the ESMF and the 
RPF.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The design of Phase II incorporates lessons learned from phase Phase I with an increased 
focus on inclusive planning processes and institutional sustainability. By maximizing 
stakeholder participation in project implementation, ownership will be expanded and 
increase the probability that its goals will be achieved within the proposed time frame.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The first phase of the VCSP achieved excellent results in building the capacity for 
safeguard policy compliance, particularly within the National Directorate for Rural Roads 
regarding the EA and action plans for rural road microprojects.  The second phase will 
build on these initial gains. The National Coordination Unit (NCU), established at the 
Ministry of Planning is responsible for ensuring that micro-projects are demand-driven, 
socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable, and can be properly operated and 
maintained. The NCU will prepare an annual work program of approved local 
development plans.  Micro-projects that are likely to have negative environmental and/or 
social impact are identified and go through an evaluation based on procedures detailed in 
the Project Implementation Manual. These assessments are carried out by national 
consultants. The NCU is satisfactorily staffed and will have an environmental specialist 
before start-up of micro-project financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Local community involvement is critical for the success of the Project. Activities during 
preparation included local diagnostic and stakeholder surveys, broad-based information 
workshops and communication sessions. Project start-up activities will include training, 
field visits, village/community meetings and workshops. Project impact studies will 
retain social indicators, which have been developed with participation of local 
communities (as part of the participatory M&E system). The safeguard documents were 
disclosed in-country on February 17, 2006 and are publicly available from either the 
National Coordination Unit of the PACV or the Ministry of Plan. They were disclosed in 
the Infoshop on November 20, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/20/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/20/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/20/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jane C. Hopkins 
01/25/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
01/25/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
01/25/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
01/25/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/25/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
01/25/2007 
Comments:   
