Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2006 
Report No.:  AC2272
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea 
Project ID:  P077317 
Project Name:  Guinea Electricity Sector Efficiency Improvement 
Task Team Leader:  Prasad V. S. N. Tallaprag 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project Development Objective: The project seeks to improve the sector’s commercial 
and operational efficiency. These results will be achieved through critical investment 
support impacting the sector's financial viability and the quality of service delivery.    
 
Global Objective: The project contributes to reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emissions by addressing the large inefficiencies in the distribution sector and reducing 
energy losses.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support investments that aim at improving (i) existing distribution 
networks and generation capacity for reliable supply; (ii) commercial character of the 
business; and (iii) customer interface. The main rationale of these investments is to create 
value in the Guinean electricity business, demonstrate its viability in a replicable manner 
and to facilitate private sector engagement in the electricity sector in Guinea beginning in 
areas such as billing and collection. Activities such as contracting/outsourcing of services 
are envisaged under this project and no transfer of assets to the private sector is 
anticipated.  The project will also facilitate the development of capacity in Guinea's 
public power utility Electricite de Guinee (EDG) in terms of technical, commercial and 
personnel systems and capabilities.  
Page  2
In order to provide the above support, the project is structured into three components: 
Component I - Commercial Reorientation of the Electricity Sector Toolkit (CREST);  
 
Component II - Rehabilitation of Critical Generation; and Component III 
–
Institutional 
Strengthening and Technical Assistance.  
 
Component 1: CREST.: The project would support investments in goods and services 
related to implementation of the following initiatives under the CREST Efficiency 
improvement program (4.2 million USD):  
 
(a) HVDS 
 
 
(b) 
HT Trivector meters for HV loads  
 
(c) 
LT Trivector meters (CT operated) for LV commercial loads above 20 KW  
 
(d) 
Single phase and three phase meters (whole current) for LV loads below 20 KW 
with AMR facility  
 
(e) 
Reactive power compensation by installation of online capacitors  
 
(f) 
Set up of customer care centers  
 
(g) 
Introduction of spot billing  
 
(h) 
Launch of rapid response vehicles  
 
(i)         GIS/GPS  systems for AM/FM operations  
 
These investments will strengthen the distribution infrastructure, improve quality of 
supply and customer satisfaction, and reduce losses.  Existing equipment will be replaced 
by more efficient models in the project areas.  However, existing equipments will not be 
disposed and will be used for distribution of electricity in less critical locations not 
covered by the project.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation of Critical Generation.(1.0 million USD for Tombo 
thermal plant Unit III and 1.0 million USD for Garafiri Hydro facility)  Investment 
support would be provided to EDG, through this project to improve the efficiency of the 
existing Garafiri Hydropower plant and the Tombo Thermal generation plant. This will 
be in the form of assistance for critically required equipment and spare parts. This 
support is critical in view of the worsening generation scenario in Guinea. The thermal 
and hydro facilities are in dire need of maintenance and rehabilitation. Efforts to improve 
generation availability would complement and reinforce the Government’s initiative to 
improve commercial discipline andoperational performance of EDG.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Technical Assistance  
 
3.1 Energy effciency and conservation:. The project recognizes the need to sustain and 
scale up the efficiency gains that will occur in the sector through these investments by 
promoting demand side management (DSM) measures .Accordingly it would assist 
development of an appropriate framework and institutional capacity for energy efficiency 
and conservation programs;  
 
3.2 Private sector capacity development:  The project would assist development of 
capcity of the private sector to participate in the sector the aim of improving the 
Page  3
electricity sector's financial viability.  These could include outsourcing of various 
distribution functions and Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) among other approaches;  
 
3.3 Financial and accounting systems: It is essential that the EDG ring fences the 
generation transmission and distribution businesses and in turn identifies the real costs for 
each of those functions. This would facilitate improvement of operational efficiencies 
through a profit center approach on one hand and efficient tariff setting on the other 
leading to commercial efficiencies. The project would assist in capacity building and 
provision of appropriate infrastructure for development of financial and accounting 
systems towards achieving this objective.  
 
3.4 MIS and operational IT support: The project would support initiatives leading to 
capacity building and infrastructure support (in various areas such as anti theft measures, 
energy audit and remote metering techniques), MIS systems, customer billing and HR 
data bases etc.  
 
US $7.2 million (IDA) is expected to be the credit under the project. However, 
simultaneously US $ 2 million would be available from the proposed restructuring of the 
Decentralized Rural electrification project to complement these activities. GEF is being 
approached separately (Associated GEF project P 098742) to assist with support for 
energy efficiency improvements to the tune of US $ 5 million. The project is essentially a 
pilot operation to assist the utility to improve commercial and operational efficiencies.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component I will be implemented in Conakry, Guinea's capital. Component II will be 
implemented in Garafiri at the site of the hydropower plant and Tombo Thermal plant 
near Conakry. Under component I, existing networks will be rehabilitated with new 
transformers, conductors, meters etc (about 4 million USD under the proposed project). 
Existing equipments will not be disposed and will be used for distribution of electricity in 
less critical locations not covered by the project Under Component II, the project will 
mostly involve supply of critical spare parts for replacement of existing/absent equipment 
in the two generation facilities (about 1 million USD each for the thermal and hydro 
facilities). Component III would provide technical assistance in terms of billing, customer 
data bases, demand and load forecast studies, energy efficiency programs etc.( about 1.2 
million).  
 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The borrower's institutional capacity to implement safeguard policies is estimated to be 
medium to low. The Borrower is currently implementing one other Project in rural 
electrification under which some capacity in the area has been built.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTEG) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
 
Comments:   
