Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1845 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/08/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea-Bissau 
Project ID: P097975 
Project Name: Multi-sector Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Boris Enrique Utria 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Power (60%);Water supply (25%);Roads and highways (15%) 
Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Other urban 
development (P);Water resource management (P);Conflict prevention and post-conflict 
reconstruction (P);Technology diffusion (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Development Objectives (DO) of the proposed “Multi-sector Infrastructure Rehabilitation 
Project (MIRP)” are to: (i) support the economic reactivation of the economy through the 
rehabilitation of critical infrastructure systems; (ii) contribute towards the reduction of poverty 
through the restoration of access to and quality of critical infrastructure services; (iii) improve 
the performance and governance of the infrastructure sectors through the institutional 
development and operational strengthening of the key sectorial agencies/actors (electricity, water 
and roads).  
 
In addition to strengthening the relevant sectorial institution through institutional and capacity 
development support activities, the project will pursue the following sectorial-level development 
objectives:  
 
(i)  
In the energy sector, to restore the access, reliability and quality of electricity supplies 
and services in Bissau by: (a) supporting the rehabilitation of electricity production; (b) 
supporting the rehabilitation and reinforcement of electricity distribution; and (c) improving 
Page  2
sector management, pricing and cost recovery through the introduction of public/private 
partnership in the sector in the generation and commercial operation activities;  
 
(ii)  
In the water sector, to restore access to water supply services in Bissau by: (a) the 
rehabilitation of water production and distribution networks and (b), improving sector 
management, pricing and cost recovery through public/private partnership; and,  
 
(iii)   In the urban roads sector, to improve sector planning and management capacity by: (a) 
supporting institutional and capacity development of the Ministry of Public Works, Construction 
and Town Planning; (b) assisting the GoGB to mobilize and coordinate donor investment 
support; (c)  assist the GoGB to implement a second generation road fund; and, (d) financing a 
limited set of road rehabilitation works.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Multi-Sector Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (MIRP) will be composed of 
three main components: (i) Restoration/Rehabilitation of Generation Capacity, Urban 
Distribution and Commercial Management in the Power Sector; (ii) Rehabilitation of Water 
Production, Treatment and Urban Distribution; and, (iii) Institutional Development and Limited 
Rehabilitation of Urban Road Infrastructure.    Taking into account the difficult context of the 
country (political/economical/social) and the limited operational capacity of the relevant public 
institutions and EAGB, the proposed project would be implemented following a flexible 
approach, allowing for the parallel implementation of the institutional development actions/plans 
and the proposed investment program.  
 
Component 1: Restoration of Generation Capacity, Distribution and Commercial Management  
in the Power Sector (US $9.5 million)  
 
Sub-Component 1.1: Institutional and Capacity Development Support  
 
This sub-component will finance institutional and capacity development support for the 
Ministry of Energy and of EAGB to achieve the development of the sector and the improvement 
of the technical and financial management of the sector’s assets.  This sub-component will 
comprise:  
 
(i) 
Institutional and capacity development of the Ministry of Energy;  
 
(ii) 
Preparation and implementation of a comprehensive re-organization plan for EAGB, 
including a staff redeployment and productivity enhancement program;  
 
(iii) 
Technical assistance to the Ministry of Energy and EAGB for the elaboration of a 
efficient and transparent electricity tariff structure and indexation formula;  
 
(iv) 
Preparation of a “Medium-to Long Term National Energy Development Strategy”, 
specifically including least-cost and renewable energy options capable of supporting the 
establishment of a sustainable national energy platform; and,  
 
(v) 
Elaboration of a National Energy Sector Investment and Resource Mobilization Plan.  
 
Sub-Component 1.2:  Restoration of Power Production Capacity  
Page  3
This sub-component will finance the setting-up of a 15 to 20 MW Leasing/Operate/Maintain 
(LOM) scheme by an independent private operator to restore power generation capacity in the 
country up to the pre-conflict levels, and the establishment of a minimum stock of critical spare 
parts to maintain the existing functional generation units in workable con
ditions as EAGB’s 
back-up generation system.  This sub-component will comprise:  
 
(i) 
Commissioning and de-commissioning costs of the 15-20 MW LOM scheme;  
 
(ii) 
Rehabilitation of the existing fuel storage system to support the efficient operation of the 
LOM scheme;  
 
(iii) 
Training of EAGB staff on the operation, maintenance  and management of the leased 
power generation system (capacity development);  
 
(iv) 
Establishment of a minimum stock of critical spare parts for existing functional 
generation units, and control and safety systems at EAGB (back-up generation system); and,  
 
(v) 
Implementation of environmental clean-up and mitigation measures at the EAGB power 
utility complex.  
 
Sub-Component 1.3: Rehabilitation and Reinforcement of the Urban Distribution Network  
 
This sub-component will finance the rehabilitation and reinforcement of the urban power 
distribution network.  This sub-component will comprise:  
 
(i) 
Rehabilitation of segments of the existing urban distribution network;  
 
(ii) 
Replacement of transformers;  
 
(iii) 
Reinforcement/upgrading of sectors of the network from 6kV to 10kV;  
 
(iv) 
Establishment of necessary equipment pool for the maintenance of the urban distribution 
network; and,  
 
(v) 
Training of EAGB staff on the operation, maintenance and management of the power 
distribution network.  
 
Sub-Component 1.4: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Commercial Management System  
 
This sub-component will finance the rehabilitation and improvement of the commercial 
management of EAGB though the establishment of an independent private sector commercial 
management operation based on pre-payment meters.   This sub-component will comprise:  
 
(i) 
Installation, maintenance and management of 15,000 commercial and residential 
costumer electricity pre-payment meters by an independent private sector operator for a period of 
3-5 years;  
 
(ii) 
Preparation and implementation of an electricity costumer education/awareness program; 
and,  
 
(iii) 
Technical assistance to EAGB and training of personnel on the installation, maintenance 
and management of pre-payment commercial customer system.  
 
Sub-Component 1.5: Development of “Green Power” and Renewable Energy Options  
 
Page  4
This sub-component will finance studies and 
two small “green power” demonstration projects 
to support the development of renewable energy options in Guinea Bissau, with a emphasis on 
exploring the linkage between the development of the country’s agro-industrial base and, both, 
its energy input requirements and its potential to contribute to the country’s energy supply 
matrix.  This sub-component will comprise:  
 
(i) 
A comprehensive assessment of the potential to sustainably produce modern energy 
(power and other fuels) from the country’s existing and potential agro-industrial and forestry 
base (agricultural/agro-industrial and forestry residues and bi-products, energy crops, woody 
biomass, etc.); and,  
 
(ii) 
Technical assistance and funding support for the installation of two small (<330 kva) 
decentralized biomass-based power generation systems at: (a) CICAJU enterprise (Bissau); and 
(b) LICAJU enterprise (Bolama).   This plant will produce sufficient excess renewable power to 
restore the supply of electricity to the city of Bolama. The two sub-projects will be set-up as 
limited public/private partnerships and will include the full repayment of the funding facility 
provided by the government to the private sector operators.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation of Water Production, Treatment and Urban Distribution (US $6 
Million)  
 
Sub-Component 2.1: Institutional Development and Capacity Building Support.  
 
This component will finance the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Institutional development: Support the preparation and implementation of the urban water 
sector reform, ensure successful public-private partnership (PPP) to improve EAGB’s 
performance, and help implement provisions of the LSP (regulatory framework, tariff policy, 
management of public standpipes, etc.. ) through technical assistance, consulting services and 
public communication; and,  
 
(ii) 
Capacity Building: increase the efficiency of EAGB and public entities involved in the 
water sector by strengthening their capacities in management and planning, through technical 
assistance and training.  
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Rehabilitation of Urban Water Production, Treatment and Urban 
Distribution.  
 
This component will finance:  
 
(i) 
Rehabilitation and reinforcement of water production and distribution networks in the 
city of Bissau, through the implementation of an already identified investment program 
including: the construction of a new reservoir (700 m3) within the existing water treatment plant 
in Bissau, the replacement of 38 km of old asbestos pipes in the primary and secondary water 
distribution networks;  
 
Page  5
(ii) 
Expansion of the tertiary distribution networks along the existing road network, to 
unserved areas, installation and/or replacement of about 7000 water connections; and, 
Equipments and logistical supplies to EAGB: water analysis kits, operation tools and vehicles.  
 
Component 3:  Rehabilitation of Urban Road Infrastructure (US $4 Million)  
 
Sub-Component 3.1: Institutional and Capacity Development Support  
 
This component will finance the institutional and capacity development needs of the Ministry 
of Public Works to enable it to effectively manage its resources and efficiently run its road and 
water sanitation rehabilitation, construction and maintenance works, and to enable it to 
effectively discharge its sectorial planning, policy making and regulatory responsibilities.  This 
sub-component is meant to back-up the reforms undertaken in the road sector (strategy, sectorial, 
road fund).  In additional to institutional strengthening support, the Ministry will receive 
technical assistance to: (i) draft a policy letter or sectorial strategy; (ii) review the decree relative 
to the institution of a second generation road fund; and, (iii) identify capacity building needs and 
design the corresponding training programs and strategies.  
 
Sub-Component 3.2: Limited Rehabilitation of Urban Road Infrastructure  
 
Within the project’s resource constraint, this sub-component will finance:  
 
(i) 
Technical assistance to the GoGB to mobilize and coordinate donor investment support 
for the roads sector;  
 
(ii) 
Technical assistance to the GoGB for the implementation of a “Second Generation Road 
Fund”; and,  
 
(iii) 
Rehabilitation of a limited number roads in Bissau’s primary and/or secondary network to 
contribute to improve mobility in and around the city.   The roads to be rehabilitated (resurfacing 
and reparation of "pot holes") within the available resource envelope will be selected following 
the standard methodology for that purpose (i.e., economic analysis, whereby axes with an 
internal rate of return that exceeds a 12% threshold and have a visible economic and social 
impact will be prioritized). Additionally, the option to give priority to rehabilitation solutions 
using high-intensity labour, such as pave, will also be considered in order to contribute towards 
poverty reduction thought employment generation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
City of Bissau and Island of Bolama.  In Bolama the project will install a 330 kva biomass-based 
(cashew shells) power co-generation unit within an existing cashew processing facility to 
generate power for the operation of the plant and to restore power supplies for the City of 
Bolama.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity for implementing safeguard policies is limited, however, 
implementation of this project will contribute towards a strengthening of this capacity.   
 
Page  6
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy will apply because the project will support mitigation measures designed to 
address some of the environmental liabilities at the EAGB power utility complex.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/16/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Borrower is in the process of preparing an Environmental Audit of the power utility in 
Bissau, the Environmental Audit report is expected to be available in January 2006. The 
SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibility.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Boris Enrique Utria 
12/07/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/08/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
02/08/2006 
Comments:   
