Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2289 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/12/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P091297 
Project Name: Urban III - Phase II 
Task Team Leader: Catherine D. Farvacque-Vi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 8, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (33%);Sanitation (22%);Solid waste 
management (21%);Roads and highways (20%);Central government administration (4%) 
Theme: Municipal finance (P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other 
urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the second phase of the Third Urban Development Program are: (a) to improve 
the provision of infrastructure and services in Conakry and secondary cities; and (b) to improve 
the financial and organizational management of municipalities.  
 
UPD III is an APL and while scaling from phase I to phase II, its overall objectives remain 
unchanged. In phase II, emphasis would be given to the development of the new tools introduced 
in phase I to improve selection and implementation of infrastructure and basic services. By 
integrating almost all the proposed activities into Municipal Contracts (MCs), the Project aims to 
reinforce the capacities of the municipalities and ensure proper operation and maintenance of 
existing assets. The institutional strengthening component and the MCs that would be signed for 
Conakry and secondary cities are key to the creation of an enabling environment for a sustained 
provision of infrastructure and services in the major cities of Guinea.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
Project costs and financing:  
 
The total project would amount to US$15 million for a four-year period (2007-2011) including 
(i) US$15 million IDA credit (ii) US$1 million counterpart funding from the GOG and (iii) 
US$1 million counterpart funding from the Governorate of Conakry, the five communes of 
Conakry  and municipalities in secondary cities.  
 
Urban III phase 1 was based on the following financing principles:  
 
-
Primary investments: 90 % IDA + 10 % central government counterpart funding,  
 
-
Secondary roads maintenance: IDA credit + annual counterpart funding from Conakry 
and the 5 communes  
 
-
Municipal contracts in secondary Cities: 90 % IDA + 5% central government counterpart 
funding + 5% local governments funding.  
 
These conditions will be reviewed during the preparation of phase 2 to take into account the 
latest policies on national counterpart funding in Guinea.  
 
Project design:  
 
The project will be based on the municipal contract approach that has proved to be successful 
during Urban III phase 1. The objective of a municipal contract is to reach a consensual and 
contractual agreement on a three / four year adjustment and investment program. The municipal 
contract is based on a highly participatory process during which municipal audits are carried out 
by local consultants under the supervision of the Bank and the Project Coordination Team. The 
process of data collection and validation of conclusions involves close consultation with mayors, 
members of city councils, private operators, community groups and neighborhood leaders. In this 
process, two audits are carried out concomitantly: (a) the urban audit has for main objective to 
gather baseline information on existing level of infrastructure and services, patterns of 
urbanization, and pockets of poverty. Data collected through the inventory of public 
infrastructure and services (IPIE) carried out as part of the urban audit help identify levels of 
services and poverty zones in urban areas. The audit also leads to the identification of a coherent 
set of priority investment projects (PIP) and maintenance works, the value of which corresponds 
to the budget envelope determined by the financial audit; (b) the financial and organizational 
audit has for main objective to assess the municipality's financial health and management 
structure, determine its capacity and therefore the volume of investments to which it can aspire, 
and identify a set of pragmatic adjustment measures the municipality is willing to take to 
improve its management and finances (Municipal Adjustment Program).  
 
Project components:  
 
The project would have three components: (i) City of Conakry Program (a municipal contract 
for Conakry + Conakry primary infrastructure); (ii) Municipal Contracts for secondary cities; and 
(iii) institutional strengthening.  
 
Component 1: City of Conakry Program  
 
This component would include two subcomponents to support the delivery of services and 
infrastructure in Conakry. The activities would be carried out through two subcomponents:  
Page  3
Subcomponent 1: Conakry Municipal Contract: a Municipal contract would be signed between 
the GOG, the city of Conakry and the five communes of Conakry to deliver activities identified 
during an urban, organizational and financial audit of the city, including:  
 
(i) Solid waste management: The sub-component would continue supporting the waste 
management system of Conakry set up during phase 1 by: (i) consolidating the waste collection 
system through support to SMEs (training, guarantee fund, management of contracts); (ii) 
consolidating the waste transfer system through support to SPTD financial management and 
asset replacement fund and (iii) consolidating the improvement of the landfill of La Miniere 
(construction of the compost unit and set up of a carbon finance mechanism).  
 
(ii) Neighborhood upgrading: The sub component would continue the program implemented 
during phase 1 in supporting the secondary roads improvement in poorly serviced and densely 
populated neighborhoods. The urban audit will provide the basis for a coherent four year 
programming of secondary roads rehabilitation (PROP) and routine maintenance operations 
(PLIC). As a follow-up to phase I, the programming and oversight of works implemented by the 
private sector will be carried out by the technical services of the City of Conakry (CVS). The 5 
communes through their technical services would be involved in the programming process, 
participate in bid opening and handover of works to the cities.  
 
(iii) Municipal infrastructure/facilities.  The urban audit carried out in a participatory manner 
with local governments and the civil society will provide the basis for the identification of a list 
of priority investments.  Eligible categories can be municipal infrastructure and facilities such as 
markets, bus stations, public administration buildings, schools, health centers, social facilities.  
 
Sub-component 2: Priority infrastructure in Conakry  
 
Primary roads infrastructure in Conakry started under the Urban II project and were pursued 
under Urban III phase 1. It was initially envisaged to finance Voie Express and T7 under the 
APL phase 2. Technical studies of this priority infrastructure have been carried out during phase 
I. Based on these studies, part of the Voie Express has been executed by the GOG with Kuwaitis 
Funds as well as the north section of road T7 executed under national budget funding. The 
estimated cost (US$23 million in 2002) of the remaining part of Voie Express, that would lead 
Conakry to the rest of the country and create an access to the site of the Kagbelen landfill, 
largely exceeds the envelope that IDA can allocate to the subcomponent. The GOG will need to 
identify potential financial partners and discuss co-financing schemes. The proposed works 
under phase 2 would therefore focus solely if IDA financing is available on the south portion of 
road T7, supporting the development of economic activities in Conakry through the 
improvement of traffic at troublesome bottlenecks. The T7 portion would extend the primary 
road framework by the construction of about 3 kilometers of roads. Under Phase 1 of the APL, 
the right of way of T7 was preserved, and this did not entail any displacement of population 
when they demarcated the ROW as the land was not in use. The actual construction of this 
portion of T7 will only be carried out if the IDA credit is large enough to accommodate this 
component.  
 
Component 2: Municipal contracts for secondary cities  
 
Page  4
This component would consist in the follow-up implementation of municipal contracts, which 
proved to be largely successful during phase 1, demonstrating strong commitment of 
municipalities and satisfactory counterpart funding on their part. The component will focus on 10 
cities: (i) 7 cities having implemented a first tranche of municipal contract during phase 1, which 
are Kindia, Kankan, Labe, Nzerekore, Mamou, Faranah and Kissidougou and; (ii) 3 cities, Boke, 
Macenta and Siguiri, ready to sign a municipal contract. The second tranche of municipal 
contracts, including Priority Infrastructure Programs (PIPs) and Adjustment Programs (PACs), 
will be based on a list of actions identified during the audits of phase 1 that exceeded largely the 
funding possibilities of phase1. Following up on the first phase implementation of the city 
contracts, a special emphasis will be placed on Municipal adjustment programs in order to 
improve (i) the financial sustainability of city management through improved mobilization of 
local revenues and (ii) the administrative and technical capacity of municipal staff.  
 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening  
 
This component would focus on institutional strengthening activities already started under 
project phase 1, support activities that would be implemented alongside the Contrat de Ville and 
improve the management of cities.  
 
It would include the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Adressage: (1) update of communes of Dixinn, Matam and Kaloum; (2) adressage in 
Ratoma and Matoto; (3) adressage in secondary cities;  
 
(ii) 
 Improvement of local resources: (4) fiscal registers improvement in Kaloum, Matam, 
Ratoma and Matoto; (5) improvement of local revenues shares in secondary cities; (6) support to 
the DNI for local revenues collection;  
 
(iii) 
Improvement of local governments budget documents: (7) fiscal and budgetary manual 
for urban communes; (8) support to the DNI in computerizing budgetary data ; (9) update of the 
ratio financial guide;  
 
(iv) 
Intergovernmental transfers: (10) set up of a fund transfer with identification of a 
sustainable fund envelope and transparent mechanisms for resources allocation to local 
governments.  ;  
 
(v) 
Urban management improvement: (11) Urban atlas; (12) update of the PUR (Plans 
Urbains de Reference) of the 10 secondary cities; (13) strategic urbanization study for the city of 
Conakry; (14) support to MUH;  
 
(vi) 
Project coordination: support to Project Coordination team;  
 
(vii) 
Communication and dissemination activities with a focus on Contrat de ville 
methodology and implementation, waste management and fiscal revenues as well as awareness 
activities at the municipal level to combat corruption practices.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Conakry, Kindia, Kankan, Labe, Nzerekore, Mamou, Faranah and Kissidougou and; (ii) 3 cities, 
Boke, Macenta and Siguiri.  
 
As the exact location and type of infrastructure investments are not known prior to appraisal, 
the project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure that futire investments are screened for 
potential adverse environmental and social imapcts and appropriate mitigation measures are 
implemented and monitored during project implementation.   
Page  5
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
strong coordination unit is in place which has proved successful in the completion of phase I 
of the APL in respect of safeguard policies. The PPF includes two studies on the resettlement 
framework, and the social and environmental impact framework which will assess the capacity 
of local counterparts and provide concrete recommendations for improvement.  To ensure safe 
medical waste management at the health centers, the Borrower will implement the relevant 
provisions of the existing National medical Waste Management Plan; this plan will be 
redisclosed as part of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
 
Further details on insitutional responsibility and capacity are as follows:  
 
Project implementation arrangements:  
 
The Government of Guinea will be responsible for (i) implementation of project activities (ii) 
timely mobilization of local counterpart funding; (iii) undertaking reforms and commitments as 
needed to ensure successful implementation and; (iv) coordinating donors participation in the 
project preparation, financing and implementation.  
 
The City of Conakry and all eligible municipalities will be responsible for: (i) defining MCs 
contents in consultation with communities, private operators and civil society; (ii) ensuring 
proper implementation of the MCs in line with safeguard policies; and (iii) meeting their 
requirements in terms of counterpart funds.  
 
The Project Coordination Team has succeeded under phase 1 in consolidating a lot of technical 
and contract management expertise within and beyond the administration, and in working closely 
with the municipalities. It helped develop technical capacity of central agencies and municipal 
technical teams through their involvement in the project implementation: DATU (Division de 
Voirie Primaire) has been able through support from the project to carry out in-house the 
technical studies of T7 and Voie Express. DNI (Direction des Impots) has worked closely with 
the Street Addressing Unit on the updating of the tax base of Conakry. The Division de Voirie 
Secondaire located within the Technical Services of the City of Conakry along with the five 
municipalities of Conakry have worked closely on the selection and rehabilitation of secondary 
road/drainage networks under the neighborhood upgrading. The SPTD has been supported in its 
streamlined mission of solid waste transfer and landfill management. The elected officials and 
technical and financial services of the municipalities participating in municipal contracts have 
been major players in the municipal audits and the execution of programs included in their 
municipal contracts. All of these entities have had hands-on training on municipal management 
and delivery of municipal services. Based on the experience of Phase 1, the Project Coordination 
Team will continue to facilitate the timely implementation of the project in close collaboration 
with all parties involved.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
 
Page  6
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The policy is triggered due to project activities such as the provision of markets, public 
administration buildings, health centers, bus stations, and social facilities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There is no foreseen involuntary resettlement as most investments will be either 
rehabilitation of existing facilities. However, the policy will be triggered if needed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/29/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
-
ESMF: September-December 2006  
 
-
RPF: September-December 2006  
 
As the exact location and type of infrastructure investments are not known prior to 
appraisal, the project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure that futire investments are 
screened for potential adverse environmental and social imapcts and appropriate mitigation 
measures are implemented and monitored during project implementation.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Catherine D. Farvacque-Vitkovic 
07/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard Verspyck 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
