Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1851 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/13/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P077317 
Project Name: Guinea Electricity Sector Efficiency Improvement 
Task Team Leader: Prasad V. S. N. Tallaprag 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Project Development Objective: The project seeks to improve the sector’s commercial and 
operational efficiency. These results will be achieved through critical investment support 
impacting the sector's financial viability and the quality of service delivery.    
 
Global Objective: The project contributes to reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions by 
addressing the large inefficiencies in the distribution sector and reducing energy losses.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support investments that aim at improving (i) existing distribution networks and 
generation capacity for reliable supply; (ii) commercial character of the business; and (iii) 
customer interface. The main rationale of these investments is to create value in the Guinean 
electricity business, demonstrate its viability in a replicable manner and to facilitate private 
sector engagement in the electricity sector in Guinea beginning in areas such as billing and 
collection. Activities such as contracting/outsourcing of services are envisaged under this project 
and no transfer of assets to the private sector is anticipated.  The project will also facilitate the 
development of capacity in Guinea's public power utility Electricite de Guinee (EDG) in terms of 
technical, commercial and personnel systems and capabilities.  
Page  2
In order to provide the above support, the project is structured into three components: 
Component I - Commercial Reorientation of the Electricity Sector Toolkit (CREST); Component 
II - Rehabilitation of Critical Generation; and Component III 
–
Institutional Strengthening and 
Technical Assistance.  
 
Component 1: CREST.: The project would support investments in goods and services related to 
implementation of the following initiatives under the CREST Efficiency improvement program 
(4.2 million USD):  
 
(a) HVDS 
 
 
(b) 
HT Trivector meters for HV loads  
 
(c) 
LT Trivector meters (CT operated) for LV commercial loads above 20 KW  
 
(d) 
Single phase and three phase meters (whole current) for LV loads below 20 KW with 
AMR facility  
 
(e) 
Reactive power compensation by installation of online capacitors  
 
(f) 
Set up of customer care centers  
 
(g) 
Introduction of spot billing  
 
(h) 
Launch of rapid response vehicles  
 
(i)     GIS/GPS  systems for AM/FM operations  
 
These investments will strengthen the distribution infrastructure, improve quality of supply and 
customer satisfaction, and reduce losses.  Existing equipment will be replaced by more efficient 
models in the project areas.  However, existing equipment will not be disposed and will be used 
for distribution of electricity in less critical locations not covered by the project.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation of Critical Generation (1.0 million USD for Tombo thermal plant 
Unit III and 1.0 million USD for Garafiri Hydro facility). Investment support would be provided 
to EDG, through this project to improve the efficiency of the existing Garafiri Hydropower plant 
and the Tombo Thermal generation plant. This will be in the form of assistance for critically 
required equipment and spare parts. This support is critical in view of the worsening generation 
scenario in Guinea. The thermal and hydro facilities are in dire need of maintenance and 
rehabilitation. Efforts to improve generation availability would complement and reinforce the 
Government’s initiative to improve commercial discipline andoperational performance of EDG.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Technical Assistance  
 
3.1 Energy efficiency and conservation: The project recognizes the need to sustain and scale up 
the efficiency gains that will occur in the sector through these investments by promoting demand 
side management (DSM) measures. Accordingly it would assist development of an appropriate 
framework and institutional capacity for energy efficiency and conservation programs.  
 
3.2 Private sector partnerships:  The project would assist identification and development of 
areas where the private sector can intervene with the aim of improving the electricity sector's 
financial viability.  These could include outsourcing of various distribution functions and Energy 
Service Companies (ESCOs) among other approaches.  
 
Page  3
3.3 Financial and accounting systems: It is essential that the EDG ring fences the generation 
transmission and distribution businesses and in turn identifies the real costs for each of those 
functions. This would facilitate improvement of operational efficiencies through a profit center 
approach on one hand and efficient tariff setting on the other leading to commercial efficiencies. 
The project would assist in capacity building and provision of appropriate infrastructure for 
development of financial and accounting systems towards achieving this objective.  
 
3.4 MIS and operational IT support: The project would support initiatives leading to capacity 
building and infrastructure support (in various areas such as anti theft measures, energy audit and 
remote metering techniques), MIS systems, customer billing and HR data bases etc.  
 
US $7.2 million (IDA) is expected to be the credit under the project. However, simultaneously 
US $ 2 million would be available from the proposed restructuring of the Decentralized Rural 
electrification project to complement these activities. GEF is being approached separately 
(Associated GEF project P 098742) to assist with support for energy efficiency improvements to 
the tune of US $ 5 million. The project is essentially a pilot operation to assist the utility to 
improve commercial and operational efficiencies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component I will be implemented in Conakry, Guinea's capital. Component II will be 
implemented in Garafiri at the site of the hydropower plant and Tombo Thermal plant near 
Conakry. Under component I, existing networks will be rehabilitated with new transformers, 
conductors, meters etc (about 4 million USD under the proposed project). Existing equipment 
will not be disposed and will be used for distribution of electricity in less critical locations not 
covered by the project Under Component II. The project will mostly involve supply of critical 
spare parts for replacement of existing/absent equipment in the two generation facilities (about 1 
million USD each for the thermal and hydro facilities). Component III would provide technical 
assistance in terms of billing, customer data bases, demand and load forecast studies, energy 
efficiency programs etc.(about 1.2 million).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower's institutional capacity to implement safeguard policies is estimated to be medium 
to low. The Borrower is currently implementing one other Project in rural electrification under 
which some capacity in the area has been built.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTSD) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Project's Environmental Category is C, which reflects the fact that the proposed 
investments are essentially for replacement of and/or improvement on existing equipment. 
Moreover, this project is essentially in the nature of a pilot operation focusing on 
improvement of commercial and technical efficiencies, mainly in Conakry, the main 
urban/peri urban settlement of the country. These investments do not have any environmental 
or social safeguard implications as such, by themselves and disposal of existing equipment is 
not planned. Hence no environmental or safeguard policies are triggered by investments 
proposed in the current project.  However, recognizing the possibility that substantial 
environmental or social concerns may be incumbent on existing facilities, the borrower has 
commenced work on environmental audit of the generation facilities and the preparation of 
an Environmental and Social Management Framework for the distribution facilities. Once 
this work is completed (by May 2006), it is expected to provide appropriate framework and 
guidance for follow up action in this regard.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of safeguards responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Prasad V. S. N. Tallapragada 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joel J. Maweni 
 
Comments:   
