Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/17/2006 
Report No.:  AC2155
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea-Bissau 
Project ID:  P097975 
Project Name:  Multi-sector Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Boris Enrique Utria 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 8, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Power (60%);Water supply (25%);Roads and highways (15%) 
Theme:  State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Other urban 
development (P);Water resource management (P);Conflict prevention and post-conflict 
reconstruction (P);Technology diffusion (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
WEST AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objectives (DO) of the proposed “Multi-sector Infrastructure 
Rehabilitation Project (MIRP)” are to: (i)to improve the institutional and management 
capacity and governance in the power, water and roads sectors; (ii) to restore the access, 
reliability and quality of electricity supplies and services in the city of Bissau to pre-
conflict levels; (iii) to restore and increase access to and quality of water supply services 
in the city of Bissau to the pre-conflict levels; and, (iv) to restore urban mobility in the 
city of Bissau.  
 
The project will pursue the outcomes by component:  
 
(i) 
Institutional development and Sectorial studies:  (a) reform of EAGB 
implemented with PSP in generation, commercial and financial operations of the power 
and water utility; (b) preparation of long-term / Least-cost “National Energy 
Development Strategy”; (c) technical assistance support and training provided to EAGB’s 
staff (power and water); (d) new tariff policies adopted in the power and water sectors; 
and, (e) transport strategy and road investment plan elaborated and Adopted;  
Page  2
(ii) 
For the energy sector: (a) increase of electricity generation from 2.6 MW to 
15MW by PS operator with international technical performance standards; (b) 
demonstrate technical and economic feasibility of biomass co-generation; (c) increase 
carrying capacity of the T&D network from 11,500 Mwh/yr flows to 65,700 Mwh/yr 
flows; (d) improve management capacity of EAGB and reduce T&D losses to below 
10%; and, (e) increase in collection of electricity bills from 40% to 100% by PS operator;  
 
(iii) 
For the water sector: (a) reduce water losses from 70% in 2006 to 50% by the end 
of the project, through rehabilitation works on water distribution networks; (b) increase 
water storage capacity by 68% through the construction of a new 700 m3 reservoir; and, 
(c) increase direct access to potable water by 17.5% in Bissau (8,450 additional people 
connected to the water distribution system) through extensions of tertiary distribution 
networks and installation of paid connections; and,  
 
(iv) 
For the roads sector: (a) linear extension (km) of roads with improved mobility 
throug
h
rehabilitation of ”hot spots”; and (b) percentage of reduction of the transit time 
for public transport services on the roads rehabilitated.   
 
3. Project Description 
3.1 
The proposed Multi-Sector Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (MIRP) will be 
composed of four main components: (i) Institutional Development and Sectorial Studies; 
(ii) Restoration/Rehabilitation of the Power System; (iii) Rehabilitation of Water 
Production, Treatment and Urban Distribution; and, (iv) Limited Rehabilitation of Urban 
Road Infrastructure.  Taking into account the difficult context of the country 
(political/economical/social) and the limited operational capacity of the relevant public 
institutions and EAGB, the proposed project would be implemented following a flexible 
approach, allowing for the parallel implementation of the institutional development 
actions/plans and the proposed investment program. Annex 8 presents a detailed 
description of the project.  
 
Component 1: Institutional Development and Sectorial Studies (US $2.21 million)  
 
3.2 
This component will undertake institutional and capacity development support 
and sectorial studies for the Ministry of the Economy, State Secretariat for Energy, 
Ministry of Natural Resources, EAGB and Ministry of Public Works, for them to achieve 
the development of the energy, water and road sectors and the improvement of the 
technical and financial management of the respective sectors’assets.   This component 
will finance technical assistance, local and international consultants, a specialized 
financial and accounting software for the utility, and institutional development and 
strengthening support for the Ministry of Economy and, when it is established, of the 
Multi-Sector Regulatory Agency.  
 
3.3 
Sub-Component 1.1: Power sector.  This subcomponent will include: (a) 
preparation and implementation of a re-organization plan for EAGB; (b) technical 
assistance to EAGB for the elaboration of an efficient and transparent electricity tariff 
structure and indexation formula (financed by PSRDP); (c) preparation of an update to 
the Letter of Sector Development Policy; (d) assessment of the potential to produce 
modern bio-energy (“green power” and other biofuels) in the country; (e) preparation of a 
Page  3
“Medium-to-Long Term National Energy Development Strategy”, specifically including 
least-cost and renewable energy options; (f) elaboration of a “National Energy Sector 
Investment and Resource Mobilization Plan”; (g) engineering studies and preparation of 
Bidding Documents for the contracting of the generation leasing system  (LOM scheme), 
for the rehabilitiation of the distribution network, and for the pre-payment metering and 
billing system (financed by PSRDP); and, (h) procurement of a Financial and Accounting 
Management System for EAGB.  
 
3.4 
Sub-component 1.2: Water sector.  This subcomponent will entail: (a) preparation 
and implementation of the urban water sector reform; and, (b) provision of technical 
assistance, training and equipment supplies to increase the efficiency of EAGB and other 
public entities involved in the water sector.  
 
3.5 
Sub-component 1.3: Roads Sector.  This subcomponent will include: (a) 
finalization of the Transport Sector Strategy; (b) preparation of a Road Investment Plan; 
(c) mobilization and coordination donor investment support for the roads sector; (iv) 
participatation in the SSATP initiative;(v) revision/update of the Driver and Licensing 
Act; and, (vi) provision of office equipment and supplies as well as support for cross-
exchanges visits in neighboring countries to the Road Department.  
 
Component 2: Restoration and Rehabilitation of the Power System (US $6.75 million)  
 
3.6 
This component will support a fast-tracked restoration and rehabilitation of power 
generation, distribution, and commercial operations in Bissau.  This objective will be 
achieved through three cross-supporting actions.  The restoration of power generation by 
the establishment of a 3-5 year term 15 MW Leasing/Operate/Maintain (LOM) scheme 
by an independent private operator.  The rehabilitation of the distribution network.  And, 
the rehabilitation of the electricity billing collection system by the establishment and 
operation of an electricity pre-payment meter system (15,000 units) by a private operator.   
All three operational elements of this component will be underpinned by the institutional 
development and sectorial studies included in the project, specially the rebuilding of the 
overall commercial management of EAGB.  
 
3.7 
Sub-Component 2.1:  Restoration of Power Production Capacity.  This sub-
component will finance the setting-up of a 15 MW firm capacity through 
Leasing/Operate/Maintain (LOM) scheme by an independent private operator to restore 
power generation capacity in the country up to the pre-conflict levels.  This sub-
component will be financed by IDA and procured in one package for the leasing of the 
generating equipment (15 MW firm) for three years minimum and extendable to five 
years, and with an option to acquire an additional 5 MW.  The winning bidder will have 
to procure the diesel fuel for the operation of the plant directly, but through a transparent 
procurement process acceptable to IDA and GoGB.  Under this arrangement, the Bank 
will finance: (a) “commissioning and , de-commissioning” costs (transportation and 
installation and removal of the leased generation equipment, and small civil works and 
site preparation costs) for the 15 MW firm LOM scheme; and, (b) implementation of the 
Page  4
environmental mitigation measures, including environmental training, identified within 
the Environmental Audit at the EAGB power utility complex.  
 
3.8 
Similar power generation leasing schemes through an independent power 
producer (IPP) have been successfully set-up within IDA financed projects (Kenya: 
Emergency Power Project, 3425-KE; Tanzania: Emergency Power Supply Project, 3916-
TZ).  Several other LOM schemes are currently in operation in Africa and other parts of 
the world under non-IDA project support (e.g., Senegal, Uganda and Haiti).  
 
3.9 
In support to this sub-component, on March 23, 2006 (Ref. 133/GME/2006) the 
Borrower formally requested IDA guaranteed support by provision of a US $5 million 
IDA Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) covering three months of lease payments and the cost 
of one month fuel supply.  The IDA PRG will be processed subsequently to Board 
approval of the MIRP project.  
 
3.10  Three small decentralized biomass-based (cashew shells) cogeneration 
demonstration projects will be implemented within the context of this sub-component 
(financed by PSRDP) to support the development of renewable power generation options 
in Guinea Bissau, with a emphasis on exploring the linkage between the development of 
the country’s agro-industrial base and, both, its energy input requirements and its 
potential to contribute to the country’s power supply matrix.  
 
3.11  Sub-Component 2.2: Rehabilitation and Reinforcement of the Urban Distribution 
Network.  This sub-component will finance the rehabilitation and extension of the 
distribution system including the upgrading of the distribution voltage to 10 kV for the 
existing leftover of 6 kV system.  This will be financed by BOAD under a single contract 
for supply and erection of the rehabilitation works for the distribution network.  
 
3.12  Sub-Component 2.3: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Commercial 
Management System.  This sub-component will finance the rehabilitation and 
improvement of the commercial management of EAGB though the establishment of an 
independent private sector commercial management (PCM) operation based on pre-
payment meters.This sub-component will comprise of the recruitment, through 
International Competitive Bidding (procured in a single package), of a qualified PCM for 
a
3
to 5 years, who will be responsible for: (i) procurement, installation, maintenance and 
operation of 15,000 commercial and residential costumer electricity pre-payment meters, 
with all the associated equipment; and (ii) preparation and implementation of an 
electricity costumer education/awareness program. This subcomponent will be financed 
by IDA through the PSRDP and the proposed MIRP.  
 
Component 3: Rehabilitation of Water Production, Treatment and Urban Distribution 
(US $4.42 million)  
 
3.13  This component will finance the rehabilitation and reinforcement of water 
production systems in the city of Bissau, for the purpose of reducing existing water 
production and distribution losses, restoring and increasing access to potable water to the 
Page  5
most vulnerable customers in Bissau, and increasing the long-term financial stability of 
the utility through the gradual commercialization of the water supply system and the 
establishment of new paid water connections.  This latter supported by the water saving 
generated from the reduction of production and distribution losses.  
 
3.14  Sub-Component 3.1: Water Production.  This sub-component will include: (a) the 
construction of a new reservoir (700 m3) within the existing premises of EAGB in the 
vicinity of the “August 3, Hopital” and replacement of the pumping system of the 
existing borehole; and (c) letter of credit for required garanteed payments.  
 
3.15  Sub-Component 3.2: Water Distribution.  This sub-component will include: (a) 
replacement of: (i) 3.6 km of primary water distribution networks along existing roads 
(November 14 Avenue and Pansau na Isna Avenue) and (ii), 9 km of tertiary water 
distribution networks in the neighborhood of Ajuda; and, (c) extension of 26.3 km of 
tertiary water distribution networks to unserved areas and the construction of 1,000 water 
connections in the neighborhoods of Luanda and Bandim.  
 
3.16  Sub-Component 3.3: Billing system and Operation tools.  This sub-component 
will include: (a) supply and installation 6,000 water meters; (b) supply and installation of 
11 macro water meters; and, (b) equipments and logistical supplies to EAGB, including 
water analysis kits, fire standpipes, operation tools and vehicles.  
 
Component 4: Limited Rehabilitation of Urban Road Infrastructure (US $3.15 Million)  
 
3.17  Within the project’s resource constraint, this component will finance consultant 
services for feasibility studies and technical design for the set of roads to be rehabilitated 
(resurfacing and reparation of “pot holes").  The main criteria for selection of the roads to 
be rehabilitated will be: (a) the improvement of access to social services and of urban 
mobility for the most vulnerable social groups; and, (b) the standard methodology for that 
purpose (i.e., economic analysis, whereby axes with an internal rate of return that exceeds 
a
12%
threshold and have a visible economic and social impact).  In order to expedite 
implementation of the intended road rehabilitation work from the beginning of project, a 
first smaller study will identify and select the most urgent roads to be treated and a 
subsequent study will select and plan for a second set of road rehabilitation works.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project activities will take place in the City of Bissau, in the Bafata area, 
and on the Island of Bolana. Limited rehabilitation activities in the water and roads 
sectors in Bissau are likely to incur minor environmental and social impacts. The leasing 
of equipment for power generation in Bissau is not expected to incur any negative 
environmental and social impacts, because the equipment will be located inside the 
compound of the power utility. Similarly, the biomass-based cogeneration facilities will 
be located within the compounds of existing cashew processing facilities in Bissau, 
Bafata, and on the Island of Bolana.   
 
Page  6
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main environmental issues under the project relate to (a) existing environmental 
liabilities (soil contamination, water pollution, air and noise pollution) at Bissau's power 
utility and their potential negative impacts on the power generation equipment to be 
leased under the project and located within the power utility; and (b) potential negative 
environmental and social impacts (soil erosion, soil and water pollution, traffic accidents) 
due to limited rehabilitation activities in the roads and water sectors. The biomass-based 
cogeneration demonstration projects will not have any negative environmental and social 
impacts, because they will be located within existing cashew processing facilities, and the 
use of cashew shells for power generation will replace the use of diesel, and will 
eliminate further soil contamination from the oil contained in shells that otherwise are 
traditionally piled outside the processing facilities. The construction of a new reservoir 
will take place within the compound of the water utility, thus not requiring additional 
land.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There will be no potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to the anticipated future 
activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to the project were not relevant, because (i) the decision to lease power 
generation equipment for a period of time before major investments are made will 
actually help to prevent further environmental deterioration in the power sector; (ii)the 
limited rehabilitation measures in the water and roads sectors will be necessary to ensure 
mobility and water supply in critical areas of Bissau; and (iii) the biomass-based 
Page  7
cogeneration facilities will not have negative environmental and social impacts as 
discussed above.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To mitigate the current environmental liabilities at the power utility and to ensure the 
safety of the leased power generation equipment, the Borrower has prepared an 
Environmental Audit (EA)Report, January 2006. The EA report outlines specific 
technical and institutional mitigation measures which will be implemented under the 
project, and it proposes environmental monitoring standards (i.e. for industrial waste 
waters    soil contamination, and emissions values). The project has made provisions 
designed to strengthen the Borrower's capacity to implement and monitor the 
environmental mitigation measures.  
 
To mitigate the potential negative environmental and social impacts of limited 
rehabilitation activities in the water and roads sectors, the Borrower will include 
Environmental Guidelines for Contractors in the bidding documents.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the project are the population of the city of Bissau, of the Bafata 
area, and the population of the Island of Bolama. The Environmental Audit Report was 
prepared in consultations with operators and personnel at the power utility, people living 
in the vicinity of the power utility, as well as representatives of public agencies; it also 
drew on information contained in environmental assessments that were carried out prior 
to the period of civil unrest.  
 
The Environmental Audit Report was disclosed in-country on Janury 24, 2006 at the 
offices of the Government (Project Preparation Unit and at the General Environmental 
Directorate),at the office of the Intenational Union for the Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN), and at the Bank's Infoshop on January 27, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/24/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Boris Enrique Utria 
04/17/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
04/17/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Tanya Lisa Yudelman 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Arun P. Sanghvi 
04/18/2006 
Comments:   
