Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/16/2006 
Report No.: 
 35773
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea 
Project ID:  P081297 
Project Name:  Community-Based Land Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Dirk Nicolaas Prevoo 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (85%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%);General information and communications sector (5%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.70 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
1.00
1.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the GEF Project is to pilot improved land management 
practices in  
 
selected sub-watersheds, thereby increasing the productive potential of arable lands and 
reducing  
 
negative impacts caused by land degradation in these sub-watersheds. The GEF funded 
project  
 
broadens the scope of the multi-donor supported Village Community Support Program 
(VCSP)  
 
by including the land degradation dimension in the development planning process of  
 
communities.  
 
The global objective of the GEF Project is to pilot an integrated cross-sectoral approach 
in  
 
selected sub-watersheds aimed at preventing and where necessary mitigating the causes 
and  
Page  2
negative impacts of land degradation on their structure and functional integrity. This 
approach  
 
will be facilitated by linking up with the VCSP, and by using sub-watersheds as a 
planning basis.   
 
3. Project Description 
In support of the above objectives, the project is adopting an integrated cross-sectoral 
approach  
 
facilitated by linking up with the Second Phase of the Village Communities Support 
Program (baseline program), and by using watersheds as a planning basis. The proposed 
GEF Project will work to integrate the ecological, social and economic dimensions of 
land degradation. Supported activities are fully compatible with OP 15 (sustainable land 
management) and corresponds to GEF strategic priorities for capacity building  
 
and the on-the-ground application of innovative approaches and technologies. The 
project includes the following components: (i) capacity building of communities and 
decentralized agents of relevant technical ministries as appropriate to promote new land 
management techniques, (ii) support to the realization of micro-projects aimed at 
preventing and/or mitigating the impact of land degradation, and (iii) coordination and 
monitoring and  
 
evaluation   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope, but will be piloted in all natural regions. To date, two 
watersheds have been identified as part of project preparation, these are: Kakrima 
(Plateau) and Fatala (Coastal). Within these watershed, pilot sub-watersheds will be 
identified based on clear criteria. Two additional sites in other water basins elsewhere in 
Middle Guinea will be confirmed as part of project appraisal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTS4) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The second phase of the base-
program has a category ‘B’ rating.  The GEF Project is 
likewise classified as a category B project, and was assigned a safeguard screening factor 
S2.  An environmental assessment was carried out in compliance with OP 4.01 and an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Process 
Framework (RPF) were prepared and made publicly available in-country.  The 
environmental assessment and the ESMF were disclosed in-country on February 17, 
2006, and submitted to the Infoshop on the same day.  The RPF was disclosed in-country 
on February 17, 2006 and submitted to the Infoshop on the the same date.  An RPF was 
required because some of the protective measures proposed by the project may lead to 
restrictions in accessing part of the natural resources by the local communities.  The RPF 
spells out the participatory tools and procedures that will be used to associate the local 
communities in the process of decision making and in the management of the natural 
resources in the protected areas.  The project will not acquire land or any other land 
related assets, neither through its natural resources protection component nor through the 
micro-projects that it intends to finance to help the communities generate additional 
sources of income.  Hence no Resettlement Policy Framework was deemed necessary to 
prepare.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main issues would be related to social inclusiveness, access to resources, and the 
cumulative effect of micro-projects, that may individually have manageable impacts, but 
cumulatively have significant impacts.  These issues are addressed in the ESMF and the 
RPF.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The design option retained with its explicit link to the baseline program has the best 
potential for mainstreaming sustainable natural resource use in local development and 
builds upon the strengths of the different agencies involved and addresses weaknesses by 
incorporating numerous, competent partners/stakeholders.By maximizing stakeholder 
participation in project implementation, ownership will be expanded and increase the 
probability that its goals will be achieved within the proposed time frame.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The procedures laid out in the environmental management plan will apply to micro-
projects funded through the GEF Project.  In addition, capacity building was carried out 
as part of project implementation to ensure that procedures will be consistently applied.  
The National Coordination Unit (NCU), established at the Ministry of Planning is 
responsible for ensuring that micro-projects are demand-driven, socially inclusive and 
environmentally sustainable, and can be properly operated and maintained. The NCU has 
Page  4
prepared an annual work program of approved local development plans.  Micro-projects 
that are likely to have negative environmental and/or social impact are identified and go 
through an evaluation based on procedures detailed in the Project Implementation 
Manual. These assessments are carried out by national consultants. The NCU is 
satisfactorily staffed and will have an environmental specialist before start-up of micro-
project financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Local community involvement is critical for the success of the Project and the adoption 
of adapted SLM practcies.  Activities during preparation included local diagnostic and 
stakeholder mapping, surveys, broad-based information workshops and communication 
sessions.  Project start-up activities would include training, field visits, 
village/community meetings and workshops at the project pilot sites.  Project impact 
studies will retain social indicators, which have been developed with participation of 
local communities.  The recommendations of the environmental and social assessment 
were used to define the consultation and disclosure requirements of the RPF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  5
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dirk Nicolaas Prevoo 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
 
Comments:   
