Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2658
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea 
Project ID:  P091297 
Project Name:  Urban III - Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Catherine D. Farvacque-Vitkovic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (33%);Sanitation (22%);Solid waste 
management (21%);Roads and highways (20%);Central government administration (4%) 
Theme:  Municipal finance (P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other 
urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of UDP 3 phase II are: (a) to improve the provision of 
infrastructure and services in Conakry and secondary cities; and (b) to improve the 
financial and organizational management of municipalities in support of the 
decentralization process.   
 
3. Project Description 
The total project will amount to US$16.004 million for a four-year period (2007-2011) 
including (i) US$ 15 million IDA credit, (ii) US$ 1.004 million counterpart funding from 
the GOG, the Governorate of Conakry and the five municipalities , and the 10 secondary 
cities involved in the project.  
 
Project design  
 
The project will be based on the municipal contract approach that has proved to be 
successful through its implementation in seven secondary cities during Urban III phase 1.  
Page  2
The objective of a municipal contract is to reach a consensual and contractual agreement 
on a four-year adjustment and investment program.  The municipal contract is based on a 
highly participatory process during which municipal audits are carried out by local 
consultants under the supervision of the Bank and the Project Coordination Unit (PCU).  
The process of data collection and validation of conclusions involves close consultation 
with mayors, members of city councils, private operators, community groups and 
neighborhood leaders.  In this process, two audits are carried out concomitantly: (a) the 
urban audit has for main objective to gather baseline information on existing level of 
infrastructure and services, patterns of urbanization, and pockets of poverty, data 
collected through the inventory of public infrastructure and services (IPIE) carried out as 
part of the urban audit help identify levels of services and poverty zones in urban areas, 
the audit also leads to the identification of a coherent set of priority investment projects 
(PIP) and maintenance works, the value of which corresponds to the budget envelope 
determined by the financial audit; and (b) the financial and organizational audit has for 
main objective to assess the municipality?s financial health and management structure, 
determine its capacity and therefore the volume of investments to which it can aspire, and 
identify a set of pragmatic adjustment measures the municipality is willing to take to 
improve its management and finances (Municipal Adjustment Program).  
 
The experience of phase 1 municipal contracts in secondary cities demonstrated that 
municipalities see the benefits of a contractual arrangement that facilitate their 
involvement in the choices made and the actual implementation of the program.  Based 
on the satisfactory implementation of the municipal contract, the second phase of the 
project will introduce the MC approach in the city of Conakry and the five municipalities 
of Conakry.  Municipal Adjustment Programs (MAPs) will support: (i) improvement in 
the management of municipal services (organization, training, small equipment); (ii) 
improvement in municipal revenue mobilization and budget control; and (iii) municipal 
assets management.  The project?s phase 2 will put a stronger emphasis on the 
municipalities? financial commitments in terms of assets maintenance. MCs will take into 
account a yearly budget commitment of at least 3% of the municipal current revenues for 
maintenance for the duration of the MC, beside the 5 % counterpart funding to the PIP.  
 
Project components: (see annex 4 for details)  
 
The project will include the following three components: (i) City of Conakry Municipal 
Contract; (ii) Municipal Contracts for secondary cities; and (iii) Institutional 
strengthening.  
 
?
Component 1: City of Conakry Municipal Contract  (cost US$6.5 million)  
 
The objective of component 1 is to provide improved access to urban infrastructure and 
services to residents in the City of Conakry and the five municipalities (Kaloum, Matoto, 
Ratoma, Dixinn, and Matam).  This will benefit a large share of the urban population of 
Guinea, concentrated in the capital city, mainly in the most deprived neighborhoods.  
 
Page  3
This component will include three subcomponents to support the delivery of services 
and infrastructure in Conakry.  A Municipal contract will be signed between the GOG, 
the city of Conakry and the five municipalities of Conakry.  The content of the (i) priority 
investment program (including the list of eligible infrastructure and services), (ii) the 
municipal adjustment program and (iii) the maintenance program has been identified 
during project preparation through the urban, organizational and financial audit of the 
city and the five municipalities conducted in close consultation with the local authorities 
and partners.  
 
(i) Solid waste management (US$1.5 million): The sub-component will continue 
supporting the waste management system of Conakry set up during phase 1 by :(i) 
consolidating the waste collection system through support to SMEs (training, guarantee 
fund, management of contracts); (ii) consolidating the waste transfer system through 
support to SPTD financial management and asset replacement fund and (iii) 
consolidating the improvement of the landfill of La Mini?re (new access roads to the 
landfill, preparatory works for the site closing, site fencing upgrading).  The construction 
of the compost unit and landfill gas collection and flaring system will be set up through a 
separate activity and parallel funding, under a Carbon Finance mechanism.  
 
(ii) Neighborhood upgrading (US$3.5 million): The sub component will continue the 
program implemented during phase 1 in supporting the secondary roads improvement in 
poorly serviced and densely populated neighborhoods.  The urban audit will determine a 
coherent four-year program of secondary roads rehabilitation (PROP) and a substantial 
maintenance program.  The city of Conakry and the five municipalities will commit 
annually at least 3% of current revenues for assets maintenance.  As a follow-up to phase 
1, the programming and oversight of works implemented by the private sector will be 
carried out by the technical services of the City of Conakry (CVS).  The 5 municipalities 
through their technical services will be involved in the programming process, participate 
in bid opening and handover of works to the cities.  
 
(iii) Municipal facilities (US$1.5 million).  The urban audit carried out in a participatory 
manner with local governments and the civil society provides the basis for the 
identification of a list of priority investments.  Eligible categories can be municipal 
infrastructure and facilities such as markets, bus stations, public administration buildings, 
schools, health centers, social facilities.  
 
It was initially planned to include a primary road sub-component. Primary roads 
infrastructure in Conakry started under the Urban II project and were pursued under 
Urban III phase 1.  Under Phase 1 of the APL, the rights of ways of Voie express and T7 
were preserved, and this did not entail any displacement of population.  Technical studies 
were also completed all the way to the preparation of bidding documents by the Cellule 
de Voirie Primaire (formerly DIU).  The actual construction of Voie express and this 
portion of T7 will not be carried out during the second phase (as initially planned) due to 
a
reduction in IDA allocation.  
 
?
Component 2: Municipal contracts for secondary cities  (US$4.5 million)  
Page  4
This component will consist in the follow-up implementation of Municipal Contracts, 
which proved to be largely successful during phase 1, demonstrating strong commitment 
of municipalities and satisfactory counterpart funding on their part.  The component will 
focus on 10 cities: (i) 7 cities having implemented a first tranche of municipal contracts 
during phase 1, which are Kindia, Kankan, Lab?, Nz?r?kor?, Mamou, Faranah and 
Kissidougou and; (ii) 3 cities, Bok?, Macenta and Siguiri, ready to sign a municipal 
contract.  The second tranche of municipal contracts will be based on the list of actions 
which were considered as priority during the audits of phase I but which could not be 
financed during phase I because they exceeded largely the funding possibilities of UDP3 
phase I.  A special emphasis will be placed on Municipal adjustment programs in order to 
continue to improve (i) the financial sustainability of city management through improved 
mobilization of local revenues and (ii) the administrative and technical capacity of 
municipal staff.  The cities will commit annually at least 3% of their current revenues for 
assets maintenance.  
 
?
Component 3: Institutional strengthening (US$2.840million)  
 
This component will focus on institutional strengthening activities already started under 
project phase 1, support activities that will be implemented alongside the Contrat de Ville 
and improve the management of cities (further details in Annex 4).  
 
It will include the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Street addressing (adressage): (1) update of street addressing of Dixinn, Matam 
and Kaloum; (2) street addressing in Ratoma and Matoto; (3) street addressing in 
secondary cities;  
 
(ii) 
Improvement of local resources: (4) fiscal registers in Kaloum, Matam, Ratoma 
and Matoto; (5) improvement of local revenues in secondary cities; (6) support to the 
DNI for local revenues collection;  
 
(iii) 
Improvement of local governments budget documents: (7) fiscal and budgetary 
manual for urban cities; (8) support to the DNI in computerizing municipal budgetary 
data; (9) update of the financial ratio guidebook;  
 
(iv) 
Intergovernmental transfers: (10) set up of a transfer fund with identification of a 
sustainable fund envelope and transparent mechanisms for resources allocation to local 
governments;  
 
(v) 
Urban management improvement: (11) Urban atlas; (12) update of the PUR 
(Plans Urbains de R?f?rence) of the 10 secondary cities;   
 
(vi) 
Project Coordination Unit: Operating costs;  
 
(vii) 
Communication and dissemination activities with a focus on Municipal Contract 
methodology and implementation, waste management and fiscal revenues as well as 
awareness activities at the municipal level to combat corruption practices;  
 
(viii)   Technical assistance to PCU (Mission d?appui);  
 
(ix) 
Technical and financial audits carried out annually.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Conakry, Kindia, Kankan, Labe, Nzerekore, Mamou, Faranah and Kissidougou and; 3 
cities, Boke, Macenta and Siguiri.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential adverse environmental and social impacts are likely to include soil and water 
pollution, air pollution, loss of vegetation, soil erosion, and the generation of asbestos and 
medical waste.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None of the planned activities are expected to cause any potential indirect and/or long-
term impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In light of the fact that this project (APL) was prepared in the context of a longer-term 
program and given that the potential adverse environmental and social impacts can be 
easily mitigated, the consideration of project alternatives was not necessary.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)to enable project implementers to 
identify and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social impacts at the planning 
Page  6
stage of infrastructure investments. While the RPF outlines the policies and procedures to 
be applied in the event that sub-projects involve land acquisition, the ESMF outlines an 
environmental and social screening process to be followed during project 
implementation. The ESMF includes and Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) which proposes environmental capacity builidng measures for project 
implementers because their current capacity in this regard is insufficient.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include representatives of relevant ministries, solid waste 
management services, pest management services, municipalities, NGOS. The ESMF 
includes a requirement for public consultations and disclosure, so the relevant 
stakeholders will be consulted at the time sub-project planning. The ESMF was prepared 
in consultation with the afore-mentioned stakeholders, and they indicated their support 
for the proposed project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/29/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/29/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  7
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Catherine D. Farvacque-Vitkovic 
06/12/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
06/12/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
06/12/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
06/12/2007 
Comments:   
