Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/26/2007 
Report No.:  AC2675
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guyana 
Project ID:  P103539 
Project Name:  Conservancy Adaptation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Francis Ghesquiere 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (100%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.80 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.20
1.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the CAP is to reduce the vulnerability of catastrophic flooding in 
Guyana's low-lying coastal area that is currently threatened by sea level rise resulting 
from global climate change.  
 
This objective will be achieved through a) strengthening the GoG's and donor 
understanding of the EDWC system and coastal plain drainage regimes while identifying 
key drainage regimes for follow-on intervention; b) implementing infrastructure 
investments aimed at increasing the drainage capacity of the EDWC; c) strengthening 
institutional capacity of the GoG to manage water levels in the EDWC and to guide 
interventions aimed reducing Guyana's vulnerability to floods.  
 
At project completion, the GoG will be in possession of a master plan for future 
upgrading of the EDWC.  Possible interventions for at least 10 key drainage regimes will 
be identified and presented to the donor community, and the drainage relief capacity of 
the EDWC to the Demerara River by will be increased by at least 35 percent.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project will finance the development of the technical foundation for a master plan of 
future interventions within the EDWC and lowland drainage systems, as well as specific 
upgrading works and operational improvements aimed at enhancing the flood control 
capacity of the EDWC.  The tools developed under the analytical component of the CAP 
will be used by the GoG and donor agencies to guide future investments.  
 
Component 1 - Pre-investment studies for engineering design of works (Total US$2.45 
mil / GEF portion US$2.0 mil): The objective of this component is to provide the 
hydrologic baseline necessary for contemplating rational interventions aimed at 
increasing the current discharge capacity of the flood control system.  The key outcome 
of these pre-investment studies will be a topographic model of the inhabited coastal plain 
to be used as the basis for hydrologic analysis of the region under projected climate 
scenarios.  The results from this component will pinpoint key areas of intervention to 
increase discharge capacity critical for flood zone management.  Pre-engineering designs 
will be completed for a set of prioritized interventions.  Specialized staff within the 
following agencies will be trained in the application of the analytical tools produced: 
NDIA, the Lands and Surveys Commission, the Ministry of Works River and Sea 
Defense Division, the Guyana Environmental Protection Agency and the Civil Defense 
Commission.  
 
Component 2 - Investments in specific adaptation measures (Total US$17.2 mil / GEF 
portion US$1.5 mil): The objective of this component is to counteract the effects of sea 
level rise, which has decreased the GoG's ability to manage water levels of the EDWC 
system.  The investments will improve the ability of the Government to manage water 
levels behind the EDWC dam during heavy rains by improving internal water flows in 
the EDWC and increasing EDWC drainage relief capacity to the Demerara River and 
eventually the Atlantic Ocean.  By the end of project, activities under this component 
should result in an increased drainage capacity of the EDWC to the Demerara River by 
roughly 35 percent (the exact figure will be finalized during the first year of 
implementation).  The GoG, through the NDIA, will direct additional investment in the 
strengthening of drainage and irrigation infrastructure based on the engineering 
foundation to be developed under Component 1.  
 
Component 3 - Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (Total US$0.35 mil 
/
GEF portion US$0.3 mil):  The objective of this component is to strengthen the 
institutional framework for flood control within the context of the national emergency 
management sector headed by the Civil Defense Commission.  The project will finance 
activities to better assess the current needs of the actors involved in the flood control and 
emergency management and will work together with the concerned parties to develop a 
national framework for a more streamlined approach to hazard and risk management in 
the country.  The project will also support consultations with civil society and the donor 
community to create consensus around a medium and long term intervention strategy to 
help the country adapt to sea level rise.  The key outcome of the analysis and project 
management component will be improved Government effectiveness in managing floods 
Page  3
and other emergencies. With clear lines of responsibility in times of urgent need as well 
as times of calm, the GoG will be better equipped to manage flood control policy.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will focus on activities in Region 4, the most populated region of the country.  
This is the area downstream of the EDWC dam and EDWC system.  Mapping and system 
analysis will be conducted in coastal regions 3, 4 and 5 to provide the analytical basis for 
managing coastal hydraulogy.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gerald E. Meier (LCSUW) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (EA) (OP/BP4.01) :  
 
An environmental management framework will be developed and publicly disclosed 
through the Infoshop in Washington and within Guyana. This framework includes: a) a 
description of the project; b) a description of the safeguards triggered and project 
mechanisms to ensure compliance with each; c) Terms of Reference for analytical work 
that will result in an engineering tool that is to be used as a foundation for determining 
the environmental impacts of follow-on interventions; d) procedures and requirements for 
sub-project specific EAs to be conducted during project implementation; and e) a 
description of the project's strategy for public consultation, during both project 
preparation and implementation.  
 
Civil works funded under this project may include the widening of the Cuffy and/or 
Cuhna outlet structures.  These activities will require the construction of a bridge along a 
major north-south thoroughfare.  Environmental impacts will be limited to the 
construction sites and will result in a temporary impact to local traffic.  An 
Environmental Assessment will be conducted during the engineering design stage of the 
Page  4
project component to address these issues.  These two structures lead directly to the 
Demerara River.  The only function of these canals is to provide relief capacity to the 
EDWC system to protect the EDWC dam during the two rainy annual seasons.  These 
canals are not associated with the irrigation or potable water supply functions of the 
EDWC system. While not expected to have an adverse impact on conservancy, an 
additional site-specific EA will be completed for the improvement of water flow systems 
within the EDWC.  Remaining civil works are limited to repairs to existing structures and 
are classified as category C.  These works will be contracted using appropriate 
environmental management clauses to assure contactor compliance with accepted 
environmental practices.  
 
A
key output of the analytical work will be an engineering tool that is to be used to as a 
foundation for determining the environmental impacts of follow-on interventions.  With 
the development and use of a detailed digital elevation model, local watershed 
characteristics and drainage regimes will be mapped and modeled, creating the basis for 
future engineering interventions. A separate report will be developed, based on the 
analytical work undertaken in the project, which will specifically addresses the likely 
environmental impacts of future interventions. Expected hydraulic impacts, as well as 
changes in water quality, natural habitats, land use, livelihoods and analysis of alternative 
strategies will be considered. Based on this information, an intervention strategy will be 
developed.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
 
A
portion of the project takes place within the East Demerara Water Conservancy.  This 
is a man made structure that is considered a natural habitat.  No adverse impacts to the 
conservancy are envisioned under the project.  At the same time, by improving the 
drainage capacity of the EDWC and assessing the weak portion of the EDWC Dam, the 
project aims to ensure that this natural habitat remains in tact.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)  
 
While activities to be carried out under the project are not expected to impact any 
known cultural heritage sites, technical specifications for works and the Operation 
Manual will include "chance find procedures" to be followed in the event that culturally 
significant materials are discovered during the execution of civil works.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)  
 
The southern portion of the East Demerara Water Conservancy is bordered by a forest.  
No physical work is envisioned within 10 miles of this forest and no adverse impacts to 
the forest are envisioned under the project.  Moreover, improvements in water flows 
within the EDWC is expected to have no impact on the bordering forest.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
 
The EDWC is bordered to the north by a 30 mile long earthen dam constructed some 
150 years ago.  The dam has been heavily stressed particularly during the past two flood 
events (2004-5, 2005-6).  While no civil works are to be conducted on the dam, a detailed 
engineering assessment of the dam and its associated drainage structures is to be 
Page  5
completed under the project.  This will provide the engineering and safety guidance to the 
GoG for the design and development of any dam strengthening programs.  
 
The engineering analysis developed under the present project will provide the technical 
basis for the Government to fulfill the requirements for an expert assessment of the 
weakened portion of the EDWC Dam provided under this safeguard.  Upon receipt of the 
dam safety assessment, and as part of implementation of the project, the World Bank will 
contract independent experts to assess and to validate the quality of the report.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long term impacts are expected to materialize as a result of the project.  By 
improving the drainage capacity of the EDWC and assessing the weak portion of the 
EDWC Dam, the project aims to ensure that this natural habitat remains in tact.  
 
Contrary to the status quo for drainage management in Guyana, future investments 
made in the populated coastal lowlands will be made with the knowledge of the 
environmental impacts of such work.  Understanding of local watershed characteristics 
and drainage regimes, better informed investments can be made in the coming years.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project is expected to have no adverse impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
While four safeguards are triggered under this project, only two will need to be addressed 
in depth.  The man-made natural habitat of the EDWC will benefit from the project 
through the increased discharge capacity of the system. This will reduce the risk of a dam 
breach that would negatively affect the natural habitat.  A forest does border the southern 
portion of the EDWC, but because investments will be made nowhere in the proximity of 
the forest, the project will have neither negative nor positive impacts.  The sites of 
physical work to take place under the project have been surveyed by Bank technical staff.  
Based on their assessment, the likelihood of cultural resources to be found at the project 
sites is extremely low.  However, ?chance find? procedures will be included in the 
contract for this work.  
 
Regarding the environmental assessment the engineering firm contracting to carry out 
the analytical work will be responsible for developing site specific environmental 
assessments for the widening of outlet canals and improvement in water flows behind the 
EDWC.  Additionally, their work program will include a separate report on the possible 
environmental impacts of future drainage sector improvements.  Both the engineering 
firm and the Implementation Secretariat will be responsible for ensuring that these 
measures are following during physical work.  
 
Page  6
Safety of Dams will also be addressed by the engineering firm.  The firm will be 
responsible for completing the dam safety analysis and proposing short and medium term 
interventions aimed at strengthening the dam.  The Implementation Secretariat will 
ensure that these outputs are complete and will be supported with technical expertise 
provided by the World Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Relief Drainage Improvements The primary beneficiaries' population located to the north 
of the EDWC dam as the improved relief capacity will reduce the risk of catastrophic 
dam failure and subsequent flooding.  This area represents over 70 percent of the 
countries population, local authorities, and local civil society that have been closely 
involved in the development of the proposed strategy.  If the improvement of the Cuhna 
canal is to be considered, the Barama Lumber Company is the only activity directly 
affected by the works.  Additionally, Ministry of Works will be closely involved with any 
constructions associated with the north-south roadway.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/12/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/24/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/24/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
Page  7
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Ghesquiere 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gerald E. Meier 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
