Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.: 41463  
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 31, 2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guyana 
Project ID: P090044 
Project Name: Guyana Bagasse 
Cogeneration 
Task Team Leader: Noreen Beg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2006 
Estimated Board Date: n/a 
Managing Unit: LCSFE 
Lending Instrument: n/a 
Sector: Renewable Energy/Power 
Theme: Climate Change, Infrastructure  
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: George Ledec 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): n/a 
Environmental Category : A 
Other financing amounts by source: (est) ERPA  
$3.224 million 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
 
Is this a transferred project                 Yes []                              No [ X] 
B.  Project Objectives 
(from CFD) 
 
The Guyana Bagasse Cogeneration Project (which is expected to receive financial payments to 
be made under the Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol, and therefore is 
hereafter referred to as the CDM Project) consists of the addition of a more efficient co-
generation plant to the ongoing Skeldon Sugar Modernization Project (SSMP) -- a modern sugar 
factory that will manufacture Very High Pol (VHP) raw sugar.   The CDM Project will generate 
bagasse-based electricity for internal use as well as for sale to the national electric utility, 
displacing the use of light fuel oil and heavy fuel oil in diesel engine-driven generators operated 
by the Guyana Power and Light Company (GPL). As the utility currently has insufficient 
capacity, there is extensive use of self-generation by industry and households. The project will 
also displace a significant amount of this unregulated and inefficient self-generation as 
confidence in reliable supply is progressively built. 
 
C.  Project Description 
(from CFD) 
 
Under the ongoing SSMP project, a modern high efficiency sugar factory will be constructed for 
the production of VHP raw sugar. The existing sugar cane area will be expanded.  The cane 
supply will come from the Skeldon Estate (expanded from 4,800 to 9,500 ha) and from holdings 
of private farmers (expanded from 300 to 4,165 ha) who will cultivate cane exclusively for sale 
Page  2
to Guyana Sugar Corporation (Guysuco).  A Combined Heat and Power (CHP) cycle plant will 
be added on to the factory design to allow the simultaneous production of electrical power for 
internal needs and for sale to the national electric utility.  This plant (the CDM Project) will use 
bagasse from the sugar factory to generate an average of 10 MW of electricity delivering 
approximately 77 GWh per year, to start. This power delivery can potentially increase as cane 
and bagasse availability is confirmed and electricity demand increases. The CDM Project will 
generate Greenhouse Gas Emission Reductions resulting from a displacement of fossil fuel use.   
 
D.  Project location 
(if known) 
 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations 
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
 
The SSMP project and the CDM Project are located in the Berbice County, at the eastern coastal 
extremity of Guyana, on the Corentyne River, bordering on Suriname in South America. The 
Berbice region currently has 5,000 to 10,000 people without access to electricity. In addition to 
providing access for these consumers, the local commercial and industrial sectors will benefit 
from the more reliable power supply. 
 
Guysuco will construct a new sugar factory and expand its cultivation at Skeldon Estate. Water 
for the irrigation of the new cultivated areas to be undertaken by Guysuco will be obtained by 
both recycling of water from the cultivated areas and by withdrawals from fresh water sources. 
The SSMP project will include the construction of the Guysuco Conservancy (a shallow 
reservoir), with a total surface area of approximately 1,520 ha for management of fresh water 
supply for use by the expanded operation. Water has historically been obtained from the area that 
encompasses the Guysuco Conservancy.  
 
The private cane farms are located primarily in the Crabwood Creek/Moleson Creek area. Water 
for irrigation of these farms will be obtained from the existing Halcrow Conservancy (a shallow 
reservoir of about 6,000 ha). The capacity of the Halcrow Conservancy to provide adequate 
supplies of water for agricultural purposes was documented in a study undertaken in the 1980s. 
The Halcrow Conservancy will also form part of the Guysuco water management plan for the 
expanded operation. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
(from CFD) 
 
[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information]
 
The SSMP and CDM Project Sponsor (Guysuco) and Project Owner (Government of Guyana) 
have formally approved both projects. Guysuco has prepared a detailed Environmental 
Management Plan for the Skeldon sugar factory and associated cane field expansion, including 
effective wildlife conservation at the Halcrow and Guysuco conservancies
1
.
Guysuco has legal 
1
While the Environmental Management Plan was commissioned for the SSMP, it also covers the CHP plant 
and as such, is detailed here. 
Page  3
responsibility for the management of both the Halcrow and Guysuco conservancies. These two 
conservancies comprise about 7,520 ha of state-owned land under Guysuco management; in the 
case of the Halcrow Conservancy, Guysuco
’s, management responsibilities are outlined in a 
long-term Agreement (signed March 2004) between Guysuco and the National Drainage and 
Irrigation Board. 
 
The Poverty Reduction and Public Management Grant (PRPMG) for Guyana from the World 
Bank (via its affiliate, the International Development Association) includes as a required policy 
action that the Government of Guyana (through Guysuco) 
"adopt and begin implementation of 
an acceptable Environmental Management Plan for the Skeldon sugar factory and 
associated cane field expansion, including effective wildlife conservation at the Halcrow 
and Guysuco Conservancies."
 
Guysuco has submitted its Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP), based on extensive input from the Bank’s environmental specialists. The EMP is 
presently being reviewed within the Bank. 
George, this must be completed by now?   
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
The Environmental Impact Assessment for the SSMP Project (
Final Environmental Impact Assessment Report:  
Proposed Expansion to Skeldon Estate
,
Ground Structures Engineering Consultants, March 2003), commissioned by 
Guysuco, has been completed. The Guyana Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has issued a permit allowing 
Guysuco to proceed with both the SSMP and CDM projects. In compliance with this permit, Guysuco will establish 
a
sanitary landfill for wastes generated by construction and operation of the Skeldon facilities. As a first step, 
Guysuco has recently completed a separate landfill site selection study, which has been reviewed and found 
acceptable by World Bank environmental specialists. 
 
The EIA report includes a socioeconomic baseline analysis, baseline coastal zone conditions, an assessment of the 
environmental consequences of air emissions generated by land clearing and open burning of vegetation, and an 
assessment of water quality in the mini-conservancy to support aquatic life. Cultural and archaeological resources 
will not be affected by the project. The conversion of existing, non-critical natural habitats for expanded cane 
cultivation will be significant, but adequately mitigated (see below). In addition, land clearing will be done by block 
to facilitate the exit of wild animals towards the remaining areas of natural habitat. Temporary log bridges will also 
be placed across canals to facilitate the exit of terrestrial wildlife. Air emissions can arise from the application of 
pesticides. The EIA report indicates that concentrations of these emissions resulting from project activities are likely 
to be minute and will have no impacts on air quality. The EIA also summarizes the stakeholder consultations that 
have been carried out on the SSMP project. 
 
The bagasse co-generation plant will lead to reduced particulate and NO
x
emissions due to more efficient firing of 
bagasse. Emission concentrations from bagasse firing were estimated at 47.8 mg/m
3
for
 particulates and 40 mg/m
3
for 
No
x
and fall within acceptable World Bank standards (150 mg/m
3
for
 particulates and 70 mg/m
3
for No
x
). 
 
Guysuco
’s Environmental Management Plan (presently being reviewed within the World Bank) for the SSMP 
(including the CDM) was prepared with input from Bank environmental specialists. It is expected to address all of 
Guysuco’s environmental management responsibilities, including those related to natural habitat and wildlife 
conservation, water quality, waste management, and agricultural pest management. After this document is reviewed 
and found acceptable to the Bank, it will be disclosed publicly (along with the EIA report) at the InfoShop and made 
available by Guysuco to interested Guyanese citizens.  
George, was this completed? 
 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X 
 
 
The most significant adverse environmental impact of the SSMP is the conversion of some 8,365 ha of land to sugar 
cane cultivation. In terms of existing vegetative cover, at least 3,000 ha of the Guysuco-held land is generally intact 
freshwater swamp and natural forest; the 880 ha comprising Block 1 have recently been entirely cleared and planted 
to cane; and the remaining Guysuco and small farmer/cooperative land is semi-natural savanna which has been 
drained in the past but is now covered with natural vegetation at different stages of succession. As demonstrated by 
Guysuco’s maps of available lands for expanding sugar cane cultivation, alternative sites of lower environmental 
sensitivity are not available within an economic transport distance of the Skeldon factory. As noted in the EIA 
report, the freshwater swamp, forest, and savanna lands are rich in biodiversity, although they do not qualify as 
Critical Natural Habitats (as per the Natural Habitats OP 4.04) or Critical Forests (as per the Forests OP 4.36), 
especially since ecologically similar lands are still widespread on the coastal plain of Guyana. Although the lands to 
be converted harbor species of conservation interest such as Jaguars 
(Panthera onca)
,
they are not considered to be 
critical for the global (or national) survival of any species. 
 
As ecological compensation for the loss of natural habitats through expanded cane cultivation, Guysuco has agreed 
to the long-term conservation of 7,520 ha, contained within the Halcrow (6,000 ha) and Guysuco (1,520 ha) 
conservancies. These two conservancies comprise state-owned land under Guysuco management; in the case of the 
Halcrow Conservancy, Guysuco’s management responsibilities are outlined in a long-term agreement (signed March 
2004) between Guysuco and the National Drainage and Irrigation Board. Both conservancies serve primarily as 
water storage areas for nearby sugar cane and other irrigated cultivation, and both comprise relatively natural 
ecosystems with a mosaic of open water, marsh, freshwater swamp, upland reef forest, and related wetland habitats. 
When adjusted for natural habitat quality, the 7, 520 ha within the two conservancies are of greater biodiversity 
conservation value overall than the (largely drained) lands to be cleared for expanded cane cultivation. Under 
Guysuco’s management, the fundamentally natural character of these areas will remain, although there might be 
some change in the proportions of each habitat type due to (relatively slight) water level changes. To help ensure 
effective wildlife conservation at both conservancies, Guysuco will prohibit all hunting and wildlife capture, and 
will restrict fishing to traditional, small-scale activities. Guysuco will enforce these restrictions through (i) 
placement of signs in strategic locations at the conservancy edges; (ii) control of vehicle and pedestrian traffic along 
the limited access roads that pass through Guysuco-managed lands; and (iii) the on-the-ground presence of at least 8 
conservancy rangers. 
 
With PHRD funding, Guysuco is carrying out a Rapid Biological Assessment (RBA) to obtain baseline data on the 
animal and plant life of the two conservancies, which will be useful for future monitoring and management 
activities. The RBA will also serve to increase awareness, within Guyana and internationally, of the biodiversity 
significance of these two conservancies.  George, was this completed? 
 
The EMP is expected to indicate the explicit environmental rules that have been incorporated within the 
“Specifications of the Bid Documents for Bush Clearing” of the remaining blocks of natural vegetation to be cleared 
for cane cultivation.  These rules are expected to require (i) proceeding in a direction (which would vary by block) 
that would facilitate the exit of wild animals towards the remaining areas of natural habitat; (ii) placing temporary 
log bridges across canals to facilitate the exit of terrestrial wildlife; (iii) no hunting, wildlife capture, nor fishing by 
contractors and their employees; (iv) no contamination of the canals by solid or liquid wastes; (v) no washing of 
machinery in canals; etc. 
 
The expansion of the sugar mill operations has necessitated the relocation of cattle belonging to the Cattle Farmers’ 
Association for Villages 67-74 (who previously had access to Block 2 of the Skeldon Sugar Estate to graze their 
cattle). They are being relocated to the adjacent 18,600 acre Manarabisi pasture, currently being utilized by the cattle 
farmers of Villages 52 – 66, who have agreed in principle to share this land. (Unlike Villages 67-74, Villages 52 – 
66 do have formal title to their grazing lands).  The reason for their willingness to share is that they have been 
guaranteed continued use of the drained portions of the pasture (which comprises the 7600 acre Sookram’s pasture 
and the 11000 acre Whittaker pasture).   
 
As a large part of the w
estern pasture is unsuitable for cattle (approximately 
7
000 heads of cattle will be relocated to 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Manarabisi) Guysuco and the Ministry of Agriculture will pay for the land clearing necessary, while the farmers will 
contribute to construction of fencing and local bridges. The area of the western portion of the pasture is 3 094 ha, 
with 85% of that constituting secondary forest and 15% comprising savannah/swamp 15%.  Of the 85% forest, 75% 
i
s
to be cleared and 25% to remain as shade area for cattle.  A total of 1,972 ha will therefore be cleared in addition 
to 62 ha along boundaries/drain lines.  All of the cleared land will be used by the displaced cattle farmers of Villages 
67-74. 
 
The land immediately to the east and west of the proposed area is savannah, already cleared for cattle pasture.  The 
land to the east will remain with the No. 52-66 Association.  The land to the west will remain with other co-
operatives. [Map provided to the bank separately].  The land to the south is in Block 4 of the Guysuco mill 
expansion area. The forest is fairly isolated with some access to other forest areas to the north. As far as Guysuco is 
aware there is no protected status for adjacent blocks and there has been no mention of this in the EIA or the Rapid 
Biodiversity Assessment. 
 
Guysuco does not envisage the process to entail 
‘mass deforestation' in a short period with a large amount of 
equipment.  It will be a slow process, moving from south to north and as such would accommodate wildlife escape. 
 
There are presently no plans for ploughing and re-seeding either Whittaker or Sookram's Pasture.  As such all 
species would be native.  At present little or no pasture burning is practiced.  In the wet seasons it is impossible and 
in the dry seasons extremely unfeasible.  In the dry seasons the best grass is grazed down leaving nut-grass etc. 
in the wet spots    
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X 
 
 
The wetland habitats within the protected Halcrow and Guysuco conservancies, as well as the area to be cleared 
for expanded cane cultivation, include natural forests (both in the swamps and the upland reef forest stands). Thus, 
all of the above comments on compliance with the Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 apply as well to the Forests OP/BP 
4.36. It should also be noted that there is presently no logging or other wood extraction from the Halcrow and 
Guysuco conservancies, nor will Guysuco allow any to take place under the SSMP.  
 
The portion of  Manarabisi pasture, where the cattle will be resettled, (see above) is covered with 85% forest, of 
which 75% is to be cleared with 25% to remain as shade area for cattle.  The forest compares directly with Block 4 
as it is mainly a continuation of the "reef" passing through Block 10, 3, and 4.  The Guyana Forestry Commission 
recently surveyed this area and concluded the number of trees of commercial value as negligible.   
 
While detailed planning of the bush clearing programme has not yet been fully discussed with the farmers it is  
likely that the remaining trees will be 'islands' on the basis that to minimise cost, the trees not felled would be the 
largest ones and these would be scattered.  The 'islands' remaining around the large trees would probably be small. 
The forest covers nearly all the Sookram's Pasture and a little of Whittaker Pasture (map attached).  The 'islands' 
would be distributed throughout the present forest area.  The requirement for shade would be the first priority but if 
there is 'best practice' on the environmental aspect of the remaining tree stand Guysuco has indicated willingness to 
include it.  The map shows that the 15% swamp/savannah area is mainly in the north of Sookram's Pasture.  One 
idea under discussion is to access this area with a traverse through the forest from the Manarabisi Canal so that cattle 
could move to the open ground quickly. 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X 
 
 
Guysuco’s current pest management practices are broadly consistent with the World Bank’s Pest Management 
Policy. The project’s Environmental Management Plan includes a Pest Management Plan that emphasizes integrated 
pest management, careful selection of compounds, and safe pesticide use and storage. This is important on account 
of possible impacts of pesticide application on workers’ safety as well as potential effects of agrochemical run-off 
on plants and animals. In addition to following the PMP in its own cane cultivation, Guysuco provides free technical 
assistance in pest management to the adjacent small farmers who are, or will be, producing cane for the new Skeldon 
factory. 
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X 
 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X 
 
 
While there is no involuntary resettlement of people in this project, as part of the SSMP expansion, the Cattle 
Farmers’ Association for Villages 67-74 who previously had access to Block 2 of the Skeldon Sugar Estate to graze 
their cattle had to be relocated as Block 2 is an integral area for cane field expansion and contiguous to other areas 
of increased cultivation.  Block 2 has now been cleared for sugar cultivation which means the Cattle Farmers’ 
Association is no  
 
In September 2006, a Select Committee was established to examine the issue of the relocation of the cattle farmers 
from Villages 67 - 74.  The issue is now approaching resolution as an alternate grazing location has been identified 
that has been deemed satisfactory to the majority of the Cattle Farmers Association. This area is the 18,600 acre  
Manarabisi pasture, currently being utilized by the cattle farmers of Villages 52 – 66, who have agreed in principle 
to share this land. (Villages 52 – 66 do have formal title to their grazing lands).  The reason for their willingness to 
share is that they have been guaranteed continued use of the drained portions of the pasture (which comprises the 
7600 acre Sookram’s pasture and the 11000 acre Whittaker pasture).  The additional rehabilitation work planned for 
the pasture will only increase the safety and welfare of their cattle, and once drained, the land is sufficient for all. 
 
The Government and Guysuco have agreed in principle to share the cost of undertaking infrastructure work at 
Manarabisi pasture, to allow all 80 -100 farmers from Villages 67-74 ( with approximately 7000 heads of cattle) to 
move there in phases from 2008 - 2009.  These works include: 
 
·
Clearing the approximately 2000 ha currently under bush cover (logging of these secondary growth forests 
to be undertaken with the supervision of the Forestry Commission) 
·
The construction of drainage and navigation canals and empoldering (Primary drainage will be 
rehabilitated/upgraded) to adequately deal with additional cleared acreage; and secondary drainage  -- 
internal canals and drains – will be installed to facilitate drainage during the rainy season and to hold 
drinking water for cattle during the dry season) 
·
Construction of access roads to the land 
·
Fencing of the perimeter ( currently about 30% is fenced), and  
·
Division of lands between the two Associations (currently under negotiation as the NDDP feels it may be 
better not to formally sub-divide the land,). 
 
The total cost of the above works has been estimated at G$ 268.6 million/ US$1.41 million and will be shared 
between the Government and Guysuco. Some bush clearance, excavation of drains, and fence erection has already 
been completed.  
 
An agreement will be negotiated with the Water Users Association with regard to the use of access dams and 
waterways used by both rice and cattle farmers in the area.   
 
While this clearance will have some effect on natural habitats and forestry, these effects will be mitigated and 
described above, and the Bank will request that updates be provided on this process.   
 
The RAP is provided separately, and the Bank as part of project supervision , will conduct a survey to determine that 
farmers’ livelihoods have not been adversely affected by the relocation of cattle.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X 
 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
The Skeldon project’s Environmental Impact Assessment has been completed and the Guyana 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has issued a permit (
Permit No. 19990204-GSEPO 
dated 15 July 2003
)
allowing GuySuCo to proceed with the SSMP. The EIA took into 
consideration a cogeneration facility to be integrated with the SSMP. 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The CDM project will not have significant adverse environmental or social impacts. All potential 
impacts should be manageable through proper project design and implementation. However, the 
SSMP, to which this project is indirectly affiliated, and the resultant clearance of Manarabisi 
pasture involves significant conversion of forests and other natural habitats (for which a 
Category A classification is required.  
 
The CDM project is a separate project which takes advantage of the new sugar factory to co-
generate electric power. The CDM project  does 
not
 (i) increase (by even one hectare) the area of 
cane that will be cultivated for the sugar factory; (ii) materially affect the sugar factory’s 
profitability; nor (iii) change the likelihood of the new Skeldon sugar factory being built in the 
first place.  
 
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
 Noreen Beg 
06/04/07 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Reidar  Kvam 
06/ /07 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Susan Goldmark 
06/   /07 
Comments:   
Page  8
