Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/05/2006 
Report No.:  AC2266
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P095371 
Project Name:  HT Economic Governance TAG II 
Task Team Leader:  Linn A. Hammergren 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSPS 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (70%);General public administration sector 
(30%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Other accountability/anti-corruption 
(P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Second Economic Governance Technical Assistance Grant (EGTAG 
II) is to further assist the Government in strengthening its institutional capacity in the 
areas of public sector resource management and improved responsiveness to citizen 
needs and demands. It is designed to advance changes begun with the EGRO, the LICUS 
Trust Fund grant and EGTAG I to overcome the weaknesses undermining Haiti’s 
planning and implementation of its current and investment budget, the efficacy of  donor 
assistance, and public trust in public sector institutions.  Specifically, the EGTAG II’s 
development objectives are to support additional activities required to meet the basic 
goals of EGTAG I and to move beyond them in order to (i) ensure the fluid and effective 
operation of the budgetary, control and procurement systems; (ii) build a central human 
resources unit and system and advance other elements of the plan to rationalize the 
distribution, upgrade the quality, and improve the incentives for public sector employees; 
(iii) create within key sector ministries a capacity for monitoring and evaluating the 
quality of service delivery; and (iv) ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of the 
Government’s anti-corruption, transparency and public participation programs.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1- Financial Resource Management: This component will provide additional 
support to improve or fine tune the Government’s implementation of improved legal and 
organizational frameworks for budgeting, control and procurement.  
 
Component 2 - Human Resource Development:  This component will support the 
creation of organizational structures, the development of basic human resource 
management tools, and the training of central and sector staff in their uses. It will also 
finance studies related to the improvement of the public administration’s legal 
framework.   
 
Component 3 – Development of MEF (Office of Economic Studies) Capacity for 
Strategic Monitoring of Sector Policy via Sector Ministries’ Tracking of Service 
Delivery.  This component will support the MEF Office of Economic Studies to develop 
its capacity to link recurrent and investment budgets to higher order government 
priorities.  It will provide TA aimed at evaluating the ability of key agencies to track 
service delivery. Finally, it will provide assistance geared to develop procedures to track 
service delivery as well as the experimental adoption of alternative means to track and 
improve service delivery. 
 
Component 4 – Anti-corruption and Civil Society Engagement: This component 
willsupport the development of the ULCC’s programming capacity, as well as it skills 
and techniques for determining and rectifying institutional vulnerabilities. It will provide 
assistance in drafting and supervising implementation of improved laws (notably, a 
freedom of information law). Furthermore, based on findings of an EGTAG I-funded 
evaluation of the civil society monitoring programs, it will provide assistance geared to 
improve their performance.  
 
Component 5 - Communication, Donor Coordination, and Project Management. This 
component will provide technical support to project management and will continue to 
provide support for communications activities on the overall economic governance 
reforms.  This includes implementing a communications strategy and promoting two-way 
communications between the government and stakeholders to build consensus on the 
programs, increase understanding of their contents and objectives, and promote input 
from stakeholders.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Port-au-Prince, Haiti.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No safeguard issues are expected to apply.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Linn A. Hammergren 
05/05/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/05/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
05/05/2006 
Comments:   
