Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2311
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P098531 
Project Name:  HT Electricity Project 
Task Team Leader:  Clemencia Torres 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project seeks to contribute to the sustainable improvement in the quality of electricity 
services to customers and to the strengthening of the financial and operational 
performance of the electricity public utility (EDH).  
 
The proposed project will specifically: (i) Adopt and implement modern commercial 
and service management systems for EDH as the basis for a more customer-oriented 
approach to providing electricity services, (ii) Improve service to, and increase revenues 
billed and collected from, large customers, who constitute close to 70 percent of total 
amount billed by EDH, (iii) Improve service to clients and increase EDH’s revenues in a 
selected zone in Port au Prince, (iv) Improve customers’ perception of EDH through a 
timely dissemination of information on the project and continuous attention to the 
public’s opinion, (v) Establish trustful relationships among EDH’s management, staff and 
workers to ensure commitment towards implementation of the project’s approach and 
sustainability of the results,(vi) Lay the foundation for replication of the approach and 
results of this project to the rest of the country.   
 
3. Project Description 
Proposed implementation arrangement.  Based on the institutional analysis of the sector 
to date, it was agreed that the best way to achieve the various objectives above was to 
Page  2
entrust EDH with the responsibility and leadership for the technical content of the Project 
and establish an Administrative Project Implementation Unit (APIU) that will gather all 
the required fiduciary expertise without distracting too many resources of the beneficiary, 
EDH, from the actual implementation of the project.  
 
This APIU will be composed of a project coordinator, a procurement specialist and a 
financial management specialist. The APIU will work throughout the implementation of 
the project with EDH, who will appoint a team of experts that will follow up the project 
on a continuous basis (the EDH-PREPSEL team). The APIU will have the fiduciary 
responsibility for the project, namely the responsibility for the management of the funds, 
and for the compliance of all PREPSEL’s transactions with the procurement and financial 
management guidelines of the Bank. Given its fiduciary responsibilities, the APIU will 
report to the MEF, namely to the Vice President of EDH’s Board, who is the 
representative of the MEF in the Board.  
 
Finally, a high level strategic steering committee comprised of representatives from the 
main government entities that intervene in the sector: MTPTC, MEF, Bureau du Premier 
Ministre (BPM) as well as EDH and the CMEP will provide guidance to the PIU on 
strategic issues.  
 
Components of the project  
 
Component 1: Improvement in management practices towards a more customer oriented 
approach (US$ 2,130,000):  
 
The objective of this component is to improve operational (technical and commercial) 
performance of EDH in a sustainable manner, by giving the company the information 
tools for a modern and efficient management of the customers and of the services that it 
provides.  
 
The first system financed by the project will be a new “state of art” 
corporatecommercial management system (CMS) allowing to properly execute and 
monitor all the commercial activities in the firm. This will strengthen the commercial 
division of EDH which now suffers from inadequate operational procedures and poor 
information on commercial situation of customers.  
 
The second system will be a new Technical Service Management System (TSMS), 
aimed at optimizing attention of customers’ claims. Current situation of the matteris 
precarious, based on manual records and procedures poorly organized and difficult to 
monitor and supervise.  
 
The project will also finance the technical assistance to guide EDH in how to build the 
corresponding reliable data bases. Finally, since these are highly specialized systems, the 
project will finance two experts in customer and technical service systems for utilities to 
assist EDH in the procurement of the systems and in the supervision of the work of the 
selected provider.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Improvement in quality of services and increase in revenue collection of 
EDH for selected group of customers (US$ 2,915,000)  
 
The objective of this component is three fold: first it intends to have a demonstration 
effect of the benefits of adopting this new ‘customer management approach’ with two 
groups of customers: a selected zone in Port-au-Prince and the group of large customers 
in the whole country. Second, it intends to increase the revenues of EDH, thereby 
lessening the fiscal burden on the State, by targeting those who account for 70% of 
EDH’s total revenues. i.e. the large customers. Third, it aims to provide an intensive 
training opportunity to EDH’s employees as well as to recruit new personnel, for the use 
and applications of more modern commercial and technical practices in the area of 
distribution and commercialization of electricity.  
 
2.1. Application of the new customer oriented management approach to a selected zone 
in Port-au-Prince. The first subcomponent aims to improve the quality of the service 
provided to EDH’s users and increase the revenues for the firm in a specific zone of Port-
au-Prince.  
 
To this end, the new systems and procedures developed under Component 1 will be 
implemented and monitored in EDH’s  local commercial agency (see below). Equally 
important, the design of this component emphasizes the need for a cultural change both 
from EDH’s employees and from the customers in the zone, as the only effective way to 
effect and sustain a change in commercial practices on both sides. This sub-component 
also includes investments in equipment and tools required in the commercial agency of 
the zone to optimize execution of the activities re-engineered following the new 
procedures. There will be some investments in the distribution network and connections 
to the clients needed to ensure reliability of the supply.  
 
2.2: Regularization of all EDH large consumers through the application of the new 
customer oriented management approach. Large customers (monthly consumption 
superior to 1,000kwh) represent 1.3% of total clients but generate close to 70% of EDH 
revenues. It is therefore crucial for EDH’s financial health, to regularize the commercial 
condition of 100 percent of its large consumers, regardless of their current situation. 
Since many of these customers have opted for self-generation, EDH would need to 
convince them of the quality and reliability of its service before they accept to become 
regular customers.  
 
The importance of large consumers in EDH revenues justifies the creation of a new 
organizational unit within the commercial department for the specific purpose of 
managing all aspects (technical and commercial) of relations of the utility with its large 
consumers. Once appointed, the manager of LCU will immediately elaborate a proposal 
of organizational structure of the unit and related human and material resources needed, 
and a plan on how to undertake the other sub-components of this strategic management of 
large consumers, and submit them to the Commercial Director and the General Director.  
 
Page  4
Once the LCU will be in place, there will be a detailed field assessment on the situation 
of all large consumers, an activity that will provide a good opportunity to revitalize EDH 
staff and, at the same time, improve company public image.  
 
Project financing will also include short term technical services of an expert in remote 
metering to assist LCU in the elaboration of the technical specifications for a call for bids 
for supply, installation and commissioning of remote metering devices.  
 
Finally, the project will finance the installation of remote metering and disconnection 
and reconnection devices in all points of supply to regularized large customers.  
 
Component 3: Participatory approach, project management, monitoring and impact 
evaluation, and replication strategy (US$ 455,000). This component regroups all the 
activities necessary for the successful implementation of the first two components. This 
includes a communication strategy with a pro-active participatory approach towards 
clients and employees of EDH. There is also a focus on the importance of an efficient 
project management and a careful monitoring and an evaluation of the results, their 
impact and their sustainability beyond the duration of the project.  Last, it includes a 
proposal to be endorsed by the Government and EDH on how to scale up and replicate 
the project in other zones of Port-au-Prince and of the rest of the country in an effort to 
expand the benefits of the model proposed here to EDH as a whole.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the capital Port-au-Prince and in the provinces. 
Component 2.1 will be implemented in a specific intervention area, in the zone of the 
Toussaint Brave 69/12.5 kV substation. This area has been selected because investments 
required for restoration of MV assets are minimal. MV lines are in good condition, as 
most of them were renovated a few years ago. Therefore no infrastructure rehabilitation is 
required. Components 1, 2.2 and 3 will be implemented for EDH as a whole.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Although the project does not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguards policies, a survey was 
conducted during preparation to gather stakeholders’ opinion about project design, to 
define quality service goals and to identify incentives to encourage willingness to pay. 
During implementation consultation will continue to assess customers’ satisfaction.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
Page  6
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Clemencia Torres 
04/18/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
04/18/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
04/18/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/13/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan G. Goldmark 
04/13/2006 
Comments:   
