Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/08/2007 
Report No.:  AC2688
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P099918 
Project Name:  HT Education For All (APG - Phase 1) 
Task Team Leader:  Samuel C. Carlson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 21, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (75%);Health (15%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Improve access to primary education for poor children aged 6-11, while improving 
equity, quality and governance of the education sector, to promote short-term poverty 
relief and longer-term human capital development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The simple vision is to help put Haiti on a path to achieve EFA by 2015.  The program 
would support both public and non public schools, with an emphasis on the latter, given 
their greater cost-effectiveness, dominance of the sector and faster supply response 
capacity. Thematically, the program would address educational access for the poor; 
primary education quality; and student health/nutrition. The issue of governance would 
be addressed transversally, through strengthening of the National Partnership Office, the 
Department of Administrative Affairs, and the Department for Private Education 
(responsible for non public school accreditation) of the MOE.   As mentioned above, 
given significant existing and future donor resources to address educational quality and 
the project?s limited funding, the primary objective of this operation is on expanding 
access. 
 
Page  2
A
three-phase Adaptable Programmatic Grant (APG) is proposed, each phase lasting 
three years and including total Bank financing of US$50-75 million (US$15-25 M per 
phase), corresponding to IDA 14, IDA 15 and IDA 16.  For the first phase, the emphasis 
is on simplicity, quick start-up and strengthening of activities begun with LICUS TF 
support.   
 
Phase One would support implementation of the National EFA strategy, specifically by 
ensuring educational access for 100,000 poor children aged 6-12 who are currently out of 
school (20% of the estimated 500,000 children not in school).   The main thrust would be 
financing of grants by the National Partnership Office (NPO) to school management 
committees of accredited schools, to subsidize tuition fees for out-of-school children and 
improve quality.   To improve quality the project would aim to improve pre-service 
teacher training, support student health/nutrition programs, strengthen school 
management committees and measurement of learning outcomes.    Governance of the 
sector would be improved through capacity-building of the National Partnership Office, 
National School Feeding Program and the MOE departments of administrative affairs 
(central and regional levels), planning; and private education (for non public school 
accreditation).  Critical to Phase One (and subsequent phases) would be a medium-term 
public expenditure framework for education, supported by the EFA Fast Track Initiative 
(FTI), EGRO II and the HIPC debt relief initiative.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Haiti - national coverage, with emphasis on expansion of educational access in rural areas 
where primary enrollment is lowest.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
Mr Reidar Kvam (LCSSA) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This is a Category C.  No environmental issues are anticipated in association with Phase 
One of this Adaptable Programmatic Grant. Should classroom construction and 
rehabilitation be included in Phase Two of this APG, environmental issues would need to 
be assessed and addressed during preparation of Phase Two.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The hoped-for long term impact is increased enrollment and attendance of primary 
schooling, which would have a beneficiary social impact on all households involved.  
There are risks that subsequent phases of the proposed APG will not materialize, whether 
because of unsatisfactory Phase One results, lack of IDA 15 funding for Haiti, or other 
factors beyond the Bank's control, in which case poor households (particularly in rural 
areas) would be adversely affected due to the loss of the per student subsidy.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project considered household-level targeting to minimize errors of inclusion (non-poor 
households benefitting from per student subsidy), but social assessment indicated this 
risked generating substantial conflict at local level and so decision was made jointly with 
Client to make subsidy universal in schools targeted by the project, beginning in grade 1.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Client participated in design of social assessment and in presentation/discussion of social 
assessment's findings and recommendations, leading to decision to discard household-
level targeting approach.  The social assessment strong endorsement of poor household's 
appreciation of school feeding confirmed client's desire to support expansion of school 
feeding with Bank financing.  The student subsidy program will be closely monitored by 
an independent agency to assess both how funds are used and what impact this has on 
households' decisions to send children to school.  The client has sufficient capacity to 
plan and implement/oversee this independent monitoring.  In addition, school 
management committees (SMC) will prepare and submit reports on use and impact of 
funds, as condition for receipt of subsequent subsidy payments.  The proposed project 
includes a sub-component for strenthening of SMC capacity to carry out these measures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key Stakeholders: 
 
Parents  
 
School Directors 
 
Teachers 
 
Ministry of Education Administrators 
Page  4
Teachers Unions 
 
Students 
 
The social assessment team interviewed key stakeholders in Port-au-Prince as well as 
over 400 stakeholders in 4 departments, of which 3 were selected due to their 
classification in the Poverty Map of Haiti as being ?extremely weak? in terms of access 
to basic education: Artibonite, Centre, and Ouest. The fourth department, Nippes, was not 
included in the Poverty Map and was added at the request of the Ministry of Education. 
Stakeholders consulted in Port-au-Prince included representatives from the Ministry of 
Education, NGOs, other donors, teachers? unions, and representatives of non-public 
school associations. In rural areas, stakeholders included parents (with and without 
children in school), students, school directors, local authority figures, regional Ministry 
of Education representatives, and teachers. Local authority figures range from local 
government representatives, such as mayors, to religious leaders, to members of society 
considered notables by virtue of their age or social influence. A complete description of 
the methodology and results by region is available in a French report.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  5
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samuel C. Carlson 
01/08/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Katherine M. Shafer Coleman 
01/08/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
 
Comments:   
