Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/22/2006 
Report No.:  AC2156
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P095523 
Project Name:  Haiti Transport and Territorial Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
CANADA: CANADIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
(CIDA) 3.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
1.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
4.00 
 
FRANCE:  GOVT. OF FRANCE - MOFA and AFD (C2D) 
5.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
2.00 
 
FOREIGN PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
1.00
18.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project Development Objective: Lower the marketing costs for small farmers in the two 
selected micro-regions. (Marketing costs are those costs incurred in the aggregate of 
functions involved in moving goods from producer to consumer.)  
 
Specific Objectives:  
 
a) Reduce transport costs in bringing locally-produced goods to markets and productive 
inputs from market.  
 
b) Reduce other marketing costs (eg. transit losses).  
 
c) Ensure the sustainability of investments (transport and other basic infrastructure).   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1 (road rehabilitation and maintenance): the objective of this component is to 
improve the transport conditions in a sustainable manner in the two micro-regions, 
through selected interventions on roads and critical points that are essential to the rural 
economy. The project will finance the cost of the works, but also related technical and 
economic studies as well as supervision. The project will also finance the maintenance 
costs for the roads that have been rehabilitated and encourage the GoH to increase 
funding for road maintenance. Funding for maintenance will be channeled through the 
Road Maintenance Fund (FER in French).  
 
Component 2 (complementary investments identified through consultative process): a 
consultative process with local stakeholders will be used to identify priorities based on a 
multi-sector territorial development strategy for the micro-regions. Priority investments 
identified from this planning process would be selected from a menu of eligible 
investments. These investments would be of micro-regional interest and support 
economic growth.  
 
Component 3 (Project administration, monitoring and evaluation): This component 
would finance expenditures for project administration, including environmental 
management, monitoring and evaluation as well as the project's impact evaluation.  
 
Component  
 
1.
Improvement of Key transport corridors (US$11.25 million)  
 
-
Road Improvement and spot interventions (US$10.75 million)  
 
-
Road Maintenance (US$0.5 million)  
 
2. Territorial Development Window (US$3.0 million)  
 
-
Territorial Development Process (US$0.5 million)  
 
-
Complementary Investments (US$2.5 million)  
 
3. Project Administration and M&E (US$1.75 million)  
 
-
Project Administration (US$1.52 million)  
 
-
M&E and impact evaluation (US$0.23 million)  
 
Total (US$16.0 million)   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project adopts a territorial approach focused on the micro-region, which is new in 
Haiti. It would be implemented on a pilot basis in the two micro-regions covered by the 
project. If successful, this model could be replicated in other micro-regions in Haiti.  
 
The two micro-regions that have been selected are: (1) micro-region of Dondon-St. 
Raphael, which covers 5 communes in the Northern region, which is connected to Cap 
Haitien, the second biggest city in the country; and (2) micro-region of Thiotte-Anse a 
Page  3
Pitre covering 4 communes in the South-Eastern region, located along the Dominican 
Republic border.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier (ESDQC) 
Mr Luc Razafimandimby (LCSHS-DPT) 
Mr Willy Egset (SDV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There will be several benefits from the project, including employment generation, easier 
access to social services and to markets, economic and financial fallouts and 
improvement of the physical environment (improved road drainage). However, some 
potential negative environmental impacts have been identified:  
 
-
land acquisition and limited physical resettlement (treated in the resettlement 
framework)  
 
-
other impacts on private property,  
 
-
hydrological alterations  
 
-
risks of increased deforestation (direct)  
 
-
traffic disturbance, notably during the works and in the towns and cities  
 
-
workers’ safety risks (diseases and deaths)  
 
-
noise and dust during construction  
 
Some of the above risks are specific to the construction phase, others to the exploitation 
phase.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
They include:  
 
-
risks of increased deforestation (indirect)  
 
-
negative changes in the landscapes (particularly attractive in both micro-regions)  
Page  4
-
increased pedestrian and other NMT safety risks  
 
-
additional risks of STD (and, in particular HIV/AIDS) transmission  
 
None of these impacts is potentially major.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternatives have been considered in the first component (roads). Given the state of 
these roads, the existing dearth of maintenance and the challenges presented to the 
Borrower, there are no reasonable alternatives to road improvement and long-term road 
maintenance. As the second component is open and programmatic, the inclusion of 
environmental and social criteria, which has been the case, is the best way of providing 
analysis of alternatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An EMF has been designed and adopted by GoH after public consultation. The 
framework describes the mechanism which will be put in place to conduct further 
environmental due diligence on the future works financed by the project.  
 
The EMF
 includes the participation of GoH’s environmental constituency, including the 
Ministry of the Environment as well as environmental Non-Governmental Organizations 
(NGOs).  
 
The GoH has designed and adopted a Cadre d'Expropriations (CE) which makes this 
project compliant with OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.  
 
The objective of the CE is to provide a mechanism by which the compensations paid to 
private parties are fair, in the context of the need for a transfer of private property to GoH 
in the context of the land requirements for the works under this project.  
 
The CE applies principles of legality, integrity, equity and transparency. It is fully 
consistent with the articles 36 et 36.1 of the 1987 Constitution.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the main actors of the road transport sector as well as their users 
and the local and central government in charge of territorial development in the two 
micro-regions. These groups have been adequately consulted during the preparation of 
the Environmental Assessment and of the Cadre d’Expropriations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2006 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  6
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
02/13/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
02/13/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Luc Razafimandimby 
02/13/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Willy Egset 
02/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
