Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2520 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Haiti 
Project ID: P099918 
Project Name: HAITI Education For All - Low-Income Country Adaptable Programmatic 
Credit (LICAPC) 
Task Team Leader: Samuel C. Carlson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (75%);Health (15%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Contribute to the achievement of Education For All in a sustainable manner, while improving 
quality of education services and governance of the education sector, to promote short-term 
poverty relief and longer-term human capital development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The simple vision is to help put Haiti on a path to achieve EFA by 2015.  The program would 
support both public and non public schools, with an emphasis on the latter, given their greater 
cost-effectiveness, dominance of the sector and faster supply response capacity. Thematically, 
the program would address educational access for the poor; primary education quality; and 
student health/nutrition. The issue of governance would be addressed transversally, through 
strengthening of the National Partnership Office, the Department of Administrative Affairs, and 
the Department for Private Education (responsible for non public school accreditation) of the 
MOE.   As mentioned above, given significant existing and future donor resources to address 
educational quality and the project?s limited funding, the primary objective of this operation is 
on expanding access.  
Page  2
A
three-phase Adaptable Programmatic Credit (APC) is proposed, each phase lasting three 
years and including total Bank financing of US$50-75 million (US$15-25 M per phase).  For the 
first phase, the emphasis is on simplicity, quick start-up and strengthening of activities begun 
with LICUS TF support.  
 
Phase One would support implementation of the National EFA strategy, specifically by 
ensuring educational access for 100,000 poor children aged 6-12 who are currently out of school 
(20% of the estimated 500,000 children not in school).   The main thrust would be financing of 
grants by the National Partnership Office (NPO) to school management committees of accredited 
schools, to subsidize tuition fees for out-of-school children and improve quality.   To improve 
quality the project would aim to improve pre-service teacher training, support student 
health/nutrition programs, strengthen school management committees and measurement of 
learning outcomes.    Governance of the sector would be improved through capacity-building of 
the National Partnership Office, National School Feeding Program and the MOE departments of 
administrative affairs (central and regional levels), planning; and private education (for non 
public school accreditation).  Critical to Phase One (and subsequent phases) would be a medium-
term public expenditure framework for education, supported by the EFA Fast Track Initiative 
(FTI), EGRO II and the HIPC debt relief initiative.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Haiti - national coverage, with emphasis on expansion of educational access in rural areas where 
primary enrollment is lowest.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguard policies are expected to be triggered by this operation, which includes no civil 
works (construction or rehabilitation) and is expected to have no environmental impact.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Katherine M. Shafer Coleman (LCSFW) 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSEO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/10/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/10/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Social Assessment was launched on September 22, and was discussed with the Ministry of 
Education during the Pre-Appraisal Mission in November, in time for assessment's 
conclusions to be incorporated into project design.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samuel C. Carlson 
09/26/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/11/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
10/12/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
