Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/22/2007 
Report No.:  AC3004
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P101218 
Project Name:  Honduras Education Quality, Governance, & Institutional Strengthening 
Task Team Leader:  Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 6, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (40%);Primary education (30%);Pre-primary education 
(30%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to support the Government of Honduras to increase the 
coverage, quality, accountability and governance of its basic education system.  
Specifically, the Project?s Development Objectives are to: (i) expand pre-school 
coverage in disadvantaged communities; (ii) improve education quality in PROHECO 
schools through teacher training; (iii) improve teacher performance and accountability; 
and (iv) improve governance.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1.  Enhancing and Scaling-Up Interventions that Address the Needs of the 
Poor (US$ 6.9 million equivalent, 43% of total project cost)  
 
This component would support pre and primary school level interventions focused at the 
poorest segments of the population.  The beneficiaries will be chosen following the 
national mechanism of targeting extremely poor population in Honduras (Red Solidaria).  
 
Page  2
1.1. Support for the preschool level in rural areas.  The proposed Project would support 
the MoE?s goal of providing one year of quality preschool education to all five year old 
children in Honduras.  
 
1.2. Teacher training and materials for education in a multi-grade setting.  The proposed 
Project would finance teacher training, including the design and production of 
appropriate methodologies and didactic materials to implement multi-grade pedagogical 
strategies in PROHECO and PROHECO-IBE schools.  
 
Component 2.  Community Participation in School Management for Better Performance 
(US$ 3 million equivalent, 19% of total project cost)  
 
The objective of this component is to foster community participation within an 
Integrated School Management System that would contribute to improve quality of 
education.  In order to achieve this general objective, the proposed Project would support 
the following three subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 2.1.  Consolidation and Institutionalization of the School Management 
System  
 
The objective of this subcomponent is to develop an integrated School Development 
System, through consolidating norms of self-management and through strengthening the 
modalities for school management for traditional schools, PROHECO, PROHECO-IBE 
and Educational Networks.  
 
Subcomponent 2.2.  School Planning and Resources for Quality Education  
 
This subcomponent?s objective is to strengthen school planning capacity and resource 
allocation for quality education including IBE schools.  
 
The subcomponent would contribute to consolidate an integral school planning system, 
based on the Schools? Educational Project (PEC).  During the past five years Honduras 
developed multiple processes and tools for the Education Planning at the school level. 
The subcomponent would contribute to review, articulate and develop a single instrument 
that supports the management modalities planning.  It would provide support for the 
educational school planning processes and for the development of tools to monitor the 
PEC?s outcomes and provide feedback.  Similarly, it would strengthen the educational 
planning through cooperative networks among schools (PER).  
 
Subcomponent 2.3. School Management and Education Performance Monitoring and 
Evaluation  
 
This subcomponent?s objectives are to develop and implement a participatory 
monitoring and evaluation system for the school management and its impact on education 
performance and on governance.  
 
Page  3
Component 3. 
Governance and Institutional Strengthening of the MoE (US$ 5.5 
equivalent, 34% of total project cost)  
 
This component would support efforts to strengthen the MoE, including improving 
governance and generating management capacity and information about the performance 
of its education system.  Many of the activities under this component constitute important 
elements of the Plan de Sostenibilidad del Proceso de Mejora de la Administraci?n de 
Recursos Humanos Docentes del Sector Educativo de Honduras that the government is 
implementing since last year, where the Census of Teachers and Audit of Post 
corresponds to its starting point.  The component is organized across the following three 
areas of intervention:  
 
3.1. Information for improved performance and greater accountability.  One of the key 
deterrents to effective educational performance, management and accountability is the 
absence and/or limited articulation of information in the sector and the MoE. This 
subcomponent would promote the development and/or completion of missing MIS 
modules and increased articulation among them in order to provide the tools for 
improved teacher management and, thus, increased accountability.  
 
3.2.  National System of Assessment of Learning Outcomes.  The proposed Project 
would finance a sample-based, external bi-annual standardized assessments for 3rd and 
6th graders to evaluate the quality of education nationwide.  
 
3.3.  Human Resource Management and Evaluation.  The proposed Project would 
support the design, modification and implementation of critical human resource 
management processes and procedures for a more effective personnel system for 
teachers.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed Project would be implemented throughout the country but school specific 
interventions will target the poorest rural schools, some of which serve Indigenous and 
Afro-Honduran peoples.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
According to the 2001 census, 7.2% of population is Indigenous or Afro-descendant, 
therefore OP 4.10 is triggered. Annex 10 describes the World Bank support to the Inter-
cultural Bilingual Program through an Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Plan 
agreed with the GOH.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N
/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an Indigenous Peoples Plan to ensure that the proposed 
Project responds to the education needs of this population in a culturally-adequate 
manner, under each component and subcomponent. The MOE is responsible for project 
implementation, and the National Intercultural Bilingual Program (PRONEEAAH) in the 
MOE will be responsible for monitoring project implementation.  PRONEEAAH will 
coordinate with the other departments of the MOE to ensure a successful implementation 
of interventions.  The IPP contemplates capacity building of PRONEEAAH to ensure 
readiness for monitoring of implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Some key stakeholders besides those responsible for the proposed Project are, at the 
central level: PRONEEAAH at the MOE and the Indigenous federations? education 
Page  5
representatives; at the department level IBE delegates; at the local level Indigenous and 
Afro-Honduran grassroots organizations supporting the school communities.  
 
At least two comprehensive informed consultations were carried out during preparation 
of the proposed Project. A country-wide social assessment carried out by an independent 
group of consultants in schools inside and outside of school networks, in three main 
regions of Honduras: (i) Western Region, (ii) Northern region, Bay Islands and Moskitia; 
and (iii) Central and Southern Regions.  The assessment consulted with stakeholders and 
beneficiaries (school principals, parents, teachers, students, Departmental coordinators, 
and supervisors) on their views about the proposed Project interventions.  Also, during 
workshops, PRONEEAAH staff has consulted with the education specialists representing 
Indigenous federations on the approaches and interventions of the components.  Their 
opinions are reflected in the IPP.  Four workshops on governance in the education sector 
were carried out by the World Bank team with key stakeholders. Results of all the 
assessments have been taken into account when designing the proposed Project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/22/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
No 
Page  6
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza 
08/06/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
08/06/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
 
Comments:   
