Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:39735 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/22/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Honduras 
Project ID: P105386 
Project Name: Natural Disaster Mitigation - Additional Scale Up Financing 
Task Team Leader: Tova M. Solo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (70%);Sub-national government administration (30%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P);Land administration and management 
(S);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (S);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
*
NOTE: CATEGORY B PROJECT.  
 
The development objective of the project is to improve the capacity of the Borrower (the 
Republic of Honduras) to reduce its vulnerability to natural disasters at the municipal level.  This 
objective will be achieved through programs specifically to support: (i) small mitigation 
measures (subprojects) identified under the project in the eligible municipalities (approximately 
US$5 million); and (ii) to support programs in early warning systems, disaster preparedness and 
vulnerability assessments, including extending coverage to eligible municipalities.  
 
[Note: there have been no changes to the Project Development Objective (PDO), project 
components or safeguard requirements.  The proposed activities are consistent with the PDO, 
given that they are of the same nature of those already implemented under the ongoing Natural 
Disaster Mitigation Project (NDMP, P064913).  As such, the scaling up is not expected to raise 
the environmental category of the project nor trigger any new safeguards].   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed activities for Additional Financing, which are explicitly highlighted in the 
February 5, 2007 request from the Ministry of Finance, would scale up activities which have 
been implemented under the ongoing Project according to the major Components and are 
described below: 
 
Under Component A
–
Monitoring, Forecasting, Early Warning and Geographical Information 
System-based Information Management
–
Additional financing would support investments listed 
in the Honduran Government’s Proposed Natural Disaster Mitigation Program (annex 4) as 1.3 
and 1.4, on the order of US$245,000 equivalent for: 
 
1. Design and installation of an integrated national flood forecasting and warning and decision 
support system; While refinements may be applied to (a) design of: (i) a flood forecasting 
system; (ii) an operational computing and communications system; (iii) and operational response 
system; and (iv) a geographical information system, additional financing will particularly 
contribute to: (b) a study of financial sustainability options; (c) acquisition and installation of all 
necessary equipment (to allow for installation and calibration of hydrometrological monitoring 
equipment in expanded watershed areas) and (d) training of SERNA’s personnel in the operation 
and maintenance of said equipment (including the elaboration of a manual on maintenance and 
operation of the hydrometrological monitoring system.) 
 
2. Improvement of national capacity to manage information relating to droughts through: (a) 
acquisition of necessary software; and (b) design and implementation of a capacity –building 
plan for drought response -to expand the geographic area covered under the first project  
 
3. Development and installation of a database management system and geographical information 
system for the purpose of establishing a national databank which will provide detailed 
information on environmental conditions and potential risks of floods and landslides and the 
provision of training in the use of those systems -  in particular to increase the capacity of the 
national forecasting center (CNP or 
Centro Nacional de Pronosticos)
 
4. Establishment of community-based flood early warning systems to complement the main 
hydrometeorological network in small river basins. 
 
Under Part B – Strengthening of National Capacity to Support Emergency Response at the 
Municipal Level
.
Additional financing would support investments listed in the Honduran 
Government’s Proposed Natural Disaster Mitigation Program (annex 4) as 2.1, 3.1, 4.2 and 4.3 
on the order of US$600,000 equivalent for: 
 
1. Identification of (a) the equipment needed by cities, municipalities and volunteer groups for 
operations concerning immediate life-saving search and rescue operations and protection of 
disaster victims; and (b) the equipment necessary for the establishment of a national emergency 
communications system; and 
 
2. Design and implementation of a system to manage information on emergency assistance, in 
particular to monitor the municipalities’ emergency needs and the national and foreign donations 
Page  3
in response to such needs. These activities would support and update disaster risk information in 
the SINIT systems and train users (municipalities and agencies) in its use and maintenance. 
 
Under Component C 
–Building Capacity in Disaster Mitigation at the Municipal Level
Additional financing would support investments listed in the Honduran Government’s Proposed 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program (annex 4) as 2.3, 2.4 and 4.1, on the order of US$6,155,000 
equivalent for: 
 
1. Development of a database on municipal vulnerability to natural disasters to provide 
information to the Honduran population, said information to be organized by topics such as: risks 
of natural hazards, disaster preparedness, mitigation measures which have been identified and 
mitigation measures which have been implemented; 
 
2. Carrying out of a disaster risk analysis in each Eligible Municipality, said analysis to include, 
inter alia,
:
(risk assessment and vulnerability mapping; (b) the identification of areas at risk 
within the boundaries of said Eligible Municipalities; (c) the preparation of disaster preventive 
land use plans; and (d) the identification and priorization of mitigation measures; 
 
3. Carrying out, if appropriate, of feasibility and engineering studies and final designs of those 
mitigation measures referred to in Part C.2 (d) of the Project which meet the criteria set forth in 
the Operations Manual; and  
 
4. Carrying out of mitigation measure subprojects in Eligible Municipalities such as: retrofitting 
schools and hospitals; identifying high risk areas and posting warnings of barriers to prevent 
unsuitable occupation or land use; providing systems for identifying unsafe areas, escape routes 
and shelters and equipping and fitting such shelters; preventing settlements in unpopulated high 
risk areas through the creation of municipal public spaces, sports facilities, community gardens 
and other similar programs; controlling landslides and erosion through reforestation programs 
and/or the construction of retaining walls and terracing; installation of waste and storm water 
drainage systems in high density areas and roadways subject to erosion or flooding; removing 
sediment deposits originated in earlier disasters; and carrying out protective works, reinforcing 
and retrofitting vital infrastructure (roads, bridges, cross walks and water supply and energy 
systems.)  Subprojects are not expected to have negative environmental impacts and will not 
include any investments described in a “Negative List” presented in Annex 2. However, as per 
the Memo of Understanding signed by COPECO, the implementing agency for the additional 
financing and the FHIS, no subproject will receive financing without first receiving a written 
clearance from FHIS confirming that the Subproject is environmentally sound as determined by 
FHIS’ environmental screening of the respective Subproject proposal. FHIS environmental 
procedures follow guidelines set out by the Environmental Ministry, SERNA as per  Memo of 
Understanding signed by FHIS and SERNA. The Memo of Understanding appears in Annex 7. 
 
Both an Environmental Assessment (EA) and an Indigenous People’s Development Framework 
(IDPF) have been developed for the additional financing and are presented in Annexes 8 and 9 
respectively. The safeguard documents in Spanish were made available by the Government of 
Honduras for local public review and these, plus the ISDS and PID, in English, have been in the 
Info Shop for a month before appraisal. 
Page  4
Financing for subprojects, which will be carried out with the participation of the respective 
municipality, may cover full or partial costs of the proposed mitigation measures according to 
criteria established in the Operations Manual which is consistent with other Bank projects 
financing Municipal works, and also takes into account municipal income, vulnerability, and 
previous financing received under the PMDN. 
 
Under Part D. Project Management, Additional financing would support strengthening of 
COPECO’s operational capacity for a maximum total of US$350,000 or $117,000 the first year 
and declining amounts thereafter for: 
 
1. Strengthening of the operational capacity of GAAEX to manage and monitor the financial and 
procurement aspects of the Project; 
 
2. Strengthening of the operational and institutional capacity of COPECO (including the TCU 
and other units within COPECO referred to in the Operations Manual) to manage and to monitor 
the implementation and technical aspects of the Project. 
 
The additional financing will cover 100% of the costs of activities identified under Components 
A, B, C and D.  All additional costs of technical and administrative staff will be financed by the 
GOH. The Borrower is also seeking to add an additional US$2 million equivalent for 
complementary expenditures.  
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project activities will be implemented through the eligible municipalities of Honduras; sites 
selection for small mitigation measures will be based on the following criteria, which have been 
applied under the NDMP:  
 
(i) 
Specific risk exposure to natural disasters (flood, wind damage, land slides, etc);  
 
(ii) 
Strategic importance of infrastructure at risk  
 
(iii) 
Probable community participation in the mitigation measures  
 
The project will finance mitigation measures (sub-projects) in up to 40 eligible municipalities, 
selected according to vulnerability indicators agreed by the Bank and the Borrower and listed in 
the Operations Manual.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Compliance with safeguard policies has been satisfactory in the NDMP. The same procedures, 
explained below, will be used in the additional financing project.  
 
In the NDMP, the environmental evaluations are done by FHIS (Fondo Hondure
ño
de
Inversión 
Social), as per the agreement signed between FHIS and SERNA (Secretaria de Recursos 
Naturales y Ambiente), which puts FHIS in charge of the process of environmental licensing.  In 
addition, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Project Coordination Unit (PCU-
NDMP) of the NDMP and FHIS, stipulates the role of FHIS in the review, evaluation, and 
supervision of mitigation measures (sub-projects) financed by the NDMP. According to this 
MoU, no sub-project may receive funding without first receiving authorization in writing from 
Page  5
FHIS, stating that the sub-project is environmentally sound, as determined by the environmental 
evaluation of FHIS.  The MoU specifies the following:  
 
1) The PCU-NDMP presents the sub-project's general information (type of mitigation measure, 
design, location, beneficiary population, preliminary field visit) to FHIS, which classifies it in 
terms of the following categories:  
 
Category 1: no environmental impact.  Requires a Certificate of Environmental Record  
 
Category 2: minor impact.  Requires an Environmental License  
 
Category 3 or 4: Moderate or major impact. Requires an Environmental Impact Evaluation in 
order to be given the Licensing subsequently.  
 
Monitoring of the mitigation measures in the NDMP was done by an Environmental 
Engineering working at the PCU-NDMP, together with environmental staff from FHIS.  All the 
sub-projects were rated category 1, with no environmental impact (the list of all the sub-projects 
and their category is annexed to the Environmental Assessment).  During implementation of each 
of the mitigation measures, the engineer made two visits and there were no specific comments or 
changes needed to consider for the measures.  
 
The institutional arrangements will change under the Additional Financing project to reflect the 
Government of Honduras's decision to institutionalize the disaster prevention and risk reduction 
activities begun under the Project.  The technical and administrative teams - PCU and GAAEX 
(the Assistance Group for External Aid) respectively - will maintain the same essential staff 
which has managed the Project in the past and which has been reviewed and found highly 
satisfactory by the Bank's fiduciary team. The technical staff would be incorporated into 
COPECO's relevant units, and GAAEX will continue to act as an independent unit within 
COPECO dedicated exclusively to managing the proposed additional financing, as per the inter-
institutional agreement with COPECO and the Ministry of Finance (SEFIN).  However, this will 
not affect the process of environmental evaluation, and the same procedures highlighted above 
will be followed.  
 
The activities to be carried in the project will be promoted, identified, appraised, approved, 
carried out and monitored by the Borrower, with the participation of COPECO, FHIS (in 
accordance with the terms of the Inter-institutional Agreement and each institution's agreement), 
the respective Eligible Municipality (in accordance with the terms of each Sub-project 
Agreement), in accordance with the procedures set forth or referred to in the Operational manual, 
including, as mentioned above, a clearance in writing issued by FHIS, prior to commencement of 
each Sub-project, confirming that it is environmentally sound as determined by the 
environmental screening done by FHIS.  This environmental evaluation will also be done during 
implementation.  
 
Note that a 'Negative List' approach is to be taken to screen out activities that would cause 
involuntary resettlement, as specified in the DCA and the environmental subproject screening 
procedures.  The 'Negative List' is the following:  
 
Subprojects Negative List  
Page  6
1. 
Non-investment activities, including, inter alia:  (i) mere consumption or transfer of 
ownership; (ii) financing of debts and liabilities; (iii) purchase or rental of land; (iv) provision of 
welfare or other social assistance; and (v) containment or extinguishment of existing fires.  
 
2.
Dam construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or strengthening.  
 
3.
Activities affecting natural protected areas recognized by central, departmental, regional 
or municipal governments (or buffer zones thereof), other than to rehabilitate areas damaged by a 
previous natural disaster.  
 
4.
Land reclamation (i.e., drainage of wetlands or filling of water bodies to create land).  
 
5.
Land clearance and leveling (when affecting natural habitats and natural land contours, 
natural habitats for this purpose being those water or land areas where most of the original plant 
and animal species are still present), except for clearing of debris resulting from an emergency.  
 
6.
Hazardous waste management and disposal, as well as manufacture, transport and use of 
pesticides and other hazardous and/or toxic materials (except small amounts of solvents, 
degreasing materials, paints, fuels and the like used during construction).  
 
7.
River training (i.e., realignment, contraction or deepening of an existing river channel, or 
excavation of a new river channel).   
 
8.
Activities involving industrial plants (large-scale) and industrial estates.  
 
9.
New road construction or major upgrading or realignment of roads (major means:  
changing the road category, such as from seasonal to all-weather or secondary to primary; adding 
new lanes; or changing road surface).  
 
10.
New large-scale irrigation, drainage or flood control works.  
 
11.
(a)  Activities which, when being carried out, would affect, or involve the use of, water of 
rivers or of other bodies of water (or their tributaries) which flow through or are bordered by 
countries other than Honduras, in such a manner as to in any way adversely change the quality or 
quantity of water flowing to or bordering said countries; and (b) activities involving the 
installation or construction of facilities which, when operated after their construction or 
installation, would affect, or involve the use of water of rivers or other bodies of water (or their 
tributaries) which flow through or are bordered by countries other than Honduras, in such a 
manner as to in any way adversely change the quality or quantity of water flowing to or 
bordering said countries (unless such bordering countries have formally expressed in writing to 
the Association and to Honduras their no-objection to the activities referred to in (a) or (b) 
herein).  
 
12.
Activities relating to forestry production.  
 
13.
Development of new, or expansion of existing, ports and harbors.  
 
14.
Aquaculture and mariculture activities.  
 
15.
River basin development activities.  
 
16.
Development of new or expansion of existing thermal power and hydropower facilities.  
 
17.
Activities of any type classifiable as category A for environmental purposes pursuant to 
the Association's Operational Policy (OP) 4.01 dated January 1999.  
 
18.
Conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats (as defined in Annex A to the 
Associations Operational Policy (OP) 4.04 dated June 2001).  
 
19.
Any project which results in (a) the involuntary taking of land resulting in (i) relocation 
or loss of shelter; (ii) lost of assets or access to assets; or iii) loss of income sources or means of 
livelihood, whether or not the affected persons must move to another location; or (b) the 
involuntary restriction of access9 to legally designated parks and protected areas resulting in 
adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced persons. 
Page  7
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (LCSUW) 
Ms Josefina Stubbs (WBIVP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The borrower has prepared an EA.  It will be consulted with relevant stakeholders in mid-April 
and will be disclosed shortly after, before project appraisal.  The EA includes an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) outlining procedures and adequate agreements to ensure adequate 
screening of each subpoject, identification of potential impacts and necessary mitigation 
measures.   The EA also includes an evaluation of past project performance with regards to 
implementation of the EMP and assessment of the new partner’s capacity for implementation 
 
Since the goal of the Project is to mitigate risks to natural disasters, in principle, the 
recommended mitigation works do not carry any environmental negative risks, but rather, seek to 
reinforce environmental protection as risk mitigation.  In addition, according to the procedures 
under the NDMP, the process of identifying the mitigation works in each municipality needs to 
undergo the processes described in section E, and have the environmental approval of FHIS-
SERNA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The purpose of the mitigation works is vulnerability reduction.  Therefore, no works will be 
financed in environmentally sensitive areas or in protected areas, according to the Negative List.  
The project is not expected to have any negative impact on movable or immovable objects, 
sites, structures, groups of structures, natural features or landscapes with archeological, 
paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other cultural significance. The 
assessment carried out during the NDMP indicates that it would be very unlikely that any project 
activity will have any negative impact on physical cultural resources.  Nevertheless, in the event 
that an archeologically or culturally significant resource is found in the project area, the 
following procedures will be followed:  
 
-work will be stopped immediately  
 
-the Division of Anthropology and History at the Secretariat for Culture and Sports 
(Dirección de Antropología e Historia, Secretaria de Cultura y Deportes) will be contacted for an 
evaluation of the site.  No work can be continued without approval of the entity.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The borrower has prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).  It will be 
consulted with relevant stakeholders in mid-April and will be disclosed shortly after, before 
project appraisal.    
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:   
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/30/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
-The Environmental Assessment and the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework have been 
completed.  Consultation will be done in mid-April, and disclosure will be done before 
appraisal.  
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tova M. Solo 
04/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
