Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2791 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Honduras 
Project ID: P103881 
Project Name: Honduras Water and Sanitation Program 
Task Team Leader: Gustavo Saltiel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Decentralization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objectives are: (i) to improve the efficiency and reliability of Honduras?s 
water supply and sanitation (WSS) services by implementing the Strategic Plan to Modernize the 
WSS Sector (PEMAPS) which decentralizes service provision to autonomous operators and 
rearranges the distribution of certain governance functions to relatively new sector institutions; 
and (ii) to develop and demonstrate replicable models of successful and sustainable provision of 
WSS services, by supporting selected municipal service providers in increasing their capacity to 
improve the quality, access, governance, accountability to consumers and management of 
WSS?all part of Honduras? poverty reduction development objectives.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project's objectives will be achieved by financing:  
 
?
At the national level, technical assistance to the sector?s institutions, as well as support to 
comply with legal requisites for the transfer of systems from the national utility to the 
municipalities.  
 
?
In selected pilot municipalities, the design and installation of autonomous operators, 
efficiency improvements (billing and collection, leak detection, metering etc.) and investments.  
 
Lending instrument proposed  
Page  2
The proposed operation would be structured as a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) with specific 
activities located within the context of the broadly accepted Strategic Plan for Modernization of 
the Water and Sanitation Sector (PEMAPS) developed by GOH with World Bank and PPIAF 
support.  
 
Institutional Arrangements  
 
It is proposed that the Honduran Social Investment Fund (?Fondo Hondure?o de Inversi?n 
Social,? FHIS) be responsible for implementation of Component 3 (the component with 
environmental implications) including procurement, disbursement, accounting, financial 
reporting, auditing, monitoring, and evaluation. Project staff would comprise a mix of FHIS staff 
as well as employees from other FHIS offices. Temporary consultants will be hired to oversee 
project implementation. A qualified management firm in charge of coordinating the required 
paperwork for design, procurement, and supervision will, under FHIS supervision, handle the 
more detailed implementation of major works. This implementation scheme has proven 
successful for other infrastructure projects in Honduras.  
 
Although the flow of funds arrangement has not yet been finalized, it is envisaged that the Bank 
would give FHIS the credit and FHIS in turn would, together with Secretary of Finance, then 
pass the funds on to the municipalities as grants. The Government has expressed interest in 
developing a financing mechanism built around the concept of matching grants, by which the 
national subsidies are "matched" or ?mixed? with municipal funds in amounts based on poverty 
levels as well as project type. Such a system has been in place for many years in the water sector 
in Mexico. The Government favors this mechanism since significant poverty alleviation funds 
from debt forgiveness programs (the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative [HIPC] and the 
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative [MDRI]) are already being distributed to municipalities as 
transfers.  
 
Project Components  
 
The proposed operation would assist the Government of Honduras in implementing the 
decentralization of WSS and helping municipalities provide improved services through activities 
at the national, regional and municipal level. Institutional strengthening actions will help fortify 
and establish the (some recently created) national sector actors (Component 1). At municipal 
level, the project will seek to support and encourage the municipalities to adopt autonomous 
operator models by providing a combination of free technical assistance for creating the 
operators, short-term efficiency improvement measures (Component 2), and performance-based 
investment funding (Component 3) once the operator is established.  
 
The following figure presents the flow of the project in a typical municipality; each component 
is described in more detail in subsequent paragraphs.  
 
[This application does not support the graphics for this figure so the figure is reinterpreted here] 
 
Step 1. Municipality agrees on the transfer of services: Municipality and operator prepare for 
the transfer of the services. 
 
Step 2. Operator starts operating: Operator improves efficiency and consolidates operation. 
 
Step 3. Operator has proven track record: Operator is well established and tackles structural 
issues. 
 
Page  3
Bank-Supported Activities: 
 
Component 1: Strengthening of the national and regional institutions 
 
Component 2: TA for design and implementation of operator; Efficiency improvement 
funding; Continued efficiency improvement funding 
 
Component 3: Investment funding 
 
Component 1: Institutional strengthening of national and regional sector institutions (Estimated 
Cost US$12 million, of which US$8 million to be Bank financed)  
 
The institutional framework for WSS in Honduras consists of the water sector planning agency 
(CONASA), a regulating agency (ERSAPS), and a national utility (SANAA). Decentralization 
and other reforms change or establish the functioning of each of these agencies. This component 
will provide support for each of these agencies to fulfill their new roles in a timely, efficient and 
transparent manner. Activities under this component are derived from the PEMAPS.  
 
Decentralization changes the function of SANAA from service provision and top-down control 
to a facilitating and supporting role. The component will provide assistance to transform the 
utility SANAA into (a) a technical assistance agency for municipal WSS providers and water 
boards (juntas de agua); and (b) a technical secretariat for CONASA. This will include setting up 
regional branches to provide technical assistance. The component will also fund severance 
payments for staff laid off in the course of decentralization, as well as from the restructuring of 
SANAA. The component will also include support to CONASA to design the Fondo Hondure?o 
para Agua y Saneamiento (FHAS), a financing mechanism for the sector that was outlined in the 
PEMAPS (this will be done in a later stage of the APL-1 to take advantage of the experience 
gained from the project?s support to local utilities).  
 
The present capacity of ERSAPS (the regulatory agency) will not suffice to fulfill its role of 
setting tariffs and ?vetting? municipal operators for the larger number of service providers after 
decentralization. Technical assistance will be provided to strengthen ERSAPS, including support 
on defining and implementing the new relationship municipal oversight units and ERSAPS in 
tariff setting.  
 
The component will also support preparatory activities for the transfer of service delivery from 
SANAA to the Municipality of Tegucigalpa (AMDC). This support will include activities such 
as updating inventories, installing consumer and asset management systems as well as planning 
the transfer process.  
 
Finally, this component would also support mechanisms to improve governance in municipal 
water management, to promote transparency and access to information as well as to ensure civil 
society and consumer participation throughout the decentralization process. The ultimate goal 
would be to promote a change in attitude and behavior of both the consumers and the providers 
so that they engage in participatory processes towards better governance, transparency and 
accountability in the water sector. This set of activities would include a communication program, 
awareness and education campaigns, public hearings, citizen report cards, among other proven 
mechanisms for promoting social accountability and building trust between government and civil 
society organizations. These activities, although part of Component 1, would be also present in 
the other components in order to promote a broad-based stakeholder dialogue on the 
decentralization process in the water sector, the benefits to citizens and to the local governments 
in terms of public participation, transparency, trust in government and efficiency of the new 
water management schemes.  
Page  4
Component 2: Efficiency Improvements (Estimated Cost US$6 million, to be entirely Bank 
financed)  
 
This component would support, the process of transferring the water and sanitation services 
from SANAA and/or the municipality itself to autonomous municipal (or regional) operators by 
focusing on a group of pilot municipalities. These operators could assume other municipal 
services as well such as solid waste management, street cleaning, etc.  
 
Some of these Municipalities within a particular population range (for example, between 40,000 
and 300,000 inhabitants)  would be among the first to receive free Technical Assistance to assist 
them in selecting and designing the management model of their autonomous operator, as well as 
plan and implement the services transfer process.  
 
Municipalities that form an operating autonomous service provider would then be eligible for 
further funding for efficiency improvements. Given the importance of showing rapid 
improvements in service quality to justify the transfer process and possible subsequent tariffs 
increases, this component would also finance short-term efficiency improvement measures of 
technical (such as leak detection, network sectorization, meters installation), commercial (billing 
and collection, reduction of non-revenue water), financial (such as tariffs adaptation) and social 
natures (hygiene and awareness-raising campaigns, etc.). This component would not finance 
large-scale coverage expansion but would instead concentrate on rapid efficiency gains.  
 
Component 3: Investments (Estimated Cost US$12 million of which US$6 million is to be 
Bank financed)  
 
As a complement to the efficiency improvements reached under Component 2, Component 3 
would finance investments in infrastructure for those operators that develop a successful track 
record. This component would serve as an incentive for municipalities to create autonomous 
operators instead of assuming the operation of the services directly. It is expected that not all of 
the municipalities that enter component 2 would benefit from component 3, hence creating a 
certain degree of competition.  
 
Component 3 would be designed using a ?matching grant? scheme where municipalities or 
operators must provide co-financing to obtain grants. The percentage of co-financing would 
depend on factors such as poverty level and type of investment, while the total amount of the 
program?s grant would depend on the size of the operator?s customer base and possibly its 
management model and operative performance.  
 
Investments funded under this component would encompass water and sanitation coverage 
extension, rehabilitation of existing systems (tanks, treatment plants, network), as well as the 
development of new water resources and the treatment of wastewater effluents as necessary. 
Although the operators would have the freedom to decide which investments they would like to 
execute, any investment would need to be justified as part of a master plan (which, if not already 
existing, could be financed from loan proceeds).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Throughout Honduras. Specific locations are not yet known.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No major environmental issues are expected in the implementation of this project, given the 
small scale of the water supply and sanitation (WSS) investments envisioned in these projects. 
However, FHIS, the implementing institution and financial intermediary, is benefiting from 
capacity building measures in safeguards through current Bank projects such as the Rural 
Page  5
Infrastructure Project and Barrio Ciudad. Its procedures for these programs were developed 
expressly to ensure compliance with World Bank Safeguard policies and involve review of 
proposed sub-projects by SERNA, the Honduran Secretary of Environment and Natural 
Resources. This project will use these safeguard policies and procedures as documented in the 
OBA Conceptual Framework for Social and Environmental Management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (LCSUW) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
As stated above, no major environmental issues are expected in the implementation of this 
project, given the small scale of the water supply and sanitation (WSS) investments envisioned. 
FHIS could create a Conceptual Framework for Social and Environmental Management for this 
Honduras Water and Sanitation Program based on its Honduras OBA National Water Sector 
Fund Framework (which has similar but smaller scale investments). This Framework for the 
Honduras Program would outline appropriate environmental screening criteria and procedures 
for management of any environmental impacts that will be incorporated into the proposed 
project?s Operational Manual.  
 
FHIS will ensure that appropriate environmental assessments are carried out for each 
individual water and sanitation sub-project during project implementation once municipalities 
have qualified and are selected for financial support from the project. Minor environmental 
impacts (proper disposal of construction waste, erosion control, protection of spring catchments 
etc.) will be addressed by appropriate guidelines that will be incorporated into the technical 
specifications governing the work of construction contractors.  
 
If necessary, the Facility will incorporate capacity building measures to support FHIS in 
doing the necessary environmental reviews. FHIS is currently increasing its capacity through its 
work on other Bank-funded projects such as Barrio Ciudad and PIR. Additionally, FHIS has an 
agreement with the Environmental Agency (SERNA) that it (FHIS), SERNA or a contractor 
could do any necessary environmental reviews or assessments?hence augmenting FHIS?s 
capacity.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
While activities to be carried out under the project are not expected to impact any known 
cultural heritage sites, technical specifications for works and the Operation Manual will include 
?chance find procedures? to be followed in the event that culturally significant materials are 
discovered during the execution of civil works. FHIS already has World Bank-approved 
guidelines to develop a Cultural Property Protection Plan and they will take into account the 
already established Honduran Institute of Archeology and History (Instituto Hondure?o de 
Arqueolog?a e Historia, IHAH) provisions.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The Indigenous Peoples Safeguard could be triggered by this Program since works locations 
are presently undefined. To ensure compliance with this policy, FHIS will develop an Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) which takes into account all existing Honduran policies 
with respect to indigenous peoples? rights, as well as any additional requirements which may 
exist beyond Honduran policies as mandated by OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
While this project is not expected to cause any resettlement, in case there will be any land 
acquisition, FHIS is preparing an Involuntary Resettlement Framework to be disclosed by 
Appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/01/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Conceptual Framework for Environmental and Social Management and Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework studies estimated to start mid-March 2007 and end May 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gustavo Saltiel 
03/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/30/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
03/07/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
