Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2809 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Honduras 
Project ID: P101209 
Project Name: Honduras Rural Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader: Edward William Bresnyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (42%);Agro-industry 
(25%);Agricultural marketing and trade (23%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income 
generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
21.20
21.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching goal of the Project is to improve the competitiveness of the rural economy and 
to raise rural per capita incomes. The two objectives of the proposed Project are: (a) increasing 
profitability and competitiveness of small and medium rural producers who are organized or can 
be organized through participation in productive alliance : and (b) increasing the access of these 
producers to markets through improvements to economic infrastructure, notably roads, water and 
energy.  
 
The project will be designed and implemented to enable small and medium sized producers to 
establish self-organized enterprises with the capacity to negotiate alliances, manage resources, 
resolve conflicts, and otherwise make the decisions necessary to adapt and thrive in different 
markets. Certain number of supply chains will be defined during the course of the project 
preparation. The potential areas highlighted in the preliminary results of the preparatory work 
include: coffee, tourism, apiculture, horticulture, aquiculture, and fruits in the areas of Corredor 
Occidental and Corredor Tur?stico Litoral Atl?ntico.  
Page  2
The institutional arrangements for the project are being developed.  Given that the 
implementation of the project centers on alliances built around the success of competitive, 
private rural enterprises in benefit of poor families, options for such arrangements will have to be 
carefully considered. The strategy of building local and regional alliances is expected to establish 
an environment within which enterprises have a greater chance of being sustainable in the long 
run.  The enterprise depends on these alliances for access to quality technical services, credit, and 
different product markets; and for opening channels of participation in larger scale initiatives for 
value added activities and commercialization.  
 
The institutional structure will need to be consistent with the decentralized nature of the rural 
economic development process it intends to support via project operations and investments, and 
the formation of strong networks of local actors to provide social accountability regarding all 
aspects of the project.  
 
The project key impact indicators will include: (i) increases in sales; (ii) increases in profit 
margins; (iii) increases in labor and land productivity; (iv) number of producers organized; (v) 
number of production alliances established and functioning; (vi) improvements in rural water, 
energy and road access; (vii) reduction in vehicle operating costs and travel times.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Project (US$70 million) would have two parts with respectively two and three 
components.  
 
Part I:  Rural Productivity Improvement. (US$ 23 million)  
 
Component 1. Support to Productive Investments (US$ 6 million).  This component will 
finance pre-investment activities.  
 
Sub-component 1.1.  Support to Productive Alliances and Business Plans. Support for: (i) 
organization and strengthening of existing producers organizations; (ii) promotion and 
identification of the productive alliances; (iii) development of and participation in productive 
alliances by producers organizations; (iv) training of producers, technical team of the Project 
coordination unit, and others to acquire knowledge and skills for preparation of profiles, business 
plans, and execution; and (v) technical and financial support needed to identify and develop 
viable business plans in concert with eligible groups or individuals, and quality control of the 
proposals.  
 
Sub-component 1.2.  Strengthening of Local Service Provision. Support for technical service 
providers and financial institutions through: (i) training and assistance for improving 
management and developing innovative credit mechanisms in rural economy; (ii) promoting 
alliances with national funds and commercial banks in order to increase availability of lending 
resources; and (iii) promotion of business opportunities with rural producer groups and 
individuals.  
 
Page  3
Sub-component 1.3. Undertake Technical Studies. To conduct studies related to 
competitiveness, including market studies and other technical studies to identify key areas and 
value chains.  
 
Sub-component 1.4. Develop Information and Network. To support the implementation of 
horizontal mechanism for the transfer of knowledge, including exchanges with the objective of 
making contacts, obtaining market knowledge, and promoting market-links and products at 
regional, national and international levels.  
 
The guiding principle is to internalize as much as possible the costs associated with 
subcomponents 1.1, 1.3 and 1.4 in the business plans so that the majority of the funds are 
invested at the farm or field level. However, in some cases the project would need to undertake 
other type of investments that cannot be internalized in the business plans such as studies related 
to competitiveness, including market studies and other technical studies to identify key areas and 
value chains. There is ample scope for tapping into other donors and NGOs support networks to 
deliver the business plan preparation support services.  
 
Critical elements to be developed and decisions to be made with the benefit of the  ongoing 
preparation work include: (a) eligible beneficiary groups for developing competitive rural 
enterprises, for example: forestry communities with national land ceded under long-term 
concessions (dominio pleno or dominio util),  families with land from the land reform, ethnic 
communities that own communal land, self-organized landless and land-poor peasant families, 
etc.; (b) geographic and specific productive (thematic) focus and coverage of the proposed 
investments; (c) national/local financial organizations partners and the implementation 
arrangements with them; (d) strategy and means to deliver the project services (hiring own staff, 
out-sourcing with the NGOs, etc.); and (e) overall communication, outreach and promotion 
strategies.  
 
Component 2. Productive Investments (US$ 17 million).  Co-financing the feasible business 
plans. Specifically, it will provide grant financing for investment in among others, on-and off-
farm minor infrastructure, working capital, and technical assistance and training for the 
implementation of business plans. The range of the investments will support production, 
processing and commercialization at the farm or enterprise-level and at the group-level.  
 
The search for and identification of business opportunities in rural areas that can be used by 
productive enterprises to generate employment and income in a sustainable manner is the central 
element of the project. An important objective is to connect all these enterprises to the financial 
and non-financial services markets, and also the products markets. Experience with group-level 
enterprises under PACTA is demonstrating the viability of public and private co-financing 
scheme to establish sustainable farmer group productive enterprises, generating ample credibility 
of the viability of the model, and in turn, successfully leveraging participation of the private 
financial sector in individual and group loans for land purchase and complementary productive 
investments.  
 
To be decided during preparation are: (a) the specific financing mechanisms and fund flows; (b) 
criteria for co-financing of producers associations and their members; and (c) the potential for 
Page  4
use of national resources to provide a complementary guarantee mechanism to leverage private 
investment capital.  
 
Part 2: Economic Infrastructure Improvement (US$ 43 million)  
 
Component 3. Road Corridor Improvement (US$ 22 million). A number of road corridors are of 
strategic importance for Honduras realizing its potential for increased exports of forest and farm 
products. Identified sections of one or more of these corridors will be improved in order to 
reduce travel times and lower operating costs and to enhance access to port facilities. Pre-
identification of such sections has been carried out based on a review carried out by SOPTRAVI 
Programa para la Implementacion del Plan Estrategico para el Mejoramiento del los Ejes Viales 
de Honduras with reference to six particular corridors.  In light of complementarities to the Part I 
of the project, priorities are likely to be given to Corredor Occidental and Corredor Tur?stico 
Litoral Atl?ntico.  
 
To be decided during preparation:  (i) as a function of the prior decision on geographical and/or 
product focus for Part 1, narrow down the list of potential investments; (ii) prioritize road 
improvements to be supported by the project based on standard economic analysis and review of 
funding and implementation status of linked sections.  
 
Component 4. 
Rural Infrastructure Improvement (US$ 20 million):  Geographical areas 
with the strongest demonstrated potential for growth in rural incomes and exports would benefit 
from packages of rural economic infrastructure improvements in order to improve access for 
rural small producers in these areas. The intention would be to use the mancomunidad model 
developed under the Rural Infrastructure Project with the explicit inclusion of any adjustments 
learned from the lessons of experience. The bulk of the proposed infrastructure improvements 
are expected to be for rural roads and bridges, with some potential for specific water and energy 
improvements.  Up to 4 new mancomunidades could be included and/or activities in the current 9 
(6 funded by IDA and 3 by CABEI) could be scaled up.  
 
To be decided during preparation: (i) work out criteria for assessing which new or existing 
mancomunidades could qualify for consideration under the new project; (ii) determine the list of 
eligible infrastructure for inclusion.  
 
Component 5. 
Capacity Building and Studies (US$ 1 million):  Central and local 
government agencies involved in the provision of public infrastructure services in the rural areas 
will continue to need access to support to build and sustain capacity for planning and 
implementation in line with the steadily increasing coverage of rural needs.  This component will 
also support selected studies which could inter alia include the following: (i) review of 
infrastructure (transport sector) plans and policies and their updating and revision to 
accommodate the rural competitiveness agenda and to prioritize support to forest and farm 
exports; (ii) development of a rural road improvement strategy with specific emphasis on: 
defining institutional responsibility, at the center and at the decentralized level, as well as the 
role of beneficiaries; identifying sources of funding for improvements; drawing up an asset 
maintenance strategy together with the sources of funding; (iii) preparation of studies, designs 
Page  5
and bidding documents for identified road corridor improvements to be supported under the 
project and (iv) training of staff in analytical methods and international best practices.  
 
Component 6. 
Project Coordination (US$ 4 million).  This component will finance 
incremental costs for the efficient execution of the project, including quality control, technical 
supervision, administration, procurement, contracts, disbursement, and establish a participatory 
monitoring and evaluation system to measure impacts, improve procedures, adjust incentives, 
and provide social accountability of operations.  
 
The project will invest in a system of participatory monitoring and evaluation that can enable 
all key participants to provide feedback on a regular basis. Participatory monitoring and 
evaluation can fulfill the role expected of it by identifying problems and adjustments to be made; 
gathering baseline data and measuring progress of the enterprises (based on income, 
employment, and other indicators); and helping to solidify participants? commitment to the 
project.  
 
To be decided during preparation are: (a) detailed institutional arrangements, including role and 
responsibilities of a project coordination unit and a steering committee; and (b) the participatory 
M&E arrangements, including the key indicators.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined during preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has reasonable experiences with preparation and implementation/compliance of 
safeguard policies with several IDA-funded projects in the country. Their safeguard management 
will be assessed during preparation of the proposed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment (EA) will be carried out during preparation. It will assess the 
project's potential impacts on environment and other safeguard policies that might be triggered. 
The EA will propose measures to mitigate any identified adverse impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The EA will assess the expected impacts upon forests and other natural habitats of the 
project's planned road improvements and productive investments.  The project design will 
incorporate mitigation measures as needed to ensure compliance with both the Natural Habitats 
and Forests policies.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The EA will assess the expected impacts upon forests and other natural habitats of the 
project's planned road improvements and productive investments.  The project design will 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
incorporate mitigation measures as needed to ensure compliance with both the Natural Habitats 
and Forests policies.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Chance finds procedures for archaelogical or fossil relics will be included within the bidding 
documents and contracts for road improvements and other civil works.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
A
Social Assessment (SA)including the demographic/socioeconomic analysis of the 
indigenous peoples will be conducted during the preparation. If SA concludes that the policy is 
triggered, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/18/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/18/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EA and Resettlement Framework will be completed by about June 15, 2007; if needed, 
the Pest Management Plan will be completed by the same date.  
 
SA will be completed by June 15, 2007; if needed IPPF will be prepared by the same date.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matthew A. McMahon 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
 
Comments:   
