Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2007 
Report No.:  AC2956
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P103881 
Project Name:  Honduras Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gustavo Saltiel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 4, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Decentralization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is to improve the sustainability (1) , 
efficiency (2) and reliability (3) of Honduras's water supply and sanitation (WSS) 
services in the participating municipalities through implementing the Strategic Plan to 
Modernize the WSS Sector (PEMAPS). The specific objectives are to:  
 
o
Establish and strengthen municipal service providers and support good 
governance in WSS services provision through increasing transparency and 
accountability;  
 
o
Reinforce the national sector actors (ERSAPS, CONASA, SANAA) to fulfill their 
new roles-a necessity for successful decentralization of the services;  
 
o
Reduce non-revenue water in selected areas of Tegucigalpa to provide immediate 
impact on the service quality.  
 
(1) measured in terms of cost recovery level  
 
(2) measured in terms of revenues per volumetric unit of water produced  
 
(3) measured in terms of hours of service per day   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed operation would assist the Government of Honduras in implementing the 
Strategic Plan for the Modernization of the WSS Sector (PEMAPS) through activities at 
the national and municipal level. The project will support municipalities with urban 
Page  2
population between 40,000 and 300,000 to adopt autonomous service provider models by 
providing a combination of free technical assistance for creating the service providers, 
short-term efficiency improvement measures, and performance-based investment funding 
once services are transferred (Component 1). The project will finance efficiency 
improvements in Tegucigalpa to provide immediate impact on the service quality, while 
the transfer from the national utility to the municipality is being discussed (Component 
2). Institutional strengthening actions will help fortify and establish the national sector 
actors (Component 3). Component 4 will finance project management activities.  
 
Component 1: Support to mid-sized municipalities to create autonomous service 
providers and invest in efficiency, rehabilitation and expansion of service delivery ? Cost 
US$21.2 million (IDA US$ 17.2 million)  
 
The component will support the implementation of the Ley Marco and the PEMAPS in 
medium-sized cities through a combination of technical assistance for reforms and 
investments for efficiency improvement and infrastructure rehabilitation and extension. 
This ?learning-by-doing? approach is expected to lead to service improvements ? and 
thus will help to build solid public and political support for decentralization. The 
component will provide incentives for reforms, given that municipalities will have to 
substantially implement some reforms in order to receive support for investments for 
rehabilitation and expansion.  
 
Component 2: Tegucigalpa Non Revenue Water Reduction ? Cost US$4.5 million (IDA 
US$ 4.1 million)  
 
The component will support a performance-based service contract with a private 
company to reduce technical and commercial losses in a limited geographical area of the 
municipality of the Metropolitan District. In addition to the contract itself, this 
component will finance the design and supervision of the contract. The component will 
conclude with an evaluation of the performance-based contract and its outcome.  
 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening of national and regional sector institutions ? 
Cost US$7.7 million (IDA US$ 7.3 million)  
 
Decentralization and other reforms change or establish the functioning of the national 
sector institutions. This component will provide support for the water sector planning 
entity (CONASA), a regulating agency (ERSAPS) and a national utility (SANAA) to 
fulfill their new roles in a timely, efficient and transparent manner. This component will 
also finance severance payments for the SANAA staff directly affected by the transfer of 
services to participating municipalities.  
 
Component 4: Project Management ? Cost US$1.6 million (IDA US$ 1.4 million)  
 
This component will finance the cost of salary, travel and general operating costs of the 
project management unit. In addition, this component would also finance monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) activities, audits and other project management activities on 
governance.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The subprojects will take place in mid-sized cities throughout Honduras:  
 
?
Component 1: Works, as yet unspecified, may take place in one or more of the 
following cities: Choloma, Choluteca, Comayagua, Danli, El Progresso, La Ceiba, La 
Lima, Puerto Cortes, Siguatepeque. Some cities are coastal areas (which have distinct 
ethnic communities) and some are mountainous.  
 
?
Component 2: in Tegucigalpa.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Marquez Martinez (LCSUW) 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (LCSUW) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen from this project. In 
any case, the key safeguard issues and impacts associated with this project are:  
 
a) Noise, dust, proper disposal of construction waste, erosion control, protection of 
spring catchments, etc. produced during construction and installation of pipes, will be 
addressed by appropriate guidelines that will be incorporated into the technical 
specifications governing the work of construction contractors.  
 
b) There is no expectation that cultural property would be found in the Project area. 
Nevertheless, because of the nature of the works envisioned, the Environmental 
Assessment sets forth "chance find" or equivalent procedures in case such property is 
encountered.  
 
c) PROMOSAS will not finance any subprojects involving involuntary resettlement or 
dams and so these safeguards are not triggered.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen.  However the 
following impacts are possible:  
 
Component 1?s expansion of water supply and sewerage networks may encourage 
increased population growth in areas served. Digging, construction and installation may 
result in the usual noise and waste which are normally managed according to established 
guidelines for contractors. Similarly, investments under Component 2 Leak Reduction 
will include works related activities such as detecting leaks and repair or replacement of 
pipes?all very benign rehabilitation activities without many environmental consequences. 
Such activities are classified as category B.  Leak detection has negligible and very 
temporary environmental implications such as temporary air quality reduction from the 
smoke used to detect leaks or illegal connections for example if that particular method is 
used (there are others). The repair or replacement of leaky pipes will generally mean 
removal of dirt from digging and its eventual replacement. Again, resulting minor 
environmental impacts (proper disposal of construction waste, erosion control, protection 
of spring catchments, etc.) will be addressed by appropriate guidelines that will be 
incorporated into the technical specifications governing the work of construction 
contractors.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given that subprojects will differ fundamentally and have diverse locations, 
consideration of alternatives will be considered on a subproject by subproject basis.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared a Framework for Environmental and Social Management and 
an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (or Policy for Ethnic Communities). With two 
environmental engineers, a technical specialist and social specialist as well as experience 
in other water projects, UAP has enough capacity to plan and implement measures 
needed to comply with safeguards. UAP may also hire consultants as necessary to carry 
out the necessary environmental and social work.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include municipalities, the water users of Honduras in the areas that 
will be affected or benefited by the works, ethnic communities which may be affected, 
SEFIN (UAP especially), SANAA, FHIS, CONASA and ERSAPS. The Concept and 
Appraisal Stage ISDSs, Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework and Framework for 
Environmental and Social Management will all be disclosed on the InfoShop website and 
in-country.  
 
Consultation on safeguard policies was carried out by the government during the 
preparation of the frameworks. The Honduran government consulted with key indigenous 
Page  5
and Afro-Honduran community group leaders on April 18, 2007 on the Indigenous 
Peoples Policy Framework. The input from these consultations has been incorporated into 
the instruments.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/08/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/03/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/25/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/08/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/03/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
No 
Page  6
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gustavo Saltiel 
05/03/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah 
05/03/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kimberly Vilar 
05/03/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/03/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
05/03/2007 
Comments:   
