Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC3162
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P101209 
Project Name:  Honduras Rural Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader:  Edward William Bresnyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (42%);Agro-industry 
(25%);Agricultural marketing and trade (23%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income 
generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
21.20
21.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to contribute to increased productivity and 
profitability among organized rural small-scale producers through their participation in 
productive alliances.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would primarily support rural agricultural and non-agricultural 
small-scale producers, organized in associations, cooperatives, unions or any other form 
of representative organization of civil society, with legal standings or in the process to 
acquire legalized status.  
 
The project will comprise of three components.  
 
Component 1 - Support to Productive Alliances (US$ 9.0 million) - would support pre-
investment activities to: (i) create and consolidate productive alliances among the rural 
producers organizations (RPOs) and commercial partners; (ii) identify potential business 
Page  2
opportunities on the part of the productive alliance (i.e., a business proposal or perfil de 
negocio); and (iii) fully prepare the business opportunity into a business plan (plan de 
negocio). Outreach and promotional activities would be financed to identify the RPOs, 
commercial partners and private financing entities, and necessary training and technical 
assistance will be provided to help form sound productive alliances.  Technical services 
will also be financed under the component to facilitate the preparation of viable business 
profiles and business plans on behalf of the productive alliances. The component would 
also build capacity among technical service providers to enhance the quality of their 
services provided to the productive alliances.  
 
Component 2 - Productive Investments (US$ 39.6 million) - would provide subproject 
grants to co-finance the implementation of approximately 150 feasible business plans 
formulated under Component 1. In order to become eligible, a business plan must be 
financially feasible, entail a concrete productive alliance, and have secured up-front 
resources from the private financial sector (minimum of 30 percent) to support the 
business plan. Subprojects would be that portion of the alliance?s business plan that 
would: (i) be financed with proceeds from the proposed Credit; (ii) be implemented by 
RPOs; (iii) be governed by subproject agreements signed between the RPO and SAG; 
and (iv) include fixed capital (e.g., plant and equipment, minor infrastructure), working 
capital and technical assistance expenditures. RPOs would be responsible for a minimum 
of 40 percent of subproject financing, resourced through financial institutions and their 
own contributions (either in cash or in-kind). Subproject finance would be further 
governed by procedures outlined in the Project Operational Manual.  
 
Under the component, a Complementary Guarantee Fund (FONGAC-COMRURAL) 
would provide up to US$5.0 million of GOH counterpart funds as a risk-sharing 
mechanism in conjunction with the participation of the private financial sector.  
 
Component 3 - Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 2.6 million) - would 
support the incremental costs associated with the project administration, monitoring, 
including the setting up and implementation of a participatory monitoring and evaluation 
system. This component will also cover baseline information collection, mid-term 
evaluation, and final evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed geographic focus of the project would encompass seven departments in the 
western part of the country: Comayagua, Copan, Intibuc?, La Paz, Lempira, Ocotepeque, 
and Santa Barbara. The specific investment locations will be determined through a 
demand-driven selection process.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Six safeguard policies are triggered as indicated in the table above. No significant large 
scale impact is envisaged: The project will mostly finance productive activities of small 
farmers with less than five hectares of land. Overall, the project is expected to be positive 
in environmental standpoint because: (i) all the business plans proposed for investment 
will be subject to rigorous environmental screening; and (ii) by adopting a market-
demand mechanism, the producers will be encouraged to employ environmentally sound 
and sustainable practices in their productive activities. The Environmental Assessment 
identified both positive and potentially adverse impacts of the investments, focusing on 
six productive activities (coffee, horticulture, fruit cultivation, beekeeping, aquaculture, 
rural tourism). Accordingly, an Environmental Management Plan was prepared that sets 
forth the criteria, procedures, and mitigation measures to be taken.  
 
There is a significant presence of indigenous peoples (Lenca and Maya-Chort?) in the 
project areas. The project preparation conducted a Social Assessment and prepared an 
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to address the potential impacts for indigenous groups and 
other vulnerable groups (women, youth) and provide guidance for their participation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse indirect or long-term impacts are expected. The participation in the project is 
voluntary. The indigenous groups will participate on their terms in commercial 
agreements with the private sector in a culturally acceptable way.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment: The EMP identifies the requirements for subproject compliance with the 
national environmental impact assessment regulations established in Acuerdo 635-2003 
of SERNA, issued on November 4, 2003. The EMP presents a detailed screening process 
with specific criteria and procedures for different activities that could be proposed 
business plans by productive alliances. The evaluators of the proposals will follow and 
will assign specific environmental impact assessment categories defined in the 
aforementioned national regulations.  
 
Social: The SA and IPP included communication and outreach strategies and 
frameworks for indigenous groups and other vulnerable groups (women, youth) in the 
project areas.  
 
The Recipient and the actors in the project implementation will receive specific 
trainings relating to the subproject investments, as necessary.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are in majority the participants in the productive alliances. They 
will have to address the safeguard issues as well as necessary measures to be taken, if 
any, in their business plans with assistance from the technical service providers.  
 
During the preparation, consultations took place both for environmental and social 
assessments. The indigenous peoples? organizations, communities, and other key 
stakeholders participated in workshops or interviewed in the process. The proposed 
project will prepare and launch communication strategies tailored for different 
stakeholders of the projects. The SA and IPP define concrete measures to encourage fair 
participation of the indigenous groups, women, and young people.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/29/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/29/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/29/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
N/A 
Page  6
been carried out? 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Edward William Bresnyan 
10/29/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
10/29/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Juan Martinez 
10/29/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
10/29/2007 
Comments:   
