Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2632 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/08/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P097985 
Project Name: Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Karin Erika Kemper 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 3, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASES 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%);General agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (25%);Solid waste management (25%);General public 
administration sector (10%);Ports, waterways and shipping (10%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Environmental 
policies and institutions (S);Other urban development (S);Biodiversity (S);Pollution 
management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
17.00
17.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project would address the national, state, and local levels. The development objectives of the 
proposed project would be to support the GoI and selected states to develop and implement an 
improved strategic management approach for India's coastal zones to preserve the long-term 
productivity of this highly-populated region for continued sustainable development and 
economic growth.  
 
Specific performance indicators will be developed during project preparation. They are likely to 
include (i) existence of a functioning national coastal zone management institute, (ii) existence of 
functioning coastal zone management authorities in at least two selected states, (iii) at least 2 
pilot activities applying integrated coastal zone management approaches are on-going and 
experiences well-documented for future scaling up, (iv) vulnerability mapping (flood prone 
zones, Environmentally Sensitive Areas [ESAs], and coastal stability - erosional and depositional 
coasts) carried out along xx km of coastline.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have four components: (i) vulnerability and ecological mapping; (ii) institution 
building and strengthening at national level; (iii) development and implementation of state-level 
approaches to Integrated Coastal Zone Management; and (iv) project management.  
 
Component I - Vulnerability and Ecological Mapping (US$25 million)  
 
This component would include flood and erosional vulnerability and Environmentally Sensitive 
Areas (ESAs) mapping and delimitation of different categories of coastal zones to be regulated 
for conservation and for protection against natural hazards. This would comprise delimitation 
and mapping of coastal ecosystems and ecologically sensitive areas; demarcation of hazard zones 
susceptible to natural disasters and flooding; and verification and pilot assessments before 
revised national delimitation is undertaken. It would also take into account forecast impacts of 
climate change as applicable.  
 
Component II - National Institution Building and Capacity Strengthening (US$15 million)  
 
This component would include support to establish and operationalize a National 
Institute/Authority (tbd) for Sustainable Coastal Zone Management, capacity building and 
strengthening of this Institute as well as of MoEF, and to develop relevant regulations and 
institutional set-ups guiding the linkages between the Centre and the states in order to develop 
the nationwide approach to coastal zone management. In addition, the possibility of supporting 
two Regional Institutes for Sustainable Coastal Zone Management in different parts of India is 
going to be assessed during project preparation. This component will also be designed to actively 
link to the state-level institutional strengthening and capacity building in ICZM under 
Component III.  
 
Component III - Development and implementation of state-level approaches to Integrated 
Coastal Zone Management (US$70 million)  
 
In this component, state-level approaches do ICZM would be developed and pilot projects 
would be implemented in specific geographical areas. Focus would be on 2 to 3 selected states.  
 
During identification, Gujarat was selected. Orissa and West Bengal are candidates for 
participation in the project. It was decided that inclusion of all 8 Indian coastal states in the 
project would not be advisable due to the complexity of the proposed state-level activities. 
Rather, the selected states would present a number of issues to be tackled that could be used for 
lessons learned and future dissemination in other states. (In addition, the ADB has expressed 
strong interest in developing a coastal zone management project in Tamil Nadu and Kerala. 
While the MoEF has not yet made a decision in this regard, it has requested the Bank-financed 
project to take the lead on the overall ICZM framework so that other projects would fall within 
this umbrella and consistency be ensured.)  
 
The component would thus focus on  
 
a. 
strengthening and capacity building of 2 to 3 state-level Coastal Zone Management 
Authorities (current state authorities function on a committee basis, mainly dealing with ad hoc 
concerns and without continuous institutional or physical presence), and their linkage with the 
national coastal zone management system (see Components I and II), and on  
 
b.
demonstration investments in critical areas related to conservation of the coastal 
environment, which would test the practical application of the coastal zone management 
approach in those states, as advocated in the Swaminathan Committee Report. This would 
Page  3
include development of integrated CZM plans, for instance with regard to tourism and eco-
tourism. The focus would be to develop and implement operational models for integrated coastal 
zone management that could provide lessons for scaling-up.  
 
In Gujarat, such activities would likely focus on the Gulf of Kachchh, which presents a range of 
pollution-related challenges, due to concomitant presence of oil based industries, marine parks, 
fishing activities, urban areas, etc.  
 
In Orissa, pilot initiatives could focus on the specific port developments, which take place in 
and adjacent to ecological sensitive areas, and where competition between local people's natural 
resource dependent livelihood needs and major economic growth initiatives is rising. The issues 
to be addressed in West Bengal would be similar to those of Orissa.  
 
c. 
The pilot activities could also include conservation and restoration of mangroves, 
including a few particularly relevant ones as a natural protection to valuable economic 
infrastructure; support to developing medium and small-scale coastal tourism facilities and 
networks, with linkage to improve the economic earning opportunities of the poor, and 
complementary reform and institution building (e.g. preparation of integrated coastal zone 
management plans for a few areas, such as areas to be managed by panchayats).   
 
Component IV - Project Management (US$5 million)  
 
Activities under this component would help ensure effective project management at national, 
state and district levels, information support, communications, and monitoring and evaluation.  
The project would be implemented by the MoEF and the State Level Coastal Zone Management 
Authorities. Harmonization with ADB and other agencies/organizations involved in the 
management of the coastal zone is being sought.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Based on the identification mission held in October 2006 and discussions with the MOEF, the 
selected locations will be in the states of Gujarat and Orissa (still to be confirmed).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There is a capacity limitation, both at the centre and the state levels, along with weak interagency 
coordination and sensitive relationships between Centre and State agencies. In addition, due to 
the history of the regulatory approach to coastal zone management in India, there is very limited 
experience with proactive management of the coastal zone in the country's institutions. This may 
have an implication (?) application on the management of safeguard policies and associated risks 
of weak implementation of management plans. This aspect would be addressed by emphasizing 
on building a strong, multidisciplinary GoI project preparation team, at national and state levels. 
Preparation in this regard has been initiated by the MOEF. In addition, during project 
preparation, stakeholder involvement will be systematically drawn to gain from the existing 
expertise in the country. The Swaminathan Committee report makes specific recommendations 
on a number of reforms to facilitate conservation of ecosystems in the coastal zone, and at the 
same time promoting economic development and poverty reduction in the coastal areas - to be 
operationalized through a more strategic, decentralized but scientific preparation and 
implementation of a National Coastal Zone Management Program. Enhancing borrower capacity 
towards effectively integrating Environmental Management and Social Development issues 
related to the proposed National Coastal Zone Management Program would be an explicit focus 
of this initiative.   
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASES) 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environment issues in the context of coastal zone management, are generally cross sectoral 
in nature, ranging from impacts on land use to bio-diversity, wetlands, forests, water resources 
and induced impacts from development of port and harbour facilities, inland navigation, solid 
waste/ water collection / disposal, tourism interventions. These are exacerbated by conflicts 
between various agencies with respect to the economic interests associated with sector 
development. These conflicts can manifest themselves ecologically and economically, since the 
productivity of coastal and marine areas and their ability to recover from damage are often 
diminished by the effects of one development activity on another. Coastal and marine zones 
mostly encompass many different kinds of resources that are generally demonstrating (most parts 
of the world) a decreasing ability to sustain development.  This is evidenced by (to name a few) 
increasing pollution, rising human health hazards, declining fisheries, spoiled beaches, conflicts 
between local cultures and tourists and displacement of groups which subsist on coastal zone 
resources.  This trend can be reversed when the unique needs of the coastal zone are recognized 
and appropriately assessed. This project aims to approach coastal zone management in this 
holistic manner by way of robust assessments to balance development needs and optimize 
conservation of natural resources. An Environmental and Social Assessment will be conducted in 
this regard. This will be scoped per the requirements of the project design and location of 
investments (as they are determined). Social Analysis, an integral part of the Social Assessment, 
will also be carried out both at the local pilot levels and for the project in general in order to 
identify and mitigate any adverse social impacts, and to identify the possible opportunities to 
enhance the positive impacts of project interventions.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Scope of assessment of natural habitats as part of the EA would be determined as locations of 
project investments are identified.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Scope of assessment as part of the EA would be determined as locations of project 
investments are identified   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
To be determined during the course of the EA and development of the project design.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Scope of assessment as part of the EA would be determined as locations of project 
investments are identified.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
To be determined as part of the Environmental and Social Assessment and  further 
development of project design and finalization of investments.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
To be determined as part of the Environmental and Social Assessment and  further 
development of project design and finalization of investments.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
To be determined as part of the Environmental and Social Assessment and  further 
development of project design and finalization of investments.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
To be determined as part of the Environmental and Social Assessment and  further 
development of project design and finalization of investments.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
To be determined as part of the Environmental and Social Assessment and  further 
development of project design and finalization of investments.   
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be assessed and determined.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
02/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/26/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Bilal H. Rahill 
03/01/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
