Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2641
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P100789 
Project Name:  Andhra Pradesh Community-Based Tank Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Deepak Ahluwalia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (70%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(30%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is: Tank based producers improve 
agricultural productivity and water user associations manage tank systems effectively.  
 
Key performance indicators proposed to measure achievement of the PDO include: 
increase in area irrigated; improved water availability for tail-end farmers; increase in 
agricultural (includes livestock and fisheries) production and incomes from tank systems; 
resources raised and O&M expenditures incurred by user groups.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has four components:  
 
Component A:  Institutional Strengthening (Base Cost US$ 16.1 million)  
 
The objective of this component is enable community-based institutions assume greater 
responsibility for tank system management and for improvement of tank-based 
livelihoods. Activities to be financed under this component include: (i) capacity building 
to promote self-management by community-based institutions; (ii) technical assistance 
for preparation, implementation and monitoring of Tank Improvement and Management 
Page  2
Plans (TIMP); (iii) services of non-government Support Organizations (SOs) to assist 
with community mobilization and capacity building; (iv) facilitation support to lead 
farmers of water user associations (WUAs); and (iv) workshops, training and capacity 
building for SO and project staff and other relevant functionaries.  
 
The component will also support WUA training and capacity building in key areas such 
as: planning and implementation of tank system rehabilitation works; preparation and 
implementation of operations and maintenance (O&M) plans; assessment and collection 
of water charges; maintenance of records and accounts; improved water-sharing and 
utilization; and participatory monitoring, learning and evaluation. It will further assist in 
mobilization and training of various production and commodity marketing groups.  
 
Component B:  Minor Irrigation Systems Improvements (Base Cost US$ 148.7 million):  
 
The objective of this component is to enhance the efficiency of water use in tank areas 
selected under the project.  Activities to be undertaken fall under two sub-components.  
 
(i)  Sub-Component B.1: Tank Systems Improvements (US$ 139.7 million): The 
objectives of this sub-component are to: (i) improve the physical and operational 
performance of selected tank systems (which includes the feeder channels above the tank 
reservoir, the tank itself, and the irrigation channels in the command area) through a 
range of interventions identified and executed in partnership with tank WUAs; (ii) secure 
the safety of the tank structure; and (iii) improve on-farm water management and water 
use efficiency. The sub-component would support the physical 
rehabilitation/modernization of tank systems with culturable command area (CCA) of 
between 40-2000 hectares.  About 3000 tanks with an estimated CCA of about 250,000 
hectares, spread across 21 districts of the state, are proposed to be rehabilitated under the 
project.  The rehabilitation works would be undertaken in three batches of approximately 
500, 1000 and 1500 tanks respectively.  In general, the physical works are likely to 
include: (a) feeder channel improvement; (b) limited tank bed desiltation where deemed 
necessary; (c) repair/strengthening of bunds to secure tank safety; (d) repair or 
replacement of sluices; (e) repairs of surplus weirs; (f) essential construction/repairs of 
canal and drainage systems; and (g) installation of water measuring devices.  
 
The sub-component will also support: (i) district level engineering support consultants 
to ensure that the rehabilitation works are carried out to acceptable construction quality 
standards; (ii) contractual staff to bridge the gap, where necessary, between technical 
staff required and presently available in District Project Units (DPUs); (iii) procurement 
of quality control equipment for district level quality control laboratories; (iv) consultants 
for third party quality assurance; and (v) creation of a statewide minor irrigation database.  
 
Sub-Component B.2: Participatory Groundwater Management (US$ 9 million): The 
focus of this sub-component is to improve, through measurement and analysis, 
understanding of the groundwater situation in areas suffering severe groundwater stress, 
and to use this to promote more effective sharing and utilization of groundwater amongst 
its users.  The rationale for the sub-component lies in the fact that (restored) tank systems 
are an important source of groundwater recharge, and promoting efficient integrated use 
of surface and groundwater in the tanks? influence zone will improve overall efficiency 
Page  3
of water use from the tank-related investments.  The sub-component will be implemented 
in those tanks selected under the project which fall in critical and over-exploited 
groundwater assessment units of the state.  Activities to be financed under this 
component include: (i) piezometers and automatic water level recorders for groundwater 
assessment; (ii) participatory hydrological monitoring by groundwater user groups; (iii) 
water distribution pipes; (iv) training and support for better water-sharing and utilization 
through crop water budgeting and planning; and (v) upgrading analytical capacity of the 
state groundwater department.  
 
Component C:  Agricultural Livelihoods Support Services (Base Cost US$ 24.9 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to enhance tank-based livelihoods by increasing 
production, productivity and profitability of agriculture, horticulture, fisheries, livestock 
and other significant productive activities. This would be done through improvements in 
production technologies and management practices, better input and output market 
linkages, more efficient and effective delivery of key support services, and augmentation 
of community-level productive capacities as well as infrastructure. The outputs are 
expected to be higher productivity in agriculture, livestock and fisheries; better alignment 
of farm-based productive activities with water availability; and diversification into more 
market-oriented agriculture and livestock production. Overall, the component is expected 
to increase net incomes and reduce economic vulnerability in the tank communities. The 
activities to be financed under this component fall into five groups:  
 
(i) Sub-Component C.1: Agriculture and Horticulture (US$ 8.7 million): The focus of 
this sub-component is on increasing production and productivity of field, horticultural 
and fodder crops/trees in tank command areas. Activities to be financed within this sub-
component include: (i) upgrading technology and production practices ? through field-
level demonstrations, and training of farmers and farmer groups; (ii) investments 
(involving beneficiary contribution) in group/community implements that enhance on- 
and off-farm incomes; and (iii) training, capacity building and exposure visits for farmer 
groups and staff from implementing agencies.   
 
(ii) Sub-Component C.2: Livestock (US$ 2.4 million): The focus of this sub-component 
is on increasing the production and productivity of milk, meat and related animal 
products. The activities to be financed include: (i) upgradation of breed quality by 
strengthening the coverage and effectiveness of the artificial insemination program; (ii) 
improvements in animal nutrition and health management; (iii) ram-lamb rearing on a 
small-scale basis; and (iv) training and capacity building of livestock producers and line 
department staff.  
 
(iii) Sub-Component C.3: Fisheries (US $ 1.6 million): The focus of this sub-component 
is on improving production and productivity of tank fisheries. Activities to be financed 
include: (i) upgrading production practices through improved stocking; (ii) improved 
feeding, management and harvesting techniques; (iii) intensive fish and prawn cultivation 
in selected ?demonstration tanks?; and (iv) training, capacity building and exposure visits 
of FCS and line department staff.  
 
(iv) Sub-Component C.4: Foreshore Plantation (US $ 4.2 million): The focus of this 
sub-component is on effective utilization of tank foreshore areas in selected locations. 
Page  4
Activities to be financed include: (i) site preparation; (ii) nursery raising and plantation; 
and (iii) training for maintenance and cultural operations. These activities, apart from 
reducing silt inflow into the tank, are also expected to create an additional, sustainable 
income source for the tank community.  
 
(v) Sub-Component C.5: Agri-Business and Marketing (US $ 8.0 million): The focus of 
this sub-component is on increasing profitability and promoting product diversification 
and greater market orientation of production. Activities to be financed include: (i) 
promotion of new agri-businesses; (ii) promoting greater market awareness ? in form of 
both knowledge of marketing opportunities and market-oriented production planning - 
among producers; (iii) strengthening producer linkages with input and output markets; 
(iv) post-harvest management of perishable produce; and (v) training, capacity building 
and exposure visits for producers and relevant project staff.  
 
Component D:  Project Management (Base Cost US$ 11.6 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to ensure smooth implementation of project activities 
as well as monitoring of and learning from project processes and outputs. Activities to be 
financed include: (i) setting up and supporting project management units at the state and 
district levels; (ii) project monitoring, evaluation and learning activities; (iii) services of 
an external M&E agency to be engaged as consultants for the duration of the project; (iv) 
providing support for emerging needs and innovations during implementation; (v) liaising 
with project partner organizations, support organizations, external professional agencies 
and the World Bank; and (vi) documentation of project experience and its dissemination 
in the wider development community.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would cover 499 mandals spread across 21 districts of the state.  These 
mandals are those where tank irrigation is an important source of irrigation.  
 
The proposed project focuses mainly on restoring the existing tank irrigation systems 
through rehabilitation works with an aim at improving irrigation service delivery system, 
strengthen participatory irrigation management together with improved agriculture 
support services. As such there are no significant safeguard issues relating to planning of 
irrigation projects. Under the existing laws of the country, no environmental clearances 
are required and the project interventions neither envisage any new land acquisition nor 
physical displacement of local population.  However, encroachment of tank system land 
is an issue in some tanks for which a resettlement and rehabilitation entitlement 
framework has been prepared to provide support to those affected to restore their 
livelihood.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASES) 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja (SASES) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A
detailed analysis of safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project has been 
carried out as part of an Integrated Environmental and Social Assessment (IESA). The 
assessment reveals no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts due to the 
proposed project interventions.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Due to the participatory nature of the sub-project design and implementation and the 
framework approach adopted for social and environmental management, the alternative 
options for tank rehabilitation would be considered during the design and planning phase 
of each sub-project   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on the findings of the ISEA and consultations held with project stakeholders, a 
Social and Environmental Management Framework (SEMF) has been prepared which 
provides a good basis to respond to the environmental and social issues in a 
programmatic manner. The SEMF includes an entitlement framework for resettlement of 
project affected people, strategy for consultation and communication, and strategies to 
address issues related to women and tribal groups. On environmental aspects, the SEMF 
prescribes specific measures to enhance the positive environmental impacts of the project 
and includes promoting sustainable agriculture through Integrated Nutrient and Pest 
Management and prescribes tank safety measures. The SEMF describes the process to be 
followed to ensure that environmental and social aspects are integrated in planning and 
Page  6
implementing project activities at the sub-project level.  Based on the findings of ISEA 
and SEMF, social and environmental management plans have been prepared taking into 
account the respective framework and strategies for key issues. i.e., Pest and Nutrition 
Management, Resettlement, Tribal and Gender Development and Community 
participation. It also includes institutional design and budget for executing these plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the project are the primary users of irrigation water, local fishing 
community  and affected people; others include catchment area farmers and functionaries 
of Irrigation and other line departments (specifically Agriculture, Fisheries, Rural 
Development, Revenue, Tribal Development, etc.), and NGO/Civil Society. As part of 
project preparation and ISEA study, the key stakeholders were consulted through 
interviews and groups discussions besides organizing stakeholders? consultation 
workshops at different levels. The consultation strategy prepared for the project envisages 
consultation and involvement of key stakeholders to continue through out the planning, 
implementing and monitoring project activities at each of the sub-project (tank system) 
level covered under the project. All mitigation plans including SEMF will be disclosed as 
per the Bank?s disclosure policy.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2007 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  8
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Deepak Ahluwalia 
02/06/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja 
01/23/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamad Hasan 
01/23/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/07/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
02/07/2007 
Comments:   
