Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2627 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/29/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P100304 
Project Name: Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal Health Project 
Task Team Leader: Birte Holm Sorensen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 8, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Child health (S);Other communicable diseases 
(S);Population and reproductive health (S);Nutrition and food security (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to support the Governments of the 
states of UP and Uttaranchal in accelerating the achievement of the MDGs, focusing on the 
poorest segments of the population; in addition the support to Uttaranchal would include 
reducing deaths and injuries caused by road accidents and natural disasters.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
(i) Overall Health Systems Development and Support, with special focus on (a) development of a 
shared results framework and an independent mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of health 
related MDGs which would facilitate targeting of interventions as well as open up possibilities 
for ?payment for performance?;  (b) strengthening human resource management and 
development including strengthening capacity for public health management and planning; (c) 
improvement of procurement and supply systems, including development of contracting 
procedures and capacity; for UP (d) institutionalizing a health resource center with important 
policy and innovations development functions ; and for Uttaranchal (d) development and 
implementation of a strategy to increase the level of health literacy (health behavior and health 
Page  2
seeking behavior) to ensure that the poor and most disadvantaged benefit from the state?s health 
programs. The preparation team is proposing a review of public and private health expenditure 
which would lead to a dialogue ? and intervention - around more flexible financing and resource 
allocation.  (ii) Innovative District Strategies for Results, with special focus on improvement of 
basic health outcomes in selected under-performing districts through utilization of all available 
health service providers to optimize the public health benefits ; and field testing and evaluating 
scalable models for effective health service delivery, especially to the underserved segments of 
the population.  All innovative district activities will be focused on results on the ground and will 
be carefully evaluated so evidence of what works is available to the state governments for 
scaling up.  For Uttaranchal new service delivery models for remote, hill areas may also have to 
be developed and tested.  
 
The proposed lending instrument would be a Specific Investment Loan (SIL).  Whereas policy 
lending would be desirable, it is the view of the IDA team that this is pre-mature for the state and 
the sector.  A Social Sector Development Policy Loan would however be added support to this 
proposed project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The states of UP and Uttaranchal   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project is being prepared by the state project management units which have had six years of 
experience with Bank financed projects.  
 
UP: After a slow start, the PMU has activated this component through an outsourced PPP type 
of arrangement and seems to have the capacity to monitor the system.  It would be too early to do 
an environmental assessment before the start of the new project and it is proposed that an 
Environmental Management Plan be developed on the basis of the new arrangement, which 
defines a sustainable system and critical time-lines. An independent review  is recommended 
after 2 years.  
 
UA: Even though the earlier project had a comprehensive Environment Management Plan, 
project impemnetation has shown that institutional capacity at the PMU for immplementing and 
monitoring the Environmental component is weak. In the new project, attention will be needed to 
strengthen PMU capacity in this area. A restructured Environment Management Plan will need to 
be developed on the basis of a quick assessment of HCWM practices in the state.  
 
The earlier project did not involve any land acquisition or resettlement, and did not have a plan 
for Indigenous People.  For this proposed project, the Borrower is expected to engage consultants 
to prepare an IP plan within a Vulnerable Communities Development Plan (VCDP) and to advise 
on what capacity will be required to manage and implement it.  
 
Social assessments will also need to be undertaken that would identify micro-regional issues 
underlying poor maternal and child health and constraints to health care utilization, especially 
among socially disadvantaged groups and poor households.  The States would also initiate a 
process of participation of poor clients, local organizations (including panchayats), and private 
and public health providers in program planning, implementation, management and monitoring.  
A
training module for Gram Panchayat monitoring of basic services is currently being piloted in 
UP.  The findings of these assessments would be made available to the districts to be used 
subsequently in the preparation of district action plans.  The draft terms of reference for these 
Page  3
tasks have already been clearedby IDAs social development specialists and the work will be 
undertaken shortly.  
 
No major civil works are envisaged in the proposed project, and so the IR OP is not triggered. 
This may change during project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASES) 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
restructured Environmental Management Plan will be developed on the basis of 
assessment of HCWM practices in the state.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The Borrower will engage consultants to prepae an IP plan within a Vulnerable Communities 
Development Plan (VCDP) and will advise on how to manage and implement it.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/20/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/20/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
Social Assessment will be carried out by 30 June 2007 and a VCDP will prepared and 
disclosed before Appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Birte Holm Sorensen 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
