Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2280
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P095114 
Project Name:  Rampur Hydropower Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sunil Kumar Khosla 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (50%);Power (50%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
230.00
230.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is (a) to improve the reliability of India's 
Northern (Electricity) Grid/Network through the addition of renewable, low carbon 
energy from the Rampur Hydropower Project and (b) to improve the effectiveness of 
Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited (SJVN) with respect to the preparation and safe 
implementation of economically, environmentally and socially sustainable hydropower 
projects   
 
3. Project Description 
Rampur hydro power project (RHEP) site is on the Sutlej River in Himachal Pradesh.  It 
is planned as a 412MW power plant consisting of a 15km transfer tunnel bringing water 
from the tailrace of the Nathpa Jhakri Hydroelectric power plant (NJHP) to a surface 
powerhouse some 15km from Jhakri village.  Thus RHEP will in effect be operated as a 
cascade station to the NJHP run of the river power plant, which was constructed with 
IBRD financing and has been in operation for more than two years.  Since Rampur hydro 
project will take water from the NJHP tailrace, it will require neither a dam nor nor any 
new reservoir capacity or land inundation.  No additional desilting chambers will be 
required as the water will already have been desilted within the NJHP plant. The intake 
arrangement is part of the NJHP scheme.  Rampur will be developed by SJVN, a joint 
Page  2
venture between Government of Himachal Pradesh and Government of India.  The 
project will generate some 1,770 million units (in a 90% dependable year as regards 
hydrology); and the power will be used in the states of the Nothern Region of India.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Rampur Hydro-electric Project is located on River Satluj, near the town of Rampur  
in Shimla and Kullu districts of Himachal Pradesh. The project area is enclosed by 
latitudes 77o35?N and 77o43?; and longitudes 31o23?E and 31o30?E.  The project is 
designed to divert from the tail race pool of Nathpa-Jhakri Power Project (located near 
village Jhakri on the east bank of the Satluj) through a 15km head race tunnel to a surface 
power station (located near village Bael on the west bank of the Satluj). Various sites of 
the Project will be approached by project roads connected to National Highway-22A on 
the left bank of the river stream. This run-of river project will be located between 2 run-
of-river projects: the upstream and operating 1500MW Nathpa-Jhakri project (which has 
a
small dam for diurnal storage) and the proposed 700MW Luhri project downstream.  
 
River Satluj rises in Tibetan Plateau (Rakastal-Mansarovar lake; at elevation about 
4570m above mean sea level), travels about 1450km (320km in China,758km in India, 
and 370km in Pakistan) before it meets the Chenab and subsequently the Indus. The 
catchment area of Satluj at Rampur is about 50,800km2 (49,800km2 at Nathpa Dam), of 
which about 30 % falls in India and the remaining in China. The catchments, particularly 
in China, receive little rainfall and precipitation is mostly in the form of snow. A small 
percentage of the project catchments receive precipitation due to the South-West 
monsoon (June-September).  
 
The project area and the project?s influence area are located in the lesser Himalaya and 
are characterized by rugged topography with high hills (altitude varying from 850m to 
2000m). The area experiences subtropical to sub-Himalayan climate; and is sparsely 
vegetated.  Immediate vicinity of the projects supports patches of dense forests, but has a 
long history of deforestation. The hill slopes are steep, and are generally covered with 
sparse vegetation, over burden and outwash material. The closest designated natural 
habitat, the Rupi-Bhaba Wildlife Sanctuary is located about 13 km away from the project. 
The project area falls under Zone-V (severe earthquake zone) as per the seismic zoning 
map of India (IS:1893-2002) (with epicentres of 29 recorded earhquakes of magnitude 
greater than 5 in the richter scale, within 200km of the project).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASES) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Involuntary Resettlement: The land acquisition and its associated resettlement impacts 
are moderate and manageable. The project involves relatively a small amount of land 
acquisition and physical displacement, consisting of about 29 hectares of private land 
belonging to 180 title holders and transfer of about 49 hectares of forest government land.  
Among 180 title holders, 29 title holders will also loose their houses and 55 land owners 
will become land less retaining less than 0.40 hectares...  
 
Indigenous Peoples. The impact on tribal people is negligible. Only two tribal families 
are being affected.  Tribal families living in the project area constitute about 3%, 
compared to 4% in Himachal Pradesh and 8% in India). The socio-economic 
characteristics of tribal people in the project area are similar to those of non-tribal reveal 
that they own agricultural land, livestock, and material assets like television, cooking gas 
appliances, four wheelers, etc. They do not exhibit any indigenous people characteristics 
as described in the Bank?s Operational Policy on Indigenous Peoples, as confirmed by 
the consultant?s analysis described in Social Assessment. The analysis carried out by the 
borrower indicates that tribal people are fully integrated into the mainstream economy of 
the local area.  
 
Mitigation of Impacts on Forests, Biodiversity & Wildlife: Baseline studies were 
conducted for the project's influence area (PIA - 7km area around the project), project's 
immediate influence area (PIIA 1.5km area around the project), and the directly affected 
areas (DAA which includes all 86.5ha of land being acquired for the surface level works 
of the project, of which 48.9 ha is forestland).  
 
Based on the baseline data and a comparison with the available data for the state, or the 
Satluj basin as a whole suggest that the project's influence area is relatively poor in terms 
of forest cover, plant wealth, wildlife and biodiversity. The project's immediate 
influenced area and the directly affected area has the minimum possible forest types in 
hilly areas - sub-tropical euphorbia scrub and dodonea scrub, which are sparsely 
distributed along foothills and hill slopes. Only four species of wildlife are reported from 
Page  4
the project's influenced area of which Himalayan Black Bear is reported only during 
summer while Musk & Barking deer showed altitudinal migration during winter. The 
Common Leopard is reported to follow cattle/goat/sheep herd commonly surrounding the 
villages in forest areas. No endangered, rare or protected species is found from the 
project's immediate influenced area or the directly affected area.  
 
Impact of the project on the existing landscape, at the basin or even a district level is 
insignificant, owing to the environmental setting of the projects. Impacts at the more 
immediate level will also be small, if not insignificant. The project acquires 48.9ha of 
degraded forest land (with very little forest or tree cover), and notionally acquires (but 
does not disturb, as the works are deep underground) another 20.47ha of similar degraded 
forest land over the tunnels. Together these represent 0.07% of the total forest area of 
Rampur and Anni forest divisions (which together have 90,596ha of legally defined 
forests). There are total 12 protected forest under the study area of which 6 forest falls in 
Rampur Division while 6 in outer Seraj division of Kullu district. The details of protected 
forest are given in Table 3. None of these are directly impacted by the project.  
 
The project will clear fell 1075 trees, of which 996 are (exotic) eucalyptus trees, which 
were earlier planted by the forest department. Other 79 trees to be felled are commonly 
distributed throughout the project's immediate influence and influence area. For each of 
the land parcels affected by the project, the diversity is very low. Highest value of 
diversity index recorded is 1.28 for powerhouse and approach road area. For all other 
sites, the diversity index is even lower than that - indicating that the area is not rich in 
floral wealth and represents poor diversity.  
 
No endangered, rare, threatened or endemic tree is lost due to felling in project. Owing 
to their common distribution and not having significant ecological status loss (although 
some of them have community use and medicinal values), loss the trees and shrubs will 
not significantly affect existing biodiversity status of the either project influence area, the 
Satluj Basin in general, or Himachal Pradesh in totality. It will also not affect the 
structure composition, of existing forest types, forest cover or distribution characteristics 
of flora.  
 
To compensate the loss acquired forestland a compensatory afforestation (CA) plan 
turning 139ha of non-forest land into forest will be implemented by State Forest 
Department, at a cost of Rs.26 million. Additional measures by the project includes 
payment of net present value of forests of about Rs.40 million (to generate forests of 
equivalent area elsewhere in the project's influence area), and a catchment area treatment 
plan, costing Rs. 219 million.  
 
Mitigation of Instream Flow Impacts & Water Quality Issues. The Rampur 
Hydroelectric project will in effect be operated as a cascade station to the Nathpa-Jhakri 
run of the river power plant, which was constructed with IBRD financing and has been in 
operation for two years.  Since Rampur hydro project will take water directly from the 
NJHP tailrace, it will require neither a dam nor any new reservoir capacity or land 
inundation.  No additional desilting chambers will be required as the water will already 
have been desilted within the NJHP plant. The only change in the river flow will occur 
Page  5
between the intake works at Jhakri (where the Nathpa-Jhakri tailrace water is currently 
re-entering the river Satluj), and the tailrace outlet at Bael village. At Jhakri, the current 
flow of river is constituted by (i) the water from Nathpa-Jhakri tailrace, and (ii) the 
combined flow of all tributaries (except a stream called Shoulding, 6 cumec of water 
from which is diverted to augment the Nathpa-Jhakri lean season peaking power 
generation) joining the river Satluj between the Nathpa dam and Jhakri. The project uses 
all water coming from the Nathpa-Jhakri tailrace, but does not use any of the water 
coming through the tributaries.  
 
The Government of Himachal Pradesh requires all projects to provide an instream flow 
of a minimum of 15% of the lean season flow, immediately downstream of any 
dam/diversion structure. The minimum lean season flow available at Nathpa dam is 47 
cumec. A minimum lean season flow of about 7 cumec is being released from Nathpa 
dam to comply with the the GoHP regulatory guideline. From the tributaries alone 
(without any release from the dam except seepage), the combined minimum lean season 
flow is about 8.2 cumec at Jhakri,  9.5 cumec at Rampur town and about 13 cumec at the 
upstream of the tailrace outlet at Bael village.  
 
Detailed studies carried out examining the issues of water pollution, flushing required to 
take care of the pollution and sewage load in the stretch between the intake and outlet 
works of the project, suggest that the available minimum lean season flow would be 
sufficient. There is no direct consumptive use of water (for drinking, irrigation and other 
household purposes) from the Satluj here. This is due to the fact that the Satluj forms a 
very deep gorge, and the villages on steep hills depend directly on the numerous small 
streams which flow into the small tributaries of Satluj. The existing plans to augment 
water supply also does not include use of any water from the Satluj. The project does not 
tap any of the water supply sources/stream, and therefore there would not be any issue 
regarding the magnitude of flow available in the Satluj. Owing to geographical reasons, 
and very high silt load coming from snow melts in China and cold desert areas of Spiti 
Vally, the acquatic life in the river is poor. During surveys of 1998, 2004 and 2006, no 
fish was reported in Satluj River  in the stretch coming under project area. However, fish 
were found in the Nogli Khad, Sumej Khad and Kajo Khad, near their confluences with 
Satluj River. Market surveys and consultation with community and experts suggest that 
the main Satluj river has very little, if any at all, fish population in stretch between 
Nathpa to Bael. However, to provide for long term conservation of river water quality, 
model studies suggested a release of 5 cumec from the Nathpa dam would suffice. The 
project will, in fact, release more water from the dam (7 cumec), as per the regulatory 
requirement of the GoHP.  
 
Mitigation and management of Construction-Related Impacts. Management of 
construction-related impacts would be the responsibility of the SJVN (through its 
contractors, as and where relevant, and as described in the EMP). The plans for managing 
the construction site impacts include plans and guidelines for managing and restoring the 
muck disposal sites (including advance protection measures for the sites, before muck is 
actually disposed in these sites), management and reinstatements for the borrow areas and 
the quarries, management of effluent discharge, management of safety and health issues 
Page  6
(including a plan to manage the HIV/AIDS risks), and a chance find procedure for 
conservation of cultural properties. These measures are described in detail in the EMP, 
and in the supporting environmental documents. Supervision and monitoring will be 
essential to ensure full implementation of the detailed plans. These arrangements have 
been described as part of the EMP.  
 
The EMP has identified a number of measures to be implemented to maintain the 
facilities in labour camps, sanitation and sewage treatment facilities, solid waste 
management, and provision of community kitchen. The EMP includes specific measures 
for road works, protection against erosion, and bio-engineering measures to protect the 
road slopes. For managing the 3 million m3 of muck to be generated by the project, a 
muck disposal plan has been prepared. The plan includes, over an above reuse of part of 
the much as construction material for the project, site protection and rehabilitation 
measures which includes civil works, vegetative measures, fencing and planting.  
 
Safety of Workers and Communities: A safety assurance plan is under preparation  to 
ensure an adequate management system in the project. This plan, which will be in place 
before mobilization of main civil contracts, will install systems so that very safe 
procedures are followed in construction of the project (documented in the safety manual 
of the project). Safety of the downstream communities, particularly in the locations 
vulnerable to flooding (although this project or the Nathpa-Jhakri project does not 
anyway alter natural flood flow) is the focus of the emergency preparedness plan.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources. The project area does not have known archaeological or 
historical sites or remains. This has been confirmed by an archaeological examination of 
the project area. There is only a small possibility of impacts on cultural properties (such 
as community religious properties, sacred groves, and chance-finds). The EMP includes 
procedures to identify such properties, and mitigate and manage impacts in the case, such 
properties are impacted.  
 
Riparian Issues. The River Satluj (a tributary of the Indus) is an international river (lies 
in China, India and Pakistan). This run-of the river is located in between two existing 
dams. The upstream dam at Nathpa, about 50km upstream of the project, has a small 
storage (an inundation of about 22ha, all within the river gorge, mainly for producing 
peaking power for the 1500MW Nathpa-Jhakri project). The downstream Bhakra dam 
and the storage of Govindsagar were completed in 1960s, and constitute a major multi-
purpose project of Northern India. The Bhakra Dam has a gross storage of 9621 million 
m3, and is about 200km downstream of the Rampur project.  Thus, there is no significant 
impact of the project related to water flow and availability on either the upstream or 
downstream riparian countries. The water quality impacts of the project is assessed to be 
minor even at the immediate project area, and would be truly negligible downstream of 
Bhakra. In addition, the Sutlej is one of the 3 eastern rivers defined by the Indus Treaty 
(between India and Pakistan), and is earmarked for sole (consumptive) use by India.  
 
According to the Bank policy on International Waterways, both the upstream and 
downstream riparian countries, China and Pakistan, were notified and provided with 
Page  7
relevant project details. No objection to the project was raised by either of the riparian 
countries.  
 
Safety of Dams.  This project does not construct any dam, but uses tailrace water 
diverted by the dam earlier constructed by the Nathpa-Jhakri Power project. Construction 
of the 60m high Nathpa-Jhakri Dam followed the Bank's policy on safety of dams (as the 
project was funded by the World Bank). In this project, the aspects related to safety of 
dam needed to be (only) re-confirmed. The borrowers have prepared an Emergency 
Preparedness Plan, which takes adequate care of the safety features for the project, and 
reconfirms the safety of the Nathpa-dam.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are several possibilities of hydropower projects on Satluj, with a total hydropower 
generation capacity of about 9400MW. Six project (totaling 3145MW, including the 
Downstream Bhakra project of 1200MW) have already been constructed on the river, and 
a
further 6 projects (totaling 2284MW) is under construction. Ten more projects are being 
investigated, and eight relatively smaller projects have been identified. Once all these 
projects are constructed, a number of long term impacts are anticipated. These were 
examined by a study on cumulative impact and induced impact analysis.  
 
Overall, the induced and the long term impacts are addressed by the catchment area 
treatment plan for the project. The plan will be implemented over a 10 year period, at a 
cost of Rs.219.9 million. The CAT plan would cover the following types of degraded 
area - degraded forest, degraded pasture and barren land, erosion prone area, treatment of 
active land slides, treatment of drains. In the open forest areas, the CAT plan will support 
replenishment afforestation, assisted natural regeneration, and development of NTFPs. As 
part of pasture improvement it will provide for subsidiary silvicultural operation, 
treatment of erosion prone area, stabilization of active landslides, roadside erosion 
control, avenue plantation and landscaping. It will also support village infrastructure 
development. Additionally the project will support the GoHP program for development 
of fisheries in the state, and contribute Rs. 10 million. Similarly, to support the GoHP 
programs for conservation of wildlife, the project will contribute Rs. 6.25 million. To 
assist the state pollution control board in environmental compliance monitoring, the 
project will support establishment of an environmental laboratory.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project had limited number of alternatives, particularly due to the cascading 
operation mandated by the construction of the Nathpa-Jhakri project. Potential storage 
options for the project had been rejected on social and environmental considerations. 
Two other project alternatives were rejected primarily from geological perspective. 
Thereafter, the project analyzed three different alignment and configuration for the 
headrace tunnel, tailrace tunnel and powerhouse. The optimum of these was chosen.  
 
Page  8
The project examined several options to minimize the impacts on forest land. For muck 
disposal, construction camps, and other related facilities, sites were chosen after careful 
examination (as could be seen from the apparent lack of forest vegetation on the sites, 
which are classified as degraded forest land).  
 
The project authorities have explored the possibility of   availing maximum government 
land to avoid impacts associated with the private land including physical displacement. 
The proportion of government land to be used for the project is about 63%.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Social Safeguards: The key measures taken to address land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement issues includes: provision for payment of top-up money for loss of private 
land  in case of  land owning becoming  unviable unit ( less than 0.40 hectares) to ensure 
replacement cost of land, options for resettlement of displaced families (cash, cash and 
development plot or constructed house), employment in the project subject to suitability 
and availability, assistance for income generation activities and award of petty contracts 
to PAPs co-operatives.  The policy also incorporates several provisions for taking up 
community development works including operation of mobile health unit, which is 
already in operational. The project authorities also sanctioned 35 scholarships to the 
wards of affected people and area to acquire technical education, support for promotion 
of horticulture, agriculture and veterinary services.  
 
The borrower has already carried out a baseline socio-economic-survey through local 
university which covered the key demographic and social economic information of the 
project affected persons (PAPs) and other people living in the affected villages. The 
report has generated lot of baseline information such as demographic profile, income and 
occupation, land holding and cropping patterns, ownership of livestock and material 
assets, health situation, availability of basic infrastructure in the affected villages, etc.The 
project authorities have also held consultations with the affected and local people from 
time to time.  
 
The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)  has been  prepared  by the borrower with the help 
of local consultants. It contains the details of policy provisions for payment of 
compensation and resettlement assistance and implementation arrangements consisting of 
institutional mechanisms, grievance procedures, monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
time table and budget provisions. The outcome of baseline socioeconomic survey and 
consultations and the baseline valuers for key performance and impact indicators are also 
described. A transit plan for resettlement of physically displaced families in place and the 
livelihood support activities for those losing economically affected people is also 
highlighted. The transit plan includes two stage resettlement consisting of leased house or 
rental allowance @ Rs. 2000 per month (USD 45) for about 18 months  which allows the 
PAPs to construct houses on the developed plots. Further, in case of some delays in 
private land acquisition, the project authorities are adopting in entering into a lease 
agreement with land owners to pay lease rent until the lands are finally acquired. The 
budget for RAP is  INR 348 millions (USD 7.7 millions).  A separate Sustainable 
Page  9
community Development Program (SCDP), has been prepared describing the proposed 
infrastructure facilities in the project area for next 5 years with an estimated cost of Rs.  
256.8 million ($ 6 million). The private land acquisition is in advance stage and so far 
about 14 hectares (49%) has been acquired and compensation has been offered to the land 
owners. Most of the land for civil works is already in possession with the project and the 
balance private land to be acquired is mostly required for the construction of the township 
which is planned only in early 2008.  
 
Environment.  
Detailed description of the project's baseline environmental 
conditions; probable adverse impacts; and detailed environmental management plans 
including institutional responsibilities, implementation schedules, budget, arrangements 
for monitoring and evaluation, are described in the Environmental Assessment and 
Management Plan (EA/EMP). The EA/EMP is supplemented by the following supporting 
documents - (a) a study of the Managed River Flow in the project stretch of the river 
Satluj, (ii) an Assessment of the Terrestrial Biodiversity Impacts from the project, (iii) an 
Assessment of Cumulative Impacts of Hydropower Development in the Satluj basin in 
India, (iv) a Safety Assurance Plan for the project, and (v) a Catchment Area Treatment 
Plan for the project. The project has also prepared an Emergency Preparedness Plan, 
summary recommendations from which is incorporated in the EMP.  
 
The institutional arrangements for the project includes creation of an Environment Cell 
both at Corporate and project site which are now in operational. The environmental cell 
at Corporate Office is headed by a DGM who reports to Director (Civil) and consists of 
Environment Officer and Assistant Engineers. This is being strengthened as per the 
medium term capacity building plan.  At the project site, the unit is headed by a Senior 
Manager who reports to the General Manager. This unit is currently consisting of Senior 
Resettlement Officer, Assistant Environment Officer, Deputy Manager (Land matters) 
and 2 Assistant Engineers.  This will be further strengthened with an additional social 
scientist primarily to look after its proposed community development programs.  In 
addition, there are staff consist of a Land Acquisition Officer and 5 support staff from the 
revenue department from the state Government on deputation to deal with land 
acquisition related matters.  A standing committee chaired by Director (Personnel) or his 
nominee will be constituted to review the implementation progress of RAP. The 
corporate group and project cells are involved in preparation of the Rampur Hydropower 
Project from early stages (starting with site investigation).  
 
During implementation of the Bank supported Nathpa-Jhakri Hydropower project, 
SJVN had developed some social and environmental capacity. SJVN established an 
Environment and Resettlement Cell. Several training programs and study tours have been 
conducted. Various environmental and social studies were commissioned by SJVN, 
where the consultants were working with SJVN staff closely, building up additional 
capability.  SJVN has taken up sensitization programs for its staff on social and 
environmental issues and further strengthening of the institutions capacity on these issues 
is planned. In January 2004, SJVN has also initiated the ISO:14000 certification process 
for its Nathpa-Jhakri Hydropower project. . The  2 staffs at the project site (Senior 
Manger and Senior Resettlement Officer) were associated with the implementation of 
Page  10
previous Nathpa-Jhaklri Power project and have gained valuable experience and exposure 
to the social safeguards aspects which will be helpful for smoother implementation of the 
RAP.  
 
During implementation and subsequent operation of the 1500MW Nathpa-Jhakri 
Hydropower project, SJVN already has implemented a range of good environmental 
mitigation measures, resettlement action plan,   community development initiatives  and 
demonstrated some adaptive capacity to manage environmental, resettlement and 
community development  issues in its projects. Remarkable among these were(a) 
completion of all environmental management targets set at the start of the project; (b) 
agreement to implement increased environmental management targets during the 
construction period; (c) substantial implementation of the increased targets such as 
fisheries development plan, wildlife sanctuary enhancement plan, the catchment area 
treatment plan, and the incremental environmental management plan. On the social side 
some of the actions successfully implemented include: (a) uninterrupted operation of 
mobile health van for more than 4 years in the affected villages; (b) offering employment 
to about 60 project affected persons in the project; (c) construction of a resettlement 
colony and market complex for project affected people; (d) support to income generation 
activities to about 50 families; and, (d) infrastructural developmental works  worth of 
about INR 25 million in the affected villages.  
 
However, implementation of the major part of the EMP in Nathpa-Jhakri Hydropower 
Project was undertaken by state level line departments such as forests or fisheries, who 
had weak capacity to ensure effective implementation.  The contractors and the project 
implementation unit implemented the remaining part of the EMP with low levels of 
supervision and monitoring.  
 
In view of the limited capacity of the forest department to implement the compensatory 
afforestation and catchment area treatment plan in the Satluj basin, the forest department 
and the hydropower development agencies (particularly SJVN) will share the 
implementation responsibility. The GoHP will constitute a multi-disciplinary committee 
under the chairmanship of Chief Minister for monitoring implementation of the project 
including aspects such as implementation of CAT plan, compensatory afforestation, 
environmental management plan, and restoration of facilities which get damaged because 
of the implementation of the project. Further improved arrangements are anticipated as a 
result of two ongoing activities (A) a Bank supported technical assistance for preparing 
basin development optimization strategies for the Satluj basin, which will cover  
environmental and social implications of multi-project development, including 
implications for water resource management, catchment area treatment plans, potential 
cumulative impact on natural forests and other protected areas; and (B) the discussion 
between the Bank and the GoHP for a development policy lending, which also focuses on 
development of hydropower and its relation to conservation of natural resources in the 
state and in the Satluj basin in particular.  
 
SJVN has adopted a corporate environmental mission statement and environmental 
policies. SJVN has prepared an adaptive environmental management plan for its 
Page  11
corporate. This would help managing environmental issues in the Rampur project. SJVN 
has already taken a number of actions to augment the capacity of the environmental cell; 
including  a detailed training plan has been prepared, which includes training of the staff 
of the environmental cell, training of contractor's staff, as well as training of the corporate 
and project level managerial staff on environmental management.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The borrower  has  undertaken  extensive consultation on environmental and social 
issues.  The borrower has organized meetings to meet the regulatory requirement of 
public hearing.  More consultations on environmental and social aspectshave been  held 
as part of the supplementary studies currently being undertaken; as part of the process to 
update EMP, RAP and Social Assessment, and an ongoing basis, particularly with the 
affected people.  
 
There were seven focused consultations related to land acquisition and resettlement 
issues participated by about 140 people and the issues discussed include: compensation 
procedures, employment opportunities, resettlement options, hiring of vehicles, mobile 
health van, etc.   The Borrower has set up a Public Information centre (PIC) in the project 
area to provide access to the local people for project related information. This PIC  has 
been  used for disclosing all safeguard related documents.  
 
The environment and social documents includes EMP and RAP have been disclosed 
locally in the Public Information Centers  by the borrower on  September 29, 2006 and 
the executive summary of the reports are also put up in SJVN's web site. The disclosure 
of documents  was also announced through local newspapers. These documents are also 
disclosed in the Bank?s Info shop on October 19, 2006.The draft reports will be replaced 
with the final reports once the Bank and borrower endorse them.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/01/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/03/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/19/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  12
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  13
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sunil Kumar Khosla 
01/15/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Tapas Paul 
01/15/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
01/15/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Jean Sylvio Etienne 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/29/2007 
Comments:  Cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
01/25/2007 
Comments:  Cleared 
