Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: 
40705
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 16, 2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P107069 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: Energy Efficient Streetlighting Carbon Offset Project 
Task Team Leader: Jeremy Levin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 2007 
Estimated ERPA Signature: January 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDN 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset 
Sector: District Heating and Other Energy Efficiency Services 
Theme: Climate Change, Municipal Finance 
Financing amounts by source:  
Equity: $3.48 million 
Local Financial Institution: $8.1 million  
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [ X ] 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]: 
The proposed development objectives of the Carbon Offset Project are: 
·
Contribute to sustainable development by improving energy efficiency of street lighting 
applications at participating municipalities 
·
Reduce global emissions of carbon dioxide.  
 
This project is consistent with the India Country Assistance Strategy in that it aids in ensuring 
environmental sustainability in a manner that also produces immediate and tangible local 
benefits. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]: 
The project consists of sale of the first 500,000 emissions reductions (ERs) resulting from 
improvements in the efficiency of street lighting at seven municipalities in India, including 
Latur, Akola, Pune, Amritsar, and others to the World Bank-managed Spanish Carbon Fund.  
These projects will be implemented on a build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) basis through an 
energy service company (ESCO) shared savings approach.  Project financing will be provided by 
the ESCO.  The Municipal Corporations will make regular payments to the ESCO that are 
proportional to the achieved reductions in energy consumption for street lighting as specified in 
the energy saving contract. 
Page  2
The project will produce greenhouse gas reductions through the reduction in fossil fuel-powered 
grid electricity consumption.  Electricity consumption from street lighting applications at 
participating cities will be reduced through the replacement of fluorescent and mercury vapor 
fixtures with energy efficient T5 and high pressure sodium lamps, cutting consumption by up to 
60 percent with additional benefit from reductions in nightly peak demand. 
 
Carbon revenues are crucial for the success of these projects as the financial inflows from sale of 
carbon credits will provide much needed additional financial comfort to the ESCO and its lender, 
as there is high repayment risk for these types of projects in India. The revenues from carbon 
credits will ultimately be shared between the ESCO and the municipality, as specified in each 
individual shared savings contract. 
 
Monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken through the specific monitoring plan for 
Verification of Emissions Reductions that will be developed in the CDM Project Design 
Document. AEL will be accountable for overall reporting on implementation progress, 
preparation of financial monitoring reports, and preparation of audited project accounts.   
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
The proposed locations for all the sub-projects in this bundle of projects are identified cities 
–
medium to large. In addition to safe installation of lamps on high masts, there are safeguard 
issues related to the appropriate collection and disposal of replaced bulbs from street lighting 
systems. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
AEL is aware of the issues related to proper disposal of bulbs and will adopt a plan for 
appropriate disposal of the wasted material with individual cities. The installation crews will be 
trained in the safe installation of new bulbs and equipment, as well as in the proper disposal of 
the waste material as part of the project preparation activities.  This plan will be further 
examined during project preparation. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Environmental Safeguards Specialist: Gaurav D. Joshi 
Social Safeguards Specialist: R. R. Mohan 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
The project is expected to have very few adverse impacts on the cities’ environment. The key 
environmental issue from this project is ensuring the appropriate disposal of the scrapped light 
bulbs. Since the old mercury vapor lamps contain potentially hazardous material which needs to 
be properly disposed of, the proposed plan of AEL and the capacity of the participating cities’ 
waste handling systems would be reviewed during project preparation.  It is expected that an 
Environmental Assessment will be 
carried out. This would result in the preparation of 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(
please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Operational Guide for the installation, commissioning and de-commissioning of street lights in 
line with local law and benchmarked with international good practice.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Given the urban setting of this project the OP is not triggered.  However, normal care needs to be 
taken while replacing the lamps so that local citizens are not inconvenienced from their normal 
activities. 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
No land acquisition is contemplated and hence the OP is not triggered. 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:   N.A. 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  January 2008 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: TBD 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jeremy Levin 
August 16, 2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
August 16, 2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
August 20, 2007 
Comments:   
