Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  51252 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/08/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P099979 
Project Name: Capacity Building for Urban Local Bodies - NURM Capacity Building 
Task Team Leader: Abha Joshi-Ghani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (45%);General 
transportation sector (25%);Roads and highways (15%);Sub-national government 
administration (15%) 
Theme: Municipal finance (P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other 
urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to assist selected States and Urban 
Local Bodies to institutionalize GOI?s urban reform agenda. The project will provide technical 
assistance to strengthen policy, support institutional reform and improve procedures and skills in 
the areas of municipal financial management, service delivery, planning and governance.  The 
project will result in enhanced capacities in ULBs for: a) improved revenue management, budget 
planning and execution, procurement, and adoption of accrual accounting; b) better preparation, 
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of projects aimed towards improved, 
financially sound and universal service delivery and professional municipal management; c) 
physical planning correlated with integrated city development plans and optimizing 
environmental resource potential;  and d) improved accountability through better citizen 
interface and sector skills upgrading and increased knowledge among elected officials of 
municipal finances and administration.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project will provide TA support at both the state and ULB level.  It will target the 300 Class 
I
cities, including the 63 JNNURM cities, but only those cities that have signed a Memorandum 
of Agreement (MOA) for implementation of reforms with MoUD will be eligible for the 
technical assistance.  
 
The project will have four focus areas created inline with the JNNURM reform requirements 
that the cities may choose activities from for TA funding.  These are described below, along with 
their main elements.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Geographically, all over India, but specific urban local bodies in various states will be identified 
later.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASES) 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/01/2007 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N.A.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Abha Joshi-Ghani 
12/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/08/2007 
Comments:  PCN ISDS is cleared for this category "C" project. Please revise EA category in PID to 
reflect this category. Please advise should any substantive changes in project scope are anticipated. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
12/11/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
