Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/01/2006 
Report No.:  AC2033
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P090592 
Project Name:  Punjab Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
Task Team Leader:  Ghanasham V. Abhyankar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 7, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 24, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
157.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
139.00
139.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
GoPs RWSS program development objective will be to increase rural communities' 
access to improved and sustainable RWSS services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Program will be implemented in all 18 districts of Punjab. There are 12278 Gram 
Panchayats (as also the same number of villages or habitations) in Punjab. As per 2001 
census, total rural population in Punjab is 16.1 million, of which 33 % is SC population. 
There is no tribal population in Punjab. The proposed program under the SWAp basket 
will aim to provide/ upgrade drinking water facilities in about 3000 NC/ PC habitations. 
In addition, in the proposed program will improve operational and financial performance 
of the water supply schemes in another 2600 FC habitations and initiate introduction of 
community sanitation schemes in about 1100 habitations, which already have high 
coverage and use of household sanitation facilities. Thus, the proposed program will 
benefit about 4.O million people living in NC/ PC villages and another about 3.5 million 
people through upgradation of existing water supply schemes. The Community sanitation 
schemes will benefit 1.65 million people. Of the prospective beneficiary population about 
50% is expected to be from the SC category.  
 
Page  2
The project will have three main components: Component A: Program Management, 
Component B: Community Development and; Component C: Infrastructure Building.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The state of Punjab lies in Northern India, and is surrounded by other Indian states of 
Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan. It shares its western 
boundary with Pakistan. The state can be divided into five major land forms: Alluvial 
plains; Sand dunes; Flood plains; Shivalik hills; and the Piedmont plain.  
 
The Alluvial plains cover about 60% of the total geographic area, and are comprised of 
the old valley floors, the remnants of which lie above the level of the present river beds. 
They are popularly known as 'Upper-Bari Doab' (covering most parts of Amritsar and 
Gurdaspur districts), 'Bist Doab' (covering most parts of Jalandhar, Kapurthala and parts 
of Hoshiarpur) and the 'Malwa' plain covering areas south of Sutlej river. The plains are 
very flat and some parts are affected by water-logging and/or alkalinity. Sand Dunes 
cover about 11 % area of the state, with major pockets observed along the old river 
courses of Beas, Sutlej and Ghaggar in the districts of Kapurthala, Jalandhar, Ludhiana, 
Patiala, Sangrur, Bathinda and Faridkot. They are locally known as 'Tibbas', and most of 
the dunes have been leveled and brought under cultivation. The Flood plains are 
undulating areas containing various inter-locking channels of steams and swamps, and lie 
along the main rivers. They comprise about 7% of the geographic area and are 
characterized by high subsoil water table (especially in the rainy season). The Shivalik 
hills are located in the northern fringe of Gurdaspur and north-eastern parts of Hoshiarpur 
and Rupnagar districts. Some parts of the Shivalik hills (known as ?Kandi? area) face 
special problems of water availability due to the hilly terrain and availability of 
groundwater only at great depths. The Piedmont plain forms a transitional zone between 
the Shivalik hills and the alluvial plains. It is about 10-15 km wide and comprises parts of 
Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur and Rupnagar districts. The land is dissected by seasonal streams, 
popularly called 'choes', many of which terminate without joining major stream/river.  
 
Punjab is occupied by Indus river basin and is drained by three major rivers of this 
system: the Ravi, the Beas and the Sutlej, apart from other drainage channels. The 
Ghaggar sub-basin drains the southeastern and southern part of the State.  
 
Although Punjab has a large total replenishable ground water resource (1.82 mham/yr), 
the resource is critically stained in many places due to extensive use of shallow aquifers 
for irrigation. Recent estimates indicate an overall state-wide ground-water development 
of 145%. Declining water tables combined with deteriorating groundwater quality in 
many parts of the state have adversely impacted the water supply situation in the rural 
areas, and impose specific challenges for provision of rural water supply and sanitation 
services.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr S. Satish (SASES) 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja (SASES) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Expected Overall Environmental Impact:  
 
The project will finance investments in rural water supply and drainage improvement 
schemes to serve the rural populations in Punjab. The project interventions are therefore 
expected to result in private and public health benefits in the rural communities, through 
improved quality and delivery levels of RWSS services. Some of the main environmental 
health benefits expected under the project include: increased and better quality water 
supply for drinking, cooking, washing, bathing and cleaning purposes; time and energy 
savings in providing water supply closer to homes; improvements in personal hygiene 
and village sanitation levels; and reduced fecal-oral contamination of drinking water.  
 
A
comprehensive Environmental Assessment (EA) has been conducted for the project, 
which included an assessment of the policy and institutional framework, assessment of 
the environmental baseline and identification of baseline environmental issues pertaining 
to the RWSS sector, assessment of the potential environmental impacts of the proposed 
project interventions, and development of an appropriate Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) for addressing them.  
 
The findings of the EA study indicate that while the proposed project interventions are 
expected to result in overall environmental and public health improvements in the state, 
potential adverse impacts could occur if the schemes are not properly designed, sited, 
implemented, and maintained. The EMF prescribes mitigation measures for identifying 
and addressing any possible adverse environmental impacts of the project interventions, 
as well as the institutional arrangements for implementing the EMF.  
 
As a part of the baseline assessment, the EA study indicates the following 
environmental issues affecting the water supply and sanitation situation in the state:  
 
Page  4
Baseline Environmental Issues Currently Affecting RWSS in Punjab:  
 
(a) 
Water Availability: Shallow groundwater has traditionally been the major source 
of water for drinking, irrigation and industrial uses in Punjab. Owing to large-scale 
extraction of groundwater for irrigation, combined with increasing demands in other 
sectors due to population and industrial growth, the shallow aquifers in large parts of 
Punjab are in the state of over-exploitation, resulting in a significant decline in 
groundwater levels. For a large number of rural households which are not covered by 
public water schemes and which are dependent on private sources like the shallow hand-
pumps or tube-wells, the declining groundwater levels have adversely affected the water 
supply.  
 
Although about 80% of DWSS schemes in Punjab are based on groundwater supply, the 
water is sourced from the deep aquifer layers, ranging in depth from 250-1100 ft. This 
water supply for drinking water from the deep aquifer is considered abundant from the 
perspective of ensuring long-term source sustainability. About 20% of the water supply 
schemes in Punjab are based on canal-water supply, and in some cases the water supply is 
adversely affected during the periods of canal maintenance shutdown.  
 
(b) 
Water Quality: The groundwater quality in many parts of Punjab is poor owing to 
natural presence of salinity and fluoride at concentrations exceeding the permissible 
levels for drinking water use. In addition, the water quality of groundwater may also 
indicate bacteriological or chemical contamination due to inadequate treatment and 
disposal of sullage, effluent from septic tanks or industrial discharges. According to 
DWSS estimates, about 44% of the total 12,278 villages in Punjab suffer from poor water 
quality conditions. Specifically:  
 
?
Salinity is a significant problem in districts of Bathinda, Sangrur, Faridkot and 
Firozepur.  
 
?
Prevalence of fluoride in groundwater is indicated in Ludhiana, Faridkot, 
Bathinda, Sangrur, Jalandhar and Amritsar.  
 
?
Nitrate is present in Patiala, Faridkot, Firozepur, Bathinda, Sangrur and Muktsar.  
 
?
In addition, isolated pockets of Ludhiana and Bathinda have been reported to have 
presence of heavy metals and pesticides, respectively, in shallow groundwater.  
 
Due to its higher depth and relative hydrogeological isolation from the shallow aquifer, 
deep groundwater is expected to be free from the presence of bacteriological/chemical 
contaminants.  
 
(c) 
Environmental Sanitation: 49% of the rural households in Punjab have household 
sanitation coverage, and the main factors affecting the status of sanitation in the villages 
are the following:  
 
?
Wastewater generated by the households, including the wastewater from cattle-
sheds, flows into open surface drains leading to stagnation in the lanes and by-lanes  
 
?
Without adequate arrangements for treatment and disposal, the wastewater often 
seeps into hand pumps, open dug wells and pipelines, and the water quality of the village 
ponds has deteriorated leading to loss of productive uses and contamination of the 
shallow aquifer.  
Page  5
?
Effluent overflowing from the septic tanks, and therefore carrying harmful 
pathogens can find its way to the village drains.  
 
The proposed project interventions are expected to deliver the health and environmental 
benefits of improved RWSS services, through adequate design of schemes based on 
appropriate source selection, water quality testing and monitoring and an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) to address any likely adverse impacts of the project 
interventions.  
 
Key Social Safeguard Issues:  
 
No lands will be acquired involuntarily and hence OP 4.12 is not triggered. So is OP 
4.10 as there are no tribal (indigenous peoples) habitations  in Punjab.. The program, 
however, does need lands and mechanisms of securing the same are detailed below.  
 
Land Availability : Land requirement arises for four purposes: FOR (i)  water source ; 
(ii) water treatment plants; (iii) construction of  ground level or overhead tanks (G/OHT) 
or cisterns; and (iv) Water transmission and distribution pipelines as well as sullage/ 
storm water drains.  Water sources could be either ground water or irrigation canal based. 
The ground water sources do require ?land? and so  is the case with WTPs. In the case of  
tanks, if they are  constructed in a place other than that of the ?source, separate land will 
be essential. Transmission and distribution lines are laid mostly in public land or along 
public streets and no land needs are to be secured. In a few cases, pipelines  may have to 
pass through private agriculture fields.  Since the pipeline are laid  at least 90 cms below 
ground  elevation, no land acquisition is needed, but permission from the land owner is 
taken. If such permission is not forthcoming, then alternative pipe routing is used, even if 
it is  more expensive to do so. This means, lands are required for Sl No (i), (ii) and (iii). 
For these, it is a tradition in Punjab that, the respective Gram Panchayat and/ or 
communities should make lands available, else, no construction is planned. Most villages 
have some public lands and the same are made available. The same tradition will 
continue in respect of the program construction too.  
 
In the case of multi-village water supply schemes, the village which houses the source 
and WTP will need to make available lands much more than the other participating 
villages. Then, the village offering land shall be compensated duly by other benefiting 
villages. The GP offering lands shall pay 30% less of the required capital cost 
contribution and the same shall be borne duly by the other GPs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environment: Continued large-scale abstractions of groundwater for irrigation and 
industrial uses, if unabated, can be expected to further constrain the water resources 
situation in the state, and may have significant long-term impacts.  
 
Social: No adverse/ negative impacts are likely to occur as a result of the program 
intervention. Instead, positive benefits are likely to occur in the fields of local level 
Page  6
human and institutional development (in particular, strengthening of Gram Panchayats), 
and improved health and hygiene.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environment: Due to the participatory nature of the schemes and framework approach 
adopted for environmental management, the alternative options for villages would be 
considered during the design and planning phase of each scheme.  
 
Social: It is well recognized  that the RWSS reforms are being attempted for the first 
time in the state, and that it will be a difficult and challenging task for the government, 
PRIs and communities. Hence, towards ensuring that potential positive benefits do 
translate into reality, program plans for trying alternative means of community 
development support as well as human and institutional development efforts. This will be 
complemented with an ample provision for ?change management? initiatives .   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Management:  
 
As discussed before, the project-sponsored interventions are expected to bring about 
private and public health and environmental benefits, by improving delivery and quality 
of RWSS services. The specific measures to address the environmental issues include:  
 
1. 
Source selection will be conducted with due regard to ensuring year-round 
adequacy of water supply and long-term sustainability of the resource. More specifically:  
 
?
The current DWSS design practice ensures that water supply for ground-water 
based schemes is sourced from deep aquifer, with depth ranging from 250-1100 feet. The 
EA study, supplemented by inputs from regional groundwater experts, indicates that the 
current and expected future drinking water abstractions from the deep aquifer are small 
compared to their estimates sustainable yield, and therefore source sustainability for deep 
groundwater-based schemes is ensured.  
 
?
In areas where deep aquifers are saline, canal-based schemes will be 
implemented, if adequate year-round supply can be guaranteed through storage or other 
measures.  
 
2.
The siting, planning, design, and operation of the schemes will ensure that source 
selection is conducted with due regard to water quality of the source, and that water 
quality at household delivery level meets the drinking water norms. More specifically:  
 
?
Due to its higher depth and relative hydrogeological isolation from the shallow 
aquifer, deep groundwater is expected to be free from the presence of 
bacteriological/chemical contaminants. Conventional water quality parameters for 
DWSS?s deep groundwater-based schemes indicate acceptable water quality for drinking 
purposes.  
 
?
However, in view of the traditional emphasis on shallow groundwater quality and 
due to emerging concerns regarding possible presence of industrial or agricultural 
Page  7
chemicals in some locations, the project will commence and support a systematic 
assessment of deep groundwater quality in the state.  
 
?
Effective and regular disinfection, as well as preventive and corrective 
maintenance of water distribution systems will b ensured.    
 
?
A
protocol for regular water quality testing and control has been developed, 
which will be implemented through the operations phase of the water supply schemes.  
 
3.
The project will support interventions on environmental sanitation to ensure that 
the benefits of improved water supply are not compromised by poor personal hygiene 
standards, and inadequate drainage, sullage/wastewater treatment and disposal. More 
specifically:  
 
?
The project will support sustained IEC campaign to create and enhance awareness 
on hygiene aspects pertaining to hand-washing, water collection, storage and handling 
practices  
 
?
The project will support, on demand basis, drainage improvement schemes for 
improving sullage drainage, addressing effluent overflow from septic tanks into village 
drains, installing small-bore sewerage and undertaking ponds rehabilitation.  
 
In addition, the EMF will prescribe measures to ensure that:  
 
4. 
the temporary adverse environmental impacts associated with construction-stage 
activities are systematically addressed in the project-sponsored schemes.  
 
5.
appropriate environmental monitoring indicators are integrated in the overall 
project M&E systems  
 
6.
adequate resources are provided for environmental awareness and capacity 
building in village communities, Gram Panchayats and DWSS staff  
 
7.
adequate resources are provided for a thorough assessment of the water 
availability and quality of the deep aquifers.  
 
Implementation Arrangements:  
 
Program implementation and oversight arrangements have been developed keeping in 
view that the proposed program will adopt a sector wide approach (SWAP) wherein, 
irrespective of funding sources. the GoP will adopt uniform principles and guidelines for 
implementing all activities in the rural water supply and sanitation sector statewide. 
Towards  ensuring a state wide buy-in and spread, a Steering Committee will be 
constituted at the state level with the Chief Minister as its Chairperson and the Minister 
of DWSS as the co-Chairperson.  The DWSS will re-define its role, changing from 
builder /provider to that of a facilitator/ partner and will shoulder responsibility for state 
wide leadership, collaboration and management of RWSS sector including undertaking 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC), safeguards, arranging capacity 
support, Quality Assurance as well as monitoring and evaluation of outputs and 
outcomes. To enable this transformation, the exiting DWSS structure will be re-organized 
such as to provide for two, rather independent, channels ? one, the Program Facilitation 
and Monitoring Wing, and the other, Operations Wing. The former, with an unitary 
structure (through the district), a State Water and Sanitation Program Management Cell 
(SPMC) and a District PMC, will be responsible for policy analysis and formulation, 
Page  8
approval of annual plans, arranging funds, IEC, quality control and M&E.  The 
operations Wing will be largely the current DWSS set-up with Regional Chief Engineers 
and the existing offices of Circles, Divisions and Sub-divisions. They will be responsible 
for providing technical support to the GPs and communities. The DPMCs will be guided 
by a District Water Supply and Sanitation Committee (DWSC) headed by the President 
of the Zilla Panchayat. Grassroots level management decision making including 
construction fund management and procurements will rest with Gram Panchayat and the 
associated sub-committee, GP Water and Sanitation Committee. The overall 
implementation arrangements, decision making authority and oversight arrangements at 
national, provincial, district and village level are presented in the line diagram and are 
further elaborated in the following paragraphs.  
 
The SPMC and DPMC staff will include Environmental-cum-Social Development  
Coordinator charged with the overall responsibility of ensuring the implementation of the 
environmental and social development aspects. DWSS being chiefly an Engineering 
Department, non-engineering skills necessarily needs to be supplemented. For this, the  
Cell will outsource a professional management consulting firm, at the state as well as 
district levels.  
 
Program Management Support Consultancy (PMSC). A professional management-
consulting firm will be hired by SPMC which will :  
 
?
Provide experienced personnel in managing community development 
interventions including safeguards, as well as  monitoring and evaluation including 
process monitoring and impact assessments.  
 
?
Support Programme Director in developing and guiding implementation of 
capacity building, IEC, and  communication.  
 
?
Assist the Program Director in the preparation of progress reports as well as in 
consolidating the key learning, document the same and disseminate it statewide.  
 
The consultancy will, in particular, assist the SPMC in: (i) developing and disseminating 
alternative mechanisms to reach and work with the communities viz.,  participatory 
management techniques and methodologies; (ii) drawing strategies and implementation 
action plans transparency, inclusion and accountability; (iii) designing and adopting 
change management approaches, in particular, and capacity building, in general; and (iv) 
designing, rolling out and maintaining a web site reflecting status and progress in the 
RWSS sector in the state.  It is expected that the DWSS will acquire/ learn the non-
engineering skills (supplemented by PMC) within 2-3 years and thereon the same will be 
managed in-house by DWSS.  
 
Additionally, a state level environmental resource agency will be contracted to provide 
environmental capacity building, to conduct environmental audits and to provide 
technical support as and when required. Similarly at the district level, each of the 18 
DPMC will include an Environmental/ Social Development Specialist in their staff, who 
will be responsible for providing environmental support and supervision to each project-
scheme in the district. In addition, a panel of environmental experts will be constituted in 
each district to provide technical support on as required basis. At the village level, the 
Page  9
awareness and capacity for environmental management in the local GPWSC and SO 
would be enhanced through a targeted training and capacity building program.  
 
The environmental management will form an integral part of the overall scheme cycle. 
Each scheme report shall contain a environmental/ social checklist highlighting the issues 
and mitigation measures (if required). Scheme appraisals will take due note of this and 
shall guide in decision making. Grassroots/ village level checklist preparation will rest 
with the concerned Junior Engineer and the Support Organization. Implementation 
monitoring will rest chiefly with the GPWSC who will be capacitated and supported for 
this by DWSS. The post implementation supervision (including water quality) would be 
integrated with the overall monitoring of performance indictors.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environment: Key program stakeholders were identified and consultations held to seek 
their views and incorporate the same into designing of the program. Grassroots level 
stakeholders include: (i) benefiting households (including women, poor, Scheduled 
Castes, and the hamlets); (ii) Gram Panchayats (men and women elected representatives), 
(iii) Junior Engineers of DWSS, and  (iv) other community based organizations. Block/ 
district level stakeholders are : the respective Panchayat Raj Institutions; other concerned 
line departments such as health, rural department, power,  irrigation; district/ block 
administration; the DWSS; and non-governmental organizations, contractors/ suppliers 
and consultants. Departments of Finance, Drinking Water Supply & Sanitation, Rural 
Development and Panchayat Raj, Science and Technology, Irrigation, Health, political 
leaders, NGOs and consultants. There have been consultations throughout the project 
preparation both by the Bank Missions as well as by the Government of Punjab.  
 
The environmental and social assessment studies have been conducted with active 
participation by relevant stakeholders. EMF has been prepared  with extensive inputs 
from DWSS technical and field staff. Summaries of the assessments have been translated 
into local language and disseminated throughout the state. Stakeholder consultation 
workshops are also underway to discuss the findings and the EMF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/14/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  10
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ghanasham V. Abhyankar 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr S. Satish 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
 
Comments:   
Page  11
