Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/01/2006 
Report No.:  AC2430
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P078538 
Project Name:  National AIDS Control Project III 
Task Team Leader:  Cornelis P. Kostermans 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 28, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 23, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);HIV/AIDS (P);Population and reproductive 
health (P);Other communicable diseases (S);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
982.00 
 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
317.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)80.00 
 
US, GOV. OF 
0.00 
 
UN CHILDREN'S FUND 
0.00 
 
William Jefferson Clinton Foundation 
25.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
805.00
2,209.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to support the Government of India to achieve its goal of halting and 
reversing the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2011 through the integration of prevention and 
care, support and treatment programs. This would be achieved through four main 
program strategies:  
 
1.
Preventing new infections in high-risk groups and vulnerable populations;  
 
2.
Increasing the proportion of persons receiving care, support and treatment among 
those living with HIV/AIDS (PLHIV);  
 
3.
Strengthening the infrastructure, systems and human resources for prevention and 
treatment programs at district, state and national levels; and  
 
4.
Establishing a nationwide strategic planning, program management, monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) system.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1, Prevention of new infections, includes the following sub-components: (a) 
saturation of targeted interventions (TIs) for high-risk groups/areas by (i) generating 
demand and access to condoms, (ii) strategic communications integrating advocacy, 
behavior change, project support, and mobilization of community resources, (iii) 
fostering an enabling environment to change legal, policy and structural barriers, (iv) 
providing services for sexually-transmitted infections (STIs), (v) ensuring focused 
behavior-change communication (BCC)/harm-reduction interventions with injecting drug 
users (IDUs), (v) promoting effective strategies for men who have sex with men (MSM) 
and transgender people, (vi) strengthening linkages between TIs and care, support and 
treatment, and (vii) increasing ownership and pro-active participation of civil society in 
program design and implementation; (b) scaling-up interventions among the general 
population by (i) raising awareness and public dialogue, (ii) assuring safe blood supplies, 
(iii) developing a sustainable condom market, (iv) focusing prevention activities on 
women, children, adolescents and youth, (v) identifying self-risk and expanding 
voluntary counseling and testing services, (vi) mainstreaming workplace interventions, 
and (vii) instituting special efforts for migrants, refugees and cross-border areas.  
 
Component 2: Care, support and treatment (CST). Under NACP3, the Government 
plans to expand the care, support and treatment of people affected by HIV by (i) 
systematically addressing stigma and discriminatory attitudes and practices, (ii) 
improving access to treatment of opportunistic infections (OI), (iii) gradually increasing 
the number of PLHIV receiving anti-retroviral treatment (ART), (iv) integrating and 
balancing prevention with CST, (v) expanding voluntary counseling and testing, 
prevention of parent to child transmission (PPTCT) and post-exposure prevention (PEP) 
programs, (vi) supporting community care and support programs, (vii) instituting 
programs for orphans and affected children, and (viii) cooperating with networks of 
PLHIV.  
 
Component 3: Strengthening capacity at district, state and national levels. To 
decentralize and scale-up program activities additional capacity will be built at various 
levels. The most important interventions currently planned are (i) a review of all positions 
and job descriptions in order to hire staff with appropriate skills, (ii) sustained technical 
and training support to public/private agencies, CBOs, NGOs, and networks of PLHIV, 
(iii) building capacity to facilitate mainstreaming of HIV programs into the regular 
programs of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) and other 
Government ministries (such as Education and Transport), and creation of better 
partnerships with the private sector, development partners and other stakeholders, and 
(iv) specific training for prevention and CST for all involved in such programs.  
 
Component 4: Strategic information management. Monitoring and evaluation will assist 
in tracking the HIV epidemic, relevant bio-behavioral factors, program activities, and the 
overall adequacy and effectiveness of the country's response to HIV.  The NACP3 will (i) 
establish an enhanced nationwide strategic information, monitoring and evaluation 
system, (ii) improve sero-surveillance, and surveillance of behavior, STIs and other 
markers such as OI, Hepatitis B, C, etc., and (iii) support evaluation and a program of 
operations research to follow-up or pilot innovations in the program.  
Page  3
Component 5: Creating an enabling environment. Prevention, care, support and 
treatment of HIV/AIDS can be made more effective by creating an enabling environment 
that respects the human rights of those infected and affected by HIV. Thus, the program 
will (a) seek Greater Involvement of People Living with HIV/AIDS (GIPA) by (i) 
supporting and strengthening the capacity of PLHIV networks in all districts/states by 
2010, (ii) developing institutional structures within the National AIDS Control 
Organization (NACO) and the States' AIDS Control Societies (SACS) to plan, implement 
and monitor GIPA, (iii) facilitating linkages between PLHIV groups, (iv) creating an 
enabling environment for GIPA; (b) combat stigma and discrimination by (i) 
systematically involving PLHIV in service delivery, (ii) advocating and promoting media 
support for the proposed HIV/AIDS Bill, (iii) training service providers and counselors 
periodically, and (iv) advocating a rights-based approach to HIV with elected 
representatives; (c) address legal, ethical and human rights issues by (i) creating links 
between AIDS and human rights organizations and strengthening legal networks, (ii) 
developing a Code of Ethics and ensuring ethical standards are adhered to in research, 
(iii) reviewing existing laws and disseminating HIV/AIDS legislation, (iv) sensitizing and 
training law enforcement authorities, and (v) establishing minimum standards for 
prevention, care, support and treatment.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
India - Countrywide.  To date the National AIDS Control Programme (NACP) has been 
largely urban-based.  In this third phase (NACP3) it will expand into rural, including 
tribal, areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASES) 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment.  AIDS-related preventive and treatment activities generate wastes such as 
sharps (infected needles and syringes, surgical equipment, intravenous sets) infected 
blood, HIV test kits used in testing centers, blood banks and laboratories, and 
pharmaceutical wastes. If these wastes are not managed and disposed properly, they 
could have direct environmental and public health implications. Healthcare workers 
(HCWs) are at great risk as most blood-borne occupational infections occur as a result of 
injuries (due to accidents or unsafe practices) from sharps contaminated with HIV-
infected blood. Systematic management of such clinical waste from source to disposal is 
therefore integral to preventing infections and controlling the HIV epidemic.  
 
Indigenous Peoples:  As the NACP3 will extend HIV prevention, care, support and 
treatment efforts into rural and tribal areas (particularly those that are particularly 
vulnerable to the spread of HIV), India's tribal people (who account for about 8 percent 
of the country's total population) stand to benefit from it.  The program is not expected to 
have any negative impacts on tribal people. To ensure positive impacts, the program will 
implement strategies that are based on the specific needs and circumstances of tribal 
people (e.g., their remore locations, migratory occupations, healh-seeking behavior, 
varing exual practices, etc.).  These strategies would be culturally compatible and 
acceptable to those involved.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environment.  The possible spread of infection due to poor practices at healthcare 
facilities and in their environs would conflict with the overall objective of the HIV/AIDS 
program, which is to prevent and eventually halt the spread of HIV.  
 
Indigenous Peoples:  In the long-term, the program would be expected to reverse the 
spread of HIV/AIDS among tribal people through increased awareness and improved 
availability of prevention, care, support and treatment services.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment.  NACO commissioned a study to focus on the risk of HIV transmission in 
health-care facilities owing to inadequate and unsafe infection control and waste 
management practices, and to assess current infection control and waste management 
practices. Through primary and secondary qualitative and quantitative data and a field 
based survey in three states, it was found that awareness and implementation of infection 
control practices are reasonably good.  Healthcare workers are provided training and 
consumables to perform their tasks. However, the waste management component 
(HCWM) remains weak, as it tends to be dependent on the host (usually Government-
Page  5
run) facilities in which the testing centers are located. Systems for reporting, monitoring 
and evaluating HCWM are also weak. An Infection Control and Waste Management 
(ICWM) Plan has been developed which details the various steps for waste management 
as required under the Government of India's (GOI) Biomedical Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules, including waste segregation, treatment and disposal. The Plan also 
highlights infection control measures to be practiced by healthcare workers involved in 
testing and treatment activities.  A generic Action Plan and time-frame for 
implementation are provided, which would be used by state-level authorities to develop 
their own schedule for action.  Recognizing the need to integrate the HCWM activities 
under NACP3 with similar activities in other programs, the Plan recommends integration 
of activities between the SACS, the Departments of HFW, and nationally-funded 
programs such as those ror Reproductive and Child Health, Tuberculosis Control, etc. 
The Plan is to be approved by NACO and the Bank, and disclosed before Appraisal. It 
needs to be agreed with NACO that a final revised ICWM Plan will be approved and 
disclosed before Negotiations. The ICWM Plan, its dissemination strategy, and proposed 
budgetary allocations will need to be included in the GOI's Project Implementation Plan 
(PIP) before Negotiations.  
 
Indigenous Peoples.  To develop appropriate program strategies and an implementation 
plan for the program in tribal areas, a social assessment was carried out by the Borrower, 
including social data collection and analysis, and primary and secondary consultations 
with tribal people and organizations.  Key findings of the SA include: low awareness and 
knowledge of HIV/AIDS and STIs among tribal people, except in the northeast; wide 
variation in sexual and marital practices which have a bearing on partner infection; very 
low access to modern health facilities and use of traditional healers or unqualified 
pratitioners; and high vulnerability among youth and those who come into contact with 
'outsiders'. The resultant Tribal Action Plan (TAP) is to be an integral part of the project, 
and will be legally covenanted. The TAP includes actions to (a) integrate tribal and social 
development issues in the NACP at every level from village health plans to national 
policy; (b) increase the access of tribal people to the range of services provided under 
NACP; and (c) work with other government departments, local development partners, 
and public and private sector enterprises to improve HIV prevention and CST for tribal 
people; and (d) systematize knowledge of HIV/AIDS among tribal people. The specific 
actions include: measures to recognize the vulnerability of tribal people in policy; 
establishing VCTCs and other AIDS-related programs in tribal areas, and linking these 
with other health programs to improve access to a wider range of health services; 
increasing awareness campaigns and condom distribution in tribal areas and diversifying 
communication and social marketing strategies; and involving corporates and 
departments of tourism in various aspects of service elivery in tribal areas where they are 
active; disaggregating data, mapping, improving surveillance, and increasing studies and 
operations research on tribal populations.  
 
As the program will expand newly into rural and tribal areas as part of the scaling-up of 
preventive and care, support and treatment activities, increasing implementation capacity 
is a central feature. The TAP includes specific measures to increase national, state and 
local capacities to implement and monitor activities for tribal people/in tribal areas. Some 
of these measures are: increasing social development expertise (especially on tribal 
people) in NACO and the SACS, sensitizing staff to cultural differences and equity 
Page  6
(including gender) issues, training health workers to reach out and provide services to 
tribal groups, and involving tribal leaders, traditional practitioners and youth in the 
program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the Environment Assessment, the consultant team visited government-run 
primary, secondary and tertiary health-care facilities, Voluntary Counselling and Testing 
Centers (VCTCs),  blood banks, ART and STD Clinics (and associated laboratories) in 
three states. The stakeholders consulted included State AIDS Committees, Departments 
of Health and Family Welfare, Medical Officers at the district and state levels, and 
health-care workers at the facilities. The team also had discussions with local 
communities including patients, peer educators, commercial sex workers, NGOs and 
private waste management organizations. NACO also organized a Stakeholder 
Consultation to discuss the draft ICWM Plan in which many representatives of the above 
groups participated.  
 
Indigenous Peoples. Among the project's key stakeholders are tribal people who are 
infected or affected by HIV/AIDS, or who are at risk of such infection.  Important among 
these are migrant workers and their families.  Throughout India, many tribal people are 
involved in seasonal agricultural work, construction, or domestic work in places distant 
from their homes.  Tribal areas near cities such as Mumbai, and through which truck 
routes pass are also vulnerable.  A special stakeholder group is the IDUs who are 
concentrated in the northeast of the country.  The social assessment (SA) interacted with 
these groups, as well as with organizations working with them, in a sample of six states 
and districts in different parts of the country.  Secondary consultations were held at the 
national level, and project preparation also included the establishment of an NACP 
Planning Team and 14 Working Groups wh also interacted with tribal and non-tribal 
people across the country. The draft SA report was disclosed in May 2006 on an AIDS 
Solution Exchange website that is widely known and interactive, and feedback was 
received through this mechanism, during the consultative workshops, and from 
reviewers. The revised SA report and Tribal Action Plan will be made available on this 
site as well as through the SACS and other local organizations, with appropriate 
summaries in local languages.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/24/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/13/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/01/2006 
 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/26/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Cornelis P. Kostermans 
07/07/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruma Tavorath 
07/05/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meera Chatterjee 
07/05/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anabela Abreu 
07/12/2006 
Comments:   
