Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:  
40876
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 17, 2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P105618 
Project Name: Punjab High Voltage Distribution System Carbon Offset Project 
Task Team Leader: Jeremy Levin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2007 
Estimated ERPA Signature Date: March 
2008 
Managing Unit: SASDE 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset 
Sector: Power 
Theme: Climate Change 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Equity: $53 million 
Loan from REC: $477 million 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [ X ] 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]: 
The proposed development objectives of the Carbon Offset Project are: 
·
Reduce global emissions of carbon dioxide  
·
Increase the efficiency, reliability, and quality of electricity supply in the local 
distribution system of Punjab State Electricity Board (PSEB) 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]: 
This Carbon Offset project consists of purchase of Emissions Reductions created by PSEB 
reductions in technical losses. These losses will be achieved through replacement of the existing 
3-phase 400V distribution system with an 11-kV high voltage distribution system at 46 schemes, 
covering nineteen out of 20 circles by Punjab State Electricity Board.  PSEB's overall losses are 
currently 25.1 percent, of which approximately 18 percent are technical losses.  The proposed 
project will reduce technical losses to 11 percent within a five year period, saving an estimated 
490 GWh per year once fully commissioned.  Project financing has been secured from Rural 
Electrification Corporation (REC), and implementation is expected to begin in the summer of 
2007. 
 
Page  2
PSEB will decommission large existing transformers and will install new 6.3-, 10-, and 16-kVA 
transformers to convert to a high voltage distribution system.  New power lines will not be 
installed as part of this project. 
 
The reduction in technical losses will result in significant reduction in generation required to 
serve existing load, leading to consequent reductions in CO
2
emissions.  The first million tons of 
these emissions reductions (ERs) will be sold to the World Bank-managed Carbon Funds. 
 
PSEB will be accountable for overall reporting on implementation progress, preparation of 
financial monitoring reports, and preparation of audited project accounts.  Monitoring and 
evaluation will be undertaken through the specific monitoring plan for Verification of Emissions 
Reductions that will be developed in the CDM Project Design Document. 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
46 schemes in nineteen circles of the PSEB are covered under the project. The alluvial plains of 
Punjab (land of 5 rivers) are characterized by an abundance of irrigation infrastructure and high 
crop yields. Though surface water from Himalyan tributaries of the Indus have been the 
traditional source of water for irrigation, in the recent past there has been an increase in use of 
groundwater.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
The PSEB has been involved in the distribution (and generation) of electricity in Punjab for 
several decades. It has the presence in all the 46 circles and members of its staff are well-versed 
with the routine processes in power distribution.  Their capacity to manage environmental issues 
related with the use of the HVDS system will be assessed during the preparation of the project 
and suitable provisions for training and raising awareness of consumers will be made a part of 
the project activities.  
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Environmental Safeguards Specialist: Gaurav D. Joshi 
Social Safeguards Specialist: R R Mohan 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
Changing over from low voltage to high voltage supply will be a major step in reducing technical 
losses from the electricity distribution network. Up-grading of the system will ensure that 
significant additional power previously lost in the distribution system will now be available for 
direct consumption.  However, improper handling of the dismantled transformers could lead to 
leakage of Poly Chlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) in case these were used as dielectric medium. The 
project will carry out advance testing of transformers included in the project for PCBs. If PCBs 
are found, a disposal plan will be prepared and reviewed by the Bank before implementation 
This issue would be analyzed as part of the EA.  Issues pertaining to operational safety during 
implementation shall also be examined as part of the EA 
and measures shall be undertaken 
to 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(
please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
reduce risk of accidental contact.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
This policy will be triggered in case there is a requirement to construct / replace the supports 
(poles / concrete bases) for new transformers replacing the existing ones. It will essentially 
confirm that ‘chance find’ procedures are in place to guide the project authorities to handle such 
a
situation.  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The project has no special adverse impact or otherwise on indigenous people. In the event 
that IP / tribal communities are found in the area of influence of the project, the community will 
be consulted and appropriate steps will be taken in accordance with the IP policy.  In all 
communities,  the following general precautions will be taken: (i) where transformers are 
changed in the vicinity of residential accommodations, citizens should have prior information of 
the proposed activities; (ii) care shall be taken to ensure that the activity causes least interference 
to normal human activity in the area in addition to routine safety precautions  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
No land acquisition is contemplated and hence the OP is not triggered 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  NA 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  March 2008 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: TBD 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jeremy Levin 
August 16, 2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
September 5, 2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Salman Zaheer 
September 5, 2007 
Comments:   
