Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2408 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/15/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P099047 
Project Name: India Vocational Training Project 
Task Team Leader: Kin Bing Wu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
265.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve the employment outcomes of graduates from 
the industrial training system, as measured by:  
 
(i) 
Improved internal efficiency of the ITI:  
 
?
Dropout and completion rates compared with the baseline  
 
(ii) 
Improved external efficiency of the ITI:  
 
?
Time taken to find employment after graduation compared with the baseline;  
 
?
Proportion of graduates employed within six months of graduation compared with the 
baseline;  
 
?
Earnings of employed graduates compared with the baseline;  
 
(iii) 
Index of institutional autonomy and private sector participation compared with the 
baseline; and  
 
(iv) 
Recurrent cost recovered from industrial contribution, services rendered and trainees as a 
percentage of total recurrent expenditure compared with the baseline.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project is a sector investment loan (SIL), pooling funds with GoI and states to finance ITI 
upgradation, capacity building and policy development.  GoI has funded the first 100 of the 500 
ITIs and is seeking Bank assistance to upgrade the remaining 400.  GoI intends to finance ITIs 
through a cost sharing arrangement of 75 percent from the Central Government (financed by the 
Bank loan/credit) and 25 percent from the states.  The total loan/credit is $265 million (indicative 
only), of which 100 percent will be IDA.  The following components are proposed:  
 
Component 1: Upgradation of ITIs ($220 million)  
 
This first component will utilize the bulk of the funds. There are two subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1:  Upgradation of ITIs ($200 million)  
 
The project will support upgrading of 400 ITIs, of which about 100 eligible ITIs will be funded 
before the project is approved by the Board and will be covered by retroactive financing of 
eligible expenditures.  
 
Selection of States and ITIs.  In order to be eligible to participate in the project, states and 
institutions should meet the following criteria:  
 
(a) 
State Council of Vocational Training (SCVT) must have active private sector 
participation;  
 
(b) 
participating ITIs must have a functioning Institutional Management Committee (IMC) 
for the entire institution. The IMC is to be chaired by a representative of the local 
industry/employers.  The Principal of the ITI will be the ex-officio member secretary.  
 
(c) 
the state should allow IMCs sufficient autonomy to perform the following functions-- 
generation of revenue and setting fees through consultation with the state and utilization of these 
revenues and fees; forecasting emerging training areas; review of new curriculum to determine 
relevance and standards; review of training needs and approval of training of faculty members; 
appointment of contract faculty; and facilitating placement of graduates.  
 
All ITIs will be required to submit a 3-year strategic development plan.  The plans should be 
developed by the IMC through a consultative process including all stakeholders, including 
faculty members, students and community.  Plans will define the vision, mission, 
issues/challenges facing the ITI and strategies for addressing them.  They will set targets for 
improvement, define indicators of performance, and detail the financial requirement to meet the 
needs.  
 
The first batch of 100 it is, which will be funded retroactively through the project, will be 
required to submit the strategic development plans by October 2006.  The remaining 300 ITIs 
will be chosen competitively based on their strategic development plans. These institutions will 
be chosen in two batches within 12 months of project effectiveness.  
 
The 300 ITIs will be selected at state level.  All ITIs in the state which meet the criteria 
specified in paragraph 9 above, will be invited to submit proposals (except those ITIs that have 
already been funded).  The state will convene a panel to review and select the best plans. The 
panel will comprise of employers and state entities responsible for industrial training.  The panel 
Page  3
will submit their recommendations to MoLE for final approval.  The panel will judge the merit 
of the plans based on: (i) how well the plan meets the needs of the local economy; (ii) the 
consideration given to gender, stakeholder participation, and social equity (e. g. stipends being 
provided to poor but meritorious students); (iii) the staffing strategy of the institution; (iv) 
whether the financing requirement is realistic and affordable; and (v) whether the ITIs will be 
able to leverage private sector financing to complement public support.  
 
The panel must justify its decision and post its minutes on the web to ensure transparency.  The 
selected plans will also be posted on the web.  The panel is also to provide comments on to 
unsuccessful ITIs as to how they should improve their plans for future competition.  In states 
with only one ITI, such a panel is still required as a way to build consensus and develop 
awareness of needs.  
 
Eligible expenditures for the plans will include (i) civil works including repair and 
maintenance; (ii) equipment; (iii) teaching and learning resources and materials; (iv) staff 
training; (v) information campaigns and dissemination; (vi) consultancy and technical assistance; 
(vii) operating and maintenance costs; and (viii) curriculum development.  The maximum 
amount that could be awarded to an ITI should not exceed $600,000.  
 
Since the strategic development plan is a 3-year plan, all ITIs interested in entering the 
competition should submit their plans prior to project effectiveness.  Funding of the plans could 
come in several tranches for implementation.  These tranches will be related to the time frame 
for procurement and implementation, which will be defined by MoLE.  
 
Sub-component 1.2:  Incentive Fund ($20 million)  
 
There will be an incentive fund for states if a certain percent (to be defined) of their 
participating ITIs meet their improvement targets (based on key indicators).  The fund will 
provide additional resources to the states to improve the VET system in line with the objectives 
of the project.  Some of these resources will also be provided as incentives to eligible ITIs (under 
component 1.1 above). This fund will be available from the third year of the project after 
information becomes available on key input, output and outcome indicators, as well as on the 
state?s success in adopting the reform initiatives becomes available.  
 
Decisions on utilizing this fund will be reviewed by a centrally convened national panel.  The 
panel will comprise national employers? associations and MoLE.  The panel must justify its 
decision and the minutes will be posted on the web to ensure transparency.  
 
Component 2:  Policy Reform, Support for Innovations and Project Management ($ 35 million)  
 
This component will set the stage for the medium-term reform agenda. It has three sub-
components:  
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Policy reform ($5 million)  
 
Page  4
?
Enhancing Curriculum Development: This activity will focus on meeting the 
government?s stated objective of setting world standards for its training programs.  Consultancy 
and technical assistance can be used to develop proposals for improving on-going curriculum 
development and to benchmark current standards against international practice.  
 
?
Develop a National Qualification Framework:- This activity will focus on developing a 
National Qualifications Framework, to provide a uniform framework for establishing course 
assessment requirements and course entry pre-requisites.  
 
?
Developing a new regulatory framework for private providers of training: Clear and 
balanced regulations will be developed and implemented to ensure that registration procedures 
for private providers are kept simple.  This will allow the private sector to compete on a ?level-
playing field? with the public sector and ensure a vigorous private sector response in areas where 
it has a comparative advantage.  
 
?
Development of a policy framework for the informal sector: This will be developed in 
conjunction with stakeholders across different ministries, the private and NGO sectors and will 
outlines strategies to stimulate training for the informal sector with a realistic timeframe for 
implementation;  
 
?
Assessing the feasibility of a training fund: This activity will focus on assessing the 
feasibility of establishing a training fund to mobilize and allocate resources.  It will explore the 
potential of mobilizing resources from the government, industry and students, and examine 
whether these resources can be allocated to well-performing institutions in either the public or 
private sector on the basis of performance criteria.  The feasibility of providing financial 
incentives (e.g. tax deductions, matching funds) to employers to encourage them to train their 
workers through this fund will also be explored.  
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Support for Innovations ($20 million)  
 
This component will solicit and finance proposals for piloting innovative interventions/reforms 
which can be implemented on a broader scale in the medium-term if found to be effective.  For 
example, activities could include: pilot testing the implementation of activities proposed under 
component 2.1 above, training and support service to the informal sector, development of web-
based curriculum and training materials, development of content to utilize EDUSAT for 
instructor training or re-training, and adaptation of different models of management such as those 
already advanced by the MoLE.  In addition, there are several specialized Central Training 
Institutions (CTIs), Advanced Training Institutions (ATIs) and Hi-Tech Training Centers under 
the aegis of MoLE which could be supported through innovative pilot programs.  
 
A
national panel will be convened to review and select proposals.  The panel will comprise 
national employers? associations and MoLE.  Preference will be given to proposals developed by 
NGOs and the private sector.  The panel must justify its decision and the minutes will be posted 
on the web to ensure transparency.  The chosen proposals will be posted on the web and 
comments will also be provided on unsuccessful proposals.  
 
Subcomponent 2.3:  Project Management ($10 million)  
 
Given the need for coordination between the center, the states and the private sectors, the 
project will support management and coordination at national and state levels.  MoLE would be 
Page  5
responsible for oversight of the Project, but assisted by a national project unit that will convene 
review panels, provide technical assistance to ITIs to prepare their institutional development 
plans, mount media campaigns, disseminate good practices, update web-based information, carry 
out joint annual reviews, build capacity of state entities in procurement, financial management 
and monitoring and evaluation, and resolve implementation issues. State entities responsible for 
industrial training would be responsible for overseeing state-level implementation, although each 
state will have a state project unit to perform similar functions as the national level unit.  Policy 
level guidance will also be provided by national and state level steering committees.  Technical 
support will be used by MoLE and the state entities to implement the project.  
 
Component 3:  Monitoring and Evaluation ($10 million)  
 
This will include the development of an appropriate labor market information system that will 
assess trends in local labor market demand to identify emerging sectors/critical areas and skill 
mix requirements.  Furthermore, support will be provided to develop and implement procedures 
and systems for monitoring outcomes (e.g. tracer studies and employers? surveys to assess 
demand for skills); provide on-going and independent evaluations of impact, with results being 
fed back into the project as new streams of selected ITIs are brought online; provide web-based 
public information on the programs and quality of training).  Baseline studies on the status of 
ITIs and a baseline tracer study to assess employment outcomes of recent graduates from the 
system will also be conducted.  This component will finance surveys as well as technical 
assistance and capacity building in monitoring and evaluation. The outputs of this component 
will be disseminated to MoLE, state-level entities and other stakeholders, including the private 
sector and fed back into policy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Countrywide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower is conducting environmental and social analysis   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental assessment underway   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
This is unlikely to be triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Equity Assurance Plan being prepared.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The studies will be prepared by October 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kin Bing Wu 
06/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/20/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helen J. Craig 
08/15/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
