Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2640 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P102550 
Project Name: India ICDS IV 
Task Team Leader: Meera Shekar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (50%);Pre-primary education (40%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (S);Population and reproductive 
health (S);Education for all (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
450.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9,000.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
50.00
9,050.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) is twofold: a) to significantly expand utilization of 
nutrition services and awareness and adoption of appropriate feeding and caring behaviours by 
parents of children 0-3 years of age; and, b) to significantly improve early child development 
outcomes and school readiness among children 3 to 6 years of age; in selected high burden 
districts/states.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will have two main components: 1) Nutrition and 2) Early Childhood Care 
and Education (ECCE) (although the scope of each of these components remains to be 
determined). The nutrition component will focus on the "window of opportunity" between pre-
pregnancy through 3 years of age, and the ECCE component will focus on preschool education 
for children 3-6 years of age.  
 
Page  2
Component 1 Nutrition:  Sub-Component 1.1. Policy & programmatic support for nutrition: 
This sub-component will support national level nutrition policy development for nutrition both 
within the ICDS framework and beyond it.  
 
Sub-Component 1.1.a will address micronutrient malnutrition via food fortification and 
micronutrient supplementation. While much of the micronutrient supplements are provided-for 
through the RCH program, the support through ICDS will focus on food fortification at a nation-
wide level, demand generation and uptake of micronutrient supplements, and on filling-in the 
supply gaps where needed.  
 
Sub-Component 1.1.b will contribute to national policies and frameworks (including, but not 
limited to ICDS) for addressing infant/young child nutrition and prevention of low birth weights.  
 
Nutrition sub-Component 1.2. Intensive support for strengthened nutrition service delivery in 
high burden/lagging districts/states: This sub-component will target selected districts in some 
states that have the highest rates of undernutrition and high poverty rates. Special strategies will 
be developed to reach the un-reached in tribal areas and outlying hamlets.  
 
Component 2 ECCE: Sub-Component 2.1. Policy and programmatic support for ECCE at 
national/state levels:  This sub-component will cover both the ICDS program as well as other 
public and private service providers. It will include support for a consultative process for (a) 
setting of quality standards for ECCE service delivery and instituting mechanisms for regulation 
of quality and for accreditation (b) addressing training & resource support needs through 
partnerships & convergence (c) instituting systems for monitoring & evaluation, and (d) 
advocacy and information sharing with parents and communities to enable them to make 
informed choices about developmentally appropriate ECCE and child caring.  
 
ECCE Sub-Component 2.2.  This sub-component will focus targeted service delivery in select 
states/districts which have the lowest rates of   participation of girls in primary schools. The sub 
component will explore improving access and quality through contracting and collaboration with 
community, NGOs and private sector, strengthened convergence with primary schooling, quality 
improvement through need based training, outcome focused monitoring etc.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National, with a special focus on selected 100-200 highest-burden districts in India in the states 
of Bihar, UP, MP, Rajasthan, Uttararchal, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand and Orissa.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project is being prepared by the Ministry of Woman and Child Development and the Central 
Project Management Unit that has several years of experience with Bank-financed projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASES) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
There may be some minor construction waste related issues, if the project finances the 
upgrading/renovation/new construction of Angawadi centres. OP 4.01 is not triggered, but codes 
are in place to manage the very limited construction impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The 100-200 districts selected for this project may have significant Indigenous Peoples 
populations.  An initial screening will be conducted to determine the presence of IP in the project 
areas.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project has been classified as EA Category B. However, any construction activity which 
may be financed under this project will be minor.  Any construction-related environmental 
impacts would be mitigated or managed by the use of specific construction guidelines and 
careful management of the building activities.  Construction guidelines have been developed 
under the National AIDS Control Program III project and these will be adopted (and 
modified if necessary) for this project.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meera Shekar 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:  Project is a national 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anabela Abreu 
 
Comments:   
