Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3172 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/11/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P102624 
Project Name: India - Kerala- Local Govt. and Service Delivery Project 
Task Team Leader: Geeta Sethi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 23, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (90%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Municipal governance 
and institution building (P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
190.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The projects development objective is to strengthen the capacity of local governments to manage 
public resources for the benefit of the constituents, including the disadvantaged, while the state is 
engaged in a long term debt restructuring program.  This would be accomplished through a two 
pronged approach:  
 
(i) 
Capacity building at the level of the state, the gram panchayats, and constituents:  
 
*At the state level, increase the capacity to manage the process of decentralization and monitor 
local governments.  This would include operationalzing the recommendations of the 3rdSFC by 
setting up a fiscal cell to prepare a data base on fiscal matters related to Local Governments and 
to monitor regularly the fiscal performance of local governments.  
 
*At the local government level, improve the process of planning, budgeting and financial 
management, information systems, and participatory and consultative decision making.  The 
state has also shown interest in setting up new institutions like the Audit Commission for 
improvement in financial management.  
Page  2
*At the community level, support public education and capacity building to build awareness 
and confidence at the community level and capacity to effectively participate in planning and 
budgeting. The state?s monitoring of local government can generate data for public discussion of 
local government effectiveness.  
 
(ii) 
Formula based block grants to the local governments for financing many of the activities 
as defined in the State Act. Increases in own revenues will be rewarded through performance 
grants, a component built into the formula.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed instrument is a programmatic loan in the form of a Sector Investment Credit (SIC) 
through which IDA would pool funds with the state government. The SIC would finance a time, 
expenditure and geographical slice of the GoK?s program.  IDA would rely on GoKs own rules 
and procedures to implement the program including for financial management, reporting and 
auditing.  Special provisions on environmental safeguards will be introduced until an 
Environmental Framework for Panchayats is put in place as one of the outputs of the proposed 
operation.  
 
India spends a larger share of GDP on rural development and poverty alleviation than most 
other countries in the world.  Bank projects can have little impact unless they can influence these 
mainstream programs.  Therefore, the proposed project intends to assist the Government of 
Kerala in improving the institutional environment for poverty and development programs, 
through policy reform, positive incentives and improved capacity of both local governments and 
constituents.   The project would enhance the capacity of the decentralized arm of the public 
sector, which is the level closest to the people.   In Kerala, the state has embarked on an 
ambitious debt restructuring program.  However, the state remains very committed to 
decentralization for improving services and reducing poverty.  The state would like to 
institutionalize many of the reform options that they have been experimenting with on an ad-hoc 
basis.  In particular the government wants to ensure that flow of funds and institutional 
development to strengthen local governance is not compromised at any cost.  The project 
components would be:  
 
*Establish a decentralization cell at the state level and to develop an information system for 
tracking local finances and performance;  
 
*Create new systems of financial management, planning and procurement; train local 
governments these new systems financial management, participatory budgeting and planning;  
 
*Provide funding for intergovernmental transfers that would balance  the goals of decreasing 
inequities across the state and encouraging tax collection; and  
 
*Facilitate organization, training and the provision of information to constituents that would 
allow them to hold their local governments to account  
 
Potential risks and mitigation:  
 
The main risk to the program is the fiscal solvency of the state government.  If the state is not 
successful in reducing their deficit, they will not be able to support the local government grant 
system at the close of the 5 year period.  There are indications that this risk is relatively low.  The 
state has shown significant reductions in their budget deficit, and state revenues have shown 
Page  3
strong growth over the past three years.  The fiscal pressure has come from the outside, in the 
form of the pay commission recommendations.  A second risk is quick turnover of local 
government and state staff that would limit the impacts of capacity building programs.  This risk 
would be mitigated by obtaining up front agreements from state and local governments regarding 
staff permanence.  The third is a risk of misappropriation and misuse of public funds.  The 
project would address this weakness head-on by giving priority to improving financial 
management and procurement procedures, more importantly, increasing the transparency of local 
governments budgeting and implementation.  The project threatens the interests of line agencies, 
local contractors or even local politicians due to a decline in their roles and increased 
accountability and transparency.  Opposition from these stakeholders might be expected.  
 
The State of Kerala has been one of the front runners on decentralization and is currently 
implementing successful capacity building programs for local governments.  It has also shown 
success in promoting women self-help groups.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented in the State of Kerala.  
 
Many villages may not have sufficient Panchayat-owned lands to carry out sub-projects. Small 
plots of private land may be required for certain small infrastructure sub-projects such as check 
dams, culverts, bore wells, pump houses and drains. These lands may be acquired through 
voluntary donations or purchase, provided they are legally available, litigation free and under the 
legal guidelines of the State of Kerala.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined during preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Guidelines need to be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project will be active in areas which feature population groups that exhibit 
characteristics laid out in OP 4.10 to identify Indigenous Peoples and hence this policy is 
triggered. Although these populations would be the main beneficiaries of this project being 
resident in Kerala?s poorer Panchayat districts, a brief section of the PAD would be devoted to 
addressing some of the specific development issues of these populations, which is a requirement 
of OP 4.10. This section would contain a brief development plan to further enhance the 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
participation of such populations in the project.  
 
The populations which would qualify under OP 4.10 would include all Scheduled Tribes as 
well as other groups who fulfill the OP criteria for Indigenous Peoples. Some of these may 
belong to the Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes and the Backward Castes. It will also 
include other vulnerable groups who may not fall into any of these Government categories but 
fulfill the criteria of Indigenous Peoples as per OP 4.10.  
 
The main objectives and the principles of OP 4.10 would be achieved in 4 important ways, 
3
of
which have been built into the design of the project (a ? c).  
 
(a) The building of financial capacity is across the entire State and will cover all 
Panchayats, including those with populations who qualify as indigenous peoples (IPs). This will 
enable IPs to acquire the financial capacities that were previously the domain of populations that 
would not qualify as IPs.  
 
(b) The main tenets of OP 4.10 will be disseminated as part of the capacity building/ 
training of rural government staff across Kerala in order that the project would be better able to 
address specific indigenous peoples issues. The project will ensure that the inclusion and 
participation of IPs is upheld at all stages of the project.  
 
(c) The untied grant component of the project will ensure preference of IPs, by virtue of 
their specific vulnerabilities, to participate in the small sub-projects in its decision-making, 
implementation and sharing of benefits.  
 
(d) The Government of Kerala?s commitment to improving the STs of the State by the 
passing the Panchayat Act in the Legislative Assembly and by implementing special programs 
targeted at the SCs and STs (the Department of Social Welfare) will help further the objectives 
of the Bank?s OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/04/2008 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be determined during preparation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Geeta Sethi 
10/10/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/10/2007 
Comments:  SAR Safeguards will review environmental and indigenous people pland before decision is 
made to transfer to sector for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
06/19/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
