Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2806 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/11/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P096124 
Project Name: Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric Project 
Task Team Leader: Michael Haney 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (50%);Renewable energy (50%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objectives of the project are:  
 
i. to improve the reliability of India's Northern (Electricity) Grid/Network through the addition 
of renewable, low-carbon energy from the Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric Project, and  
 
ii. to improve the effectiveness of Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Ltd. with respect to 
the preparation and safe implementation of economically, environmentally and socially 
sustainable hydropower projects.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric Project (VPHEP) has been designed as a 444 (4 x 111) MW, 
run-of-river hydropower generation scheme on the Alaknanda River in the north Indian state of 
Uttarakhand.  
 
When completed, the project will generate approximately 1,800 GWh (Gigawatt-hours, or 
million kilowatt-hours) of design energy in a dependable year.  The gross storage of 3.63 million 
cubic meters (MCM) is equivalent to (only) about 4.9 hours on average.  The major civil works 
required by VPHEP include a 65-meter diversion dam, a 13.4 kilometer headrace tunnel and a 3-
km tail race tunnel, and an underground power house.  All water diverted from the river will be 
Page  2
returned to the river approximately 18 kilometers after the point of diversion.  The impact of the 
project on downstream water quality is expected to be negligible.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
India, State of Uttarakhand, Chamoli District.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower is familiar with the social and environmental issues related to hydro projects. 
THDC has already implemented a large hydroelectric project, the Tehri Hydropower project. 
During implementation of the Tehri project, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and a catchment Area Treatment Plan (CATP) were 
prepared and implemented. The Tehri hydro project involved a major resettlement program for 
the project displaced population. However, this is the first time that the Borrower is engaged 
with the Bank. The Borrower is in the process of revising its R&R policy that will be applied to 
the proposed project. The Borrower works with the State (the Government of Uttarakhand) 
which has well established institutions to deal with aspects like land acquisition, resettlement, 
indigenous peoples development. However, for effective implementation, Bank will work on the 
proposed R&R policy (to conform to the Bank's requirements),improving the institutional 
arrangements and capacity-building to deal with issues related to resettlement and tribal 
development.  
 
During implementation and subsequent operation of the Tehri Dam Project, THDC 
implemented a range of good environmental mitigation measures, and demonstrated some 
adaptive capacity to manage environmental issues in its projects. In the process, THDC has 
developed some in-house capacity for environmental management. A project-level 
environmental unit was created, and a number of staff have been sensitized on environmental 
issues. A corporate environmental unit, headed by a Senior Manager, has also been established. 
The corporate environmental unit has been involved in preparation of the Vishnugad-Pipalkoti 
Hydropower Project from early stages (starting with site investigation). However, given the 
specific needs of the current project, as well as the recent developments in environmental 
policies, regulation and enforcement thereof by the GoU and GoI, substantial capacity 
augmentation will be required at both the project and corporate level to strengthen the company's 
capacity to assess and manage environmental impacts of hydropower development.  
 
Moreover, implementation of the major part of the EMP in Tehri Dam Project was undertaken 
by state-level line departments such as Forests or Fisheries, who had weak capacity to ensure 
effective implementation.  The contractors and the project implementation unit implemented the 
remaining part of the EMP with low levels of supervision and monitoring.  Given this, additional 
augmentation of the capacity to manage environmental issues will be needed for line 
departments and the THDC to implement this Project to an internationally acceptable standard.  
 
The Bank proposes to provide technical support to THDC to introduce further improvements 
that would help translate more effectively their corporate policies for sustainability into systems, 
procedures and institutional capacity for improved design and implementation of environmental 
and social programs.  The emphasis in this aspect of the Bank's intervention will be on 
establishing a corporate system for environmentally and socially sustainable hydro development.  
Page  3
In view of the major civil works encompassing over 16 kilometers of tunnels, establishment of 
a
state-of-the-art system for assuring worker safety will be given priority.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASES) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The major environmental issues in the project would include (a) disturbance to the forest 
cover and biodiversity in the project influence area; (b) impacts on the potential water use 
downstream; (c) induced erosion and landslides in the project area and its vicinity; (d) impacts 
from the project's associated facilities; (e) potential impacts on physical cultural resources 
situated on and by the banks of the Alaknanda, and (e) the construction-related impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project falls within the outer boundary of the Nandadevi Biosphere Reserve (recognized 
by GOI and UNESCO, this is also a World Heritage Site for its biodiversity values). Although 
the core National Parks -- the Nanda Devi National Park and the Valley of Flowers National Park 
-- are away from the project, the direct and indirect impacts of the project on the outlying areas 
of the Biosphere Reserve will need to be ascertained. If unavoidable, any impact will need to be 
fully compensated and mitigated, as per provisions of the OP.  
 
Although wild fauna is not evidently seen in the current approaches to the project area, it is 
possible that some wild fauna exists in the project's influence area, in which case there could be 
some direct or indirect impacts on them.  If this is the case, the impact will be assessed, and the 
requisite mitigation/management plan prepared.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The Project will acquire 120ha of land for the project, of which about 100ha is forestland. 
The forestland to be acquired consists of small parcels of land spread over the project area. Some 
of these parcels apparently do not have good forest cover, and some of these do not have forest 
cover at all. Still, a few parcels do appear to have good quality secondary forests. These (small 
patches of) forests will be lost.  In addition there could be indirect impacts on the patches of 
good quality secondary forests in the surroundings of the project.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project area is situated on a 2,000 year old pilgrimage path along the Alaknanda. The 
entire project influence area is dotted with ancient or old religious structures/building. Although 
none of these physical cultural resources are being directly impacted by the project, the indirect 
impacts could be substantial. The possible impacts on these as well as potential impacts on 
community religious properties, sacred groves, and chance-finds will be ascertained.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Due to the hilly nature of the project area, there are some indigenous peoples (locally referred 
as tribal) in the project area. The issues related to tribal communities will be identified during 
social assessment and accordingly a strategy will be developed to address them.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project developer, THDC, has estimated that 140 families will need to be relocated and 
about 346 families will need to be assisted for the loss of their land for the project.  This will be 
clarified during the social impact assessment which will be carried out in the course of project 
preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The project includes construction of a 65-meter diversion dam.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project lies on the Alaknanda River, a tributary of the Ganges River.  Riparian 
notification has been sent to China, Nepal and Bangladesh.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/14/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Borrower prepared a preliminary environmental impact assessment (EIA) report before 
the World Bank was invited by GOI to consider financing this project.  The preliminary EIA 
contains draft environmental baseline, prediction of impacts, a draft environment 
management plan (EMP), draft disaster management plan (DMP), draft catchment area 
treatment plan (CAT Plan), and a draft resettlement action plan (RAP).  The preliminary EIA 
report, with the associated draft EMP, DMP and the CAT Plan, have been reviewed by the 
Bank, and gaps have been identified that will be filled before before appraisal, as necessary.  
In this context THDC is undertaking supplementary environmental and social studies related 
to (a) assessment of the managed downstream river flows; (b) study of the terrestrial 
biodiversity impacts; (c) archaeological surveys, (d) safety assurance plan, (d) social impact 
assessment and (e) building adaptive environmental and social management capacity.  
 
To meet the Indian regulatory requirement of the public hearing, THDC has held meetings 
with the communities in the project area. More consultations on environmental and social 
aspects will be held as part of the supplementary studies currently being undertaken; as part 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
of the process to update EMP and RAP, and an ongoing basis, particularly with the affected 
people.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Haney 
03/08/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/03/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
04/11/2007 
Comments:  Cleared 
