Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2657 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P102768 
Project Name: Strengthening India's Rural Credit Cooperatives 
Task Team Leader: Priya Basu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Banking (50%);Agricultural marketing and trade (25%);General finance sector 
(25%) 
Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Corporate governance 
(P);Standards and financial reporting (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural non-
farm income generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project will be a SWAp and broadly support the objectives of GoI?s Program. The 
development objective is to strengthen the financial and technical capabilities of potentially 
viable CCS institutions in participating states, so that they can become robust, efficient and 
commercially sustainable financial institutions that can cater more effectively to the financial 
needs of small and marginal farmers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Bank project will be designed to support the GoI?s Program of reforms for the 
CCS. The total cost of the Program, as estimated by the authorities on the basis of 31 March, 
2003 data, is Rs. 13,596 crore (US$2.94 billion). Program costs will be shared by the Central 
Government (68%), State governments (28%) and the CCS (4%). The Central Government will 
provide its share as grants to the States, while the States will meet their share from their budget 
or through open market borrowing. The GoI has requested the Bank to provide up to US$1 bn of 
Page  2
financing to be used to fund a part of the Central Government?s contribution to the Program. 
Other donors, including the Asian Development Bank and KfW, have also been approached.  
 
The proposed project will adopt a Program-Based Sector-wide investment Approach (SWAp), 
through which the project will be able to support this high priority Program of the GoI in a 
comprehensive and coordinated manner, in partnership with other donors (ADB, KfW, GTZ, 
DFID and others who may come in at later stages), thereby leveraging Bank resources to scale-
up impact. The lending instrument to be used is an Adaptable Program Loan (APL), which 
would allow the Bank to provide phased support for the GoI?s longer-term development program 
for the CCS, through a series of loans that could build on lessons learned.  
 
The programmatic series of operations would be divided into two phases:  Phase 1 (mid-2007 to 
end-2009). This first phase (financed with IDA/IBRD funds of approx. US$600 million) would 
focus on strengthening the financial and technical capabilities of the potentially viable (and 
hence, eligible) CCS institutions in at least the six states that have joined the Program, covering 
the following elements: i) Building a facilitating legal, regulatory and governance framework 
(US$15 mn); ii) Supporting institutional development of the CCS (US$ 250 mn) including 
strengthening CCS capacity to comply with the new legal, regulatory and governance 
framework, improve performance, and achieve longer term sustainability, through the provision 
of TA in the form of consulting services and training and investments in an information 
technology (IT) platform; iii) Recapitalization support (US$330 mn) providing phased 
recapitalization support to viable but insolvent CCS; iv) Program management/implementation 
costs (US$ 5 mn):  
 
Phase 2 (early-2010 to mid-2013). The second phase (with a proposed loan of US$400 million 
or higher) would build on these foundations to further expand the Program to cover a larger 
number of states (and CCS institutions), while consolidating gains where reforms were initiated 
in the first phase, and deepening reforms.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be open to the states that sign up to the Program.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The instrument being chosen for the proposed Bank lending is an Adaptable Program Loan 
(APL), where the investment will go towards re-capitalization of the CCS and towards 
Institutional Development and reform. The Program does not entail any loan funds/credit line to 
the CCS. The project thus does not support any investment which could directly cause any 
environmental impacts. The project is therefore categorized as a Category C project from the 
Environmental Assessment point of view. It is unlikely that any of the Environmental or Social 
safeguards are triggered. NABARD, the agency, which would channelize the re-capitalization 
funds to the CCS, has been traditionally supporting agriculture and rural development activities 
in the country, and is engaged in providing/facilitating capacity building for good farm 
production techniques, farm management, agri-technology, etc.  Therefore, the borrower?s 
capacity to manage safeguards issues is not considered to be a significant issue.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Mr Kirtan Chandra Sahoo (SASES) 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/22/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The activities envisaged in the project and the investments (recapitalization of CCS) 
supported by the project are not likely to cause any significant adverse environmental 
impacts directly. Bank's lending would help the GoI revive the CCS system, which in turn is 
expected to improve access to finance for the rural population (particularly small and 
marginal farmers). Review of available information shows that the average size of individual 
agricultural loans availed by the farmers through the PACS are in the range of   US$ 130 ? 
US$ 160, and that such loans are usually used for agricultural purposes, which include 
among others ploughing and preparing land for sowing, weeding, transplantation where 
necessary, acquiring and applying inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, etc., and labor for all 
operations in the fields for raising and harvesting the crops (Source: NABARD). The scale of 
activities supported by such small individual loans is not expected to lead to any significant 
environmental risks, particularly because the project area is too wide (spread across the 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
country). The project is therefore likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental 
impacts.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Priya Basu 
01/19/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
 
Comments:   
