Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2582 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/22/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P100735 
Project Name: Orissa Community Tank Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Deepak Ahluwalia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (70%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(30%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (P);Other rural 
development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
35.00
35.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is: Improve tank system based livelihoods and 
strengthen community management of selected tank systems.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project proposes to rehabilitate about 1400 tank systems with a command area of about 
130,000 hectares in the state of Orissa. The rehabilitation work would be undertaken in three 
batches over a six year project period.  
 
There are likely to be four main components:  
 
Strengthening community-based institutions to assume responsibility for tank system 
improvement and management.  US$ 10 million. This would include, inter alia, development of 
human resources, formation and/or strengthening of local institutions for tank improvement and 
Page  2
management, and developing mechanisms whereby the needs of traditionally vulnerable 
stakeholders can be addressed.  
 
Tank systems improvements.  US$ 70 million.  This would include physical investments in tank 
systems with command area of 20 hectares and above.  The actual rehabilitation work required 
would be determined for each tank system individually with an upfront 'tank improvement and 
management plan' prepared in consultation with tank users prior to undertaking any investments.  
In general, interventions are likely to address deficiencies in feeder channels, tank bed and 
structures, and the water distribution and drainage systems.  
 
Livelihood support services for tank system users.  US$ 15 million.  This would include 
promotion of farmer interest groups, agricultural research and extension support through public 
agencies and private service providers as appropriate, and facilitation of market linkages for 
agricultural producers/groups (including for fisheries and livestock products).  
 
Project Management.  US$ 5 million.  Activities under this component would help ensure 
effective project management at the state and district levels, information support, 
communications, and concurrent monitoring and evaluation through an independent agency.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
State of Orissa   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower is familiar with the Bank's social/environmental requirements as the state has 
implemented numerous Bank funded projects in water and other sectors in the past. The state has 
well established institutions dealing with safeguards aspects, and the Bank team will work on 
further strengthening their capacity to deal with issues related to environment, resettlement, and 
tribal development.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASES) 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The impacts of the proposed project on the environment and tanks-associated livelihoods are 
expected to be overall positive. Since there is a possibility that there might be short-term adverse 
environmental impacts associated with some of the project interventions, an Environmental 
Assessment will be conducted to evaluate the potential for such impacts, as a part of the 
Environmental and Social Assessments (ESA) for the project. One of the outputs of the 
assessments will be the development of a Social and Environmental Management Framework 
(SEMF) for identifying and mitigating the adverse social and environmental impacts, and to 
enhance the positive impacts of the project interventions.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
To address the possibility that improvements in tank infrastructure and irrigation services 
may lead to increased use of pesticides, the SEMF will include a pest management plan.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
This OP may be triggered from the perspective of the chance finds of objects or sites of 
cultural/ archaeological importance, during the course of the physical works associated with the 
sub-project construction and operation. The SEMF will develop a Cultural Property Plan to 
ensure that objects are not destroyed and that the relevant authorities are informed.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some of the tanks to be covered under the project would be in areas inhabited by indigenous 
peoples (referred to as tribal). The proposed project interventions are unlikely to have any direct 
adverse impacts on tribal communities. However, to ensure their inclusion and participation in 
the project and that they derive project benefits at par with others, some operational adjustments 
might be required. The proposed social assessment will identify specific issues related to these 
communities vis a vis the project activities and accordingly develop a tribal plan.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project may involve appropriation of land for the proposed interventions. The adverse 
impacts as a result of the project interventions would be identified and assessed through a social 
assessment which would be undertaken as a part of the SEA for the project. The results of this 
assessment will provide input to develop SEMF including R&R entitlements for different 
categories of adverse impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Although the tanks taken under the project are unlikely to fall in the category of large dams 
(>15m height), this OP is triggered to ensure the safety of smaller checkdams and tank bunds 
that are an integral component of tanks infrastructure. The SEMF will contain detailed safety 
guidelines in this regard.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As part of project preparation an Environmental Assessment and Social Assessment is 
planned and the assessment reports, including the safeguards documents(environment 
management plan, resettlement plan, pest management plan, and an indigenous people's 
(tribal) development plan) are expected to be ready by August 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Deepak Ahluwalia 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/18/2006 
Comments:  Decision to transfer safeguards oversight to SASSD / Agriculture to be made when 
interventions and impacts are better known. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
12/18/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
