Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3012 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/31/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P102328 
Project Name: Karnataka Community Based Tank Management Project (Supplement) 
Task Team Leader: Prabir Joardar 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: August 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%);Sub-national government administration 
(15%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%);Other social services 
(10%);Micro- and SME finance (5%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Gender (S);Rural markets (S);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
48.38 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.13 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
21.50 
 Local 
Communities 
5.00
26.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to develop and strengthen community-based approaches to 
managing selected tank systems in order to improve rural livelihoods.  The project proposes to 
cover 2,000 tanks in 9 districts -- a subset of the approximately 37,000 tanks in Karnataka.  The 
project aims to demonstrate the viability of a community-based tank improvement and 
management approach by returning the main responsibility of tank development to people on a 
selected basis.  If successful, the project would provide a useful model for scaling up this 
innovative approach statewide.  The poverty focus of the project is based on geographic targeting 
of talukas across the state with a high incidence of poverty.  Within these talukas, the selection of 
individual tank systems will be based on community demand.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project adopts a programmatic approach to community-based tank management and covers 
the first slice of the program 
–
2,000
tanks of the tanks in the state or about 67,570 ha of 
Page  2
command area irrigated by tanks.  The project adopts a programmatic approach to community-
based tank management and the existing project covers the first slice of the program 
–
2,000 
tanks of the tanks in the state or about 67,570 ha of command area irrigated by tanks.  The 
Additional Financing of $ 94.6 m (IDA) proposes to cover an additional set of tanks (about 
1200) and would be split as follows among the three project components: (a) establishing an 
enabling, environment for the sustainable, decentralized management of tank systems (US $ 
12.6m); (b) strengthening community-based institutions to assume responsibility for tank system 
development and management (US $ 12.6m); and (c) undertaking tank system improvements 
(US $ 76.9m).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in eastern and northern Karnataka and aims to rehabilitate about 1200 tank 
systems in 39 talukas of 9 districts with an approximate command area of about 80,000 hectares 
The areas fall into six agro-ecological zones, ranging from areas of heavy precipitation on the 
west coast to very arid areas of the east (where the project is primarily concentrated). Karnataka 
has the second-largest arid area after Rajasthan in India.  No National Parks of Wildlife 
Sanctuaries are located in the 39 talukas, and therefore, the project will not negatively impact 
any critical natural habitats.  
 
The proposed project area targeted for tank improvements has been determined by selecting 
talukas that exhibit the following attributes: a) high incidence of poverty; b) female illiteracy; c) 
high level of SC/ST population; d) high level of non-working population; and e) a significant 
number of minor irrigation tanks.  Tank systems located in the Cauvery Basin are excluded from 
the project due to an unresolved inter-state river dispute.  
 
The tanks are of varying sizes, with different institutional controls for each (e.g. tanks irrigating 
less than 4 ha are managed by village local governments or Gram Panchayats; those from 4-40 
ha managed by the Zilla Parishad or district local government; and those greater than 40 ha 
managed by the Department of Minor Irrigation) prior to the project.  Many of the tanks were 
central to the village economy and have been in existence for hundreds of years but have 
deteriorated over time due to a host of institutional, technical, and demographic reasons.Some 
tanks also have informal stakeholder groups and a community-employed regulator to help 
manage its operation.  In the context of landownership patterns in the tank command area, the 
preparatory studies have indicated that it is usually members of the dominant caste who now own 
a
major portion of the command area.However, other castes and weaker sections of the village 
may depend on the tank system in other ways (e.g. groundwater recharge, fisheries, livestock, 
washing, etc.). Some of the villages have significant tribal populations; preparatory exercises 
have indicated that the tribal population the project area have already merged with the 
mainstream and have similar socio-economic characteristics as the rest of the village population.  
Finally, some small cultural properties (places of worship, sacred trees) are located within the 
tank system and often relate to rituals associated with the health of the tank and prosperity tank 
water may bring.  
 
About 1200 tanks proposed for additional financing are expected to cover tanks that would 
irrigate about 20-100 ha of command area for a total command area of about 80,000 ha.  The 
tanks are expected to be located in about 39 talukas spread over nine additional districts.  The 
Page  3
activities are expected to be completed by the year 2012.  These estimates are likely to be revised 
as preparation for the additional financing is finalized.   
 
E.  Borrowe
r’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Specific Action Plans have been developed to mitigate against adverse environmental and social 
impacts and risks and to enhance the potential positive benefits.  These plans include the EMP, 
RAP, TDP, Pest Management Plan, Cultural Property Plan (as part of the EMP), and Tank Safety 
Plan (as part of the EMP).  The plans have been designed to be mainstreamed into each tank-
specific Integrated Tank Development Plan (ITDP) as an integral part of the preparation, 
capacity-building, implementation, and monitoring and learning.  Each Action Plan includes 
monitoring and learning indicators and estimated costs that have been incorporated in the overall 
project costs.  
 
The institutional arrangements for implementing these Action Plans have also been outlined in 
the SEA.  The Cluster Facilitation Team (CFT) 
–
which is the frontline institution responsible for 
project implementation – consists of five specialists in the area of participation and social 
development, engineering, gender and training, agriculture and environment, and resettlement 
and tribal development.  The inclusion of a specialist to focus specifically on social safeguards 
will help ensure adequate treatment of the more sensitive issues related to encroachment and 
tribal development.  The state implementing agency, Jala Samvardhane Yojana Sangha (JSYS) 
has also strengthened its staff at the state, and district levels in the following areas: resettlement, 
tribal development, environment, gender, agriculture, hydrology, and other skills relevant to the 
successful implementation of these action plans.  The costs and implementation arrangements 
have been mainstreamed into the project design and are described in the SEA, Project 
Implementation Plan (PIP) and other project documents.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao (SASES) 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASES) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The major environmental issues identified in the EA include inter alia: (i) degraded nature of 
the tank system (e.g. loss of an important common property resource; land degradation in the 
catchment); (ii) the spatial and sectoral context of the systems (upstream soil erosion and 
downstream siltation - both in single tank systems and in cascades - with silt accumulation 
reducing storage, groundwater recharge and increasing the need for expensive desiltation); (iii) 
the physical characteristics of the tanks (inadequate dead storage, tank safety concerns due to 
weak bund structure, damaged sluice and surplus/waste weirs leading to shortages, waterlogging, 
and poor water efficiency); (iv) encroachment (of tank bed, foreshore area, streams and feeder 
channels) and potential effects on cultural property; (v) inefficient use of water in the command 
(ill-defined irrigation distribution systems and damaged main and field canals lead to low 
productivity of water and distributional inequities); (vi) increasing fertilizer and pesticide use and 
declining use of organic manure/compost/green manure; and (vii) contamination of tank water 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
including poor hygiene and possible contamination of drinking water and associated public 
health concerns.  
 
The impacts of the project on the environment and rural livelihoods are expected to be 
overall positive.  The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and other plans designed for the 
project will help raise environmental awareness; promote the holistic planning of tank systems 
(catchment, tank, command) for individual tanks and cascades; promote integrated pest 
management; improve the tank ecology; and develop an improved environmental and social 
knowledge base for management.  The project will however have some negative impacts for 
which mitigation plans (e.g. EMP, RAP) have been developed.  Possible adverse environmental 
impacts include proper disposal of silt; uncertain impacts on groundwater; introduction of fish 
and trees to the tank system; potential induced impacts of increased pesticide use in the area due 
to command area rehabilitation (although the project will not finance pesticides); and potential 
adverse impacts on public health through impacts on the local hydrology and induced pesticide 
and fertilizer use. These issues and impacts have been addressed as part of the combined SEA 
and in the design of the EMP.  In addition, measures have been incorporated to enhance the 
activities that could have a positive impact on the environment 
–
such as improving tank 
ecology, improving environmental awareness and general tank water use hygiene (e.g. mixing of 
village wastewater runoff into tank, protection of drinking water and drinking water recharge 
areas, management of waste and manure on tank beds, etc.) to improve water quality and 
associated public health, improving cropping and input practices to reduce chemical pesticide 
and fertilizer use, and improve tank safety.  
 
The experiences of the KCBTMP so far have been overall positive on the environmental 
front.  An update of the Environmental and Social Assessment done for the proposed additional 
financing has not indicated any major environmental problems, and suggestions have been made 
to further improve the environmental benefits under the additional financing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
A
separate assessment and action plan has been developed for this safeguard and is part of 
the EMP.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
A
separate assessment and action plan has been developed for this safeguard and is part of 
the EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The indigenous peoples (referred as tribal) policy applies in this project not only to scheduled 
tribes (ST) but also to scheduled castes and certain vulnerable groups that are marginalized from 
mainstream economy or polity.  The percentage of ST population is approximately 30% in the 
nine districts although there is sizable difference between districts.  The objectives of the Tribal 
Development Plan (TDP) are to help ensure that potential benefits of the project are accessible to 
‘indigenous peoples’ and that fresh sources of social and economic imbalances are prevented.  
Based on the consultations conducted as part of the SEA with SC and ST and other communities, 
a
Tribal Development Strategy (TDS) has been prepared that describes the key issues identified 
by these communities and strategies to address these issues.  Broadly, the TDS will help t
hat 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
indigenous peoples are (i) adequately involved and effectively represented in project-related 
decision-making; (ii) priority is provided to them in terms of wage labor; small tank-related 
enterprises such as tank-based fisheries, forestry, livestock; and agricultural extension and 
capacity building for other income generation activities; (iii) able to access existing Government 
schemes for assisting ‘indigenous peoples’; and (iv) able to access agricultural markets and 
financial services provided by banks.  Based on the TDS, Tribal Development Plans (TDP) have 
been prepared and implemented under the project. The focus of TDP plans has been more on 
improving the economic status of ST, SC and other vulnerable groups and this approach will 
continue in the tanks covered under additional financing.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The most important safeguard issue relates to involuntary resettlement. The project involves 
the rehabilitation of existing tanks – and not the construction of new tanks. Therefore, acquisition 
of private land and physical displacement are not envisaged under the project although there may 
be a few exceptions.  However, encroachment of tank beds is an issue. The project has a well 
designed R&R policy to restore the livelihoods of project affected families. Though the 
encroachment issues were identified in about 50 per cent of the tanks in phase I, only about 9 per 
cent tanks have qualified for rehabilitation as per the project eligibility criteria. It should be noted 
that GoK has reiterated the illegality of all encroachment in tank beds and has voiced its desire to 
prevent further encroachment in the future.  The project however recognizes that not all 
encroachment affects the functioning of the tank system and has therefore attempted to minimize 
the extent of displacement to those whose land practices impede the operation of the tank. 
Details are provided in the R&R policy and RAPs prepared fro the tanks under the project.  
 
The recent assessment of RAP implementation, commissioned by the implementing agency 
(JSYS), has revealed that the project interventions did not require any physical displacement, the 
support under R&R policy provided to the affected people helped in restoring their economic 
livelihood and established the suitability of the policy for the tanks to be covered under 
additional funding. During planning and implementation at the tank level, efforts will continue to 
minimize the negative imapcts of the project on the population, including encroachers, dependent 
on tank for their livelihood.  Principles for assessing the ‘voluntary surrender’ of encroached 
land have been developed. The RAP prepared at the tanks level would contain mitigation 
measures to ensure that those affected are helped, at least, in restoring their livelihoods to 
existing levels.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
A
separate assessment and action plan has been developed for this safeguard and is part of 
the EMP.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  6
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/28/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Safeguard related studies are ready and will be submitted to Infoshop by June 4, 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Prabir Joardar 
05/28/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/29/2007 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
05/28/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
