Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2699 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P101650 
Project Name: Andhra Pradesh Rural Water Supply & Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Smita Misra 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective will be to increase reliable, sustainable and affordable rural 
water and sanitation services to the rural communities.  The key outcome indicators will be: (i) 
percentage habitations with improved drinking water and sanitation services; (ii) percentage rural 
households with safe and adequate water supply throughout the year; (iii) percentage rural 
households adopting improved hygiene and sanitation practices; and (iv) improvements in cost 
recovery (contributions to capital and O&M cost) and collection efficiency.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would contribute to GoAP's RWSS sector program mostly by: (i) 
implementing new sector policy and institutional framework; and (ii) financing a substantive 
portion of its investment program for the next five years.  The project would include the 
following components:  
 
(i) Policies, Institutional Reforms and Capacity Building: (a) development and implementation 
of updated procedures for new RWSS projects by PRIs, financing application, project appraisal 
and GoAP fund channeling; (b) development and implementation of standard memoranda of 
understanding and contracts between the various actors to enhance the accountability framework; 
Page  2
(c) reorganization of PRED and transformation into a provider of technical assistance and 
contracted engineering consultant and operator; (d) building capacity of the PRIs in the field of 
community mobilization, RWSS project formulation, RWSS project implementation (including 
procurement, construction supervision and financial management), sanitation and hygiene, O&M 
operations and setting of user charges; (e) building capacity of the other key actors such as the 
new PRED, private engineering consultants and operators of WSS services; (f) pilot programs on 
groundwater management, research and development and related sector studies.  
 
(ii) Investment: (a) augmentation, rehabilitation or construction of SVS and MVS, including 
improvement of water sources in about 15,000 habitations located in about 7,000 GPs, and 
representing a total population of about 12 million ; (b) improvement of operational performance 
of all SVS and MVS schemes; (c) sanitation and environmental sanitation programs including 
liquid and solid waste management.  
 
(iii) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E): (a) independent M&E of outputs (rehabilitated and 
new RWSS infrastructure) and of outcomes (reliability, financial and environmental 
sustainability and affordability of the RWSS service); (b) monitoring of water quality; (c) 
management information system (MIS).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rural Areas of Andhra Pradesh state of India   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Panchayati Raj Engineering Department (PRED) of GOAP has strong  engineering and 
environmental management expertise. However, this needs to be supplemented with institutional/ 
social expertise, particularly, to conduct stakeholder consultations and dissemination thereof. 
Early during the project preparation, this will be further assessed and capacity building 
reqirements if any will be included as an integral part of the project design.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASES) 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Management Framework along with a  checklist will be devised for application to all the 
selected sub-projects. This study will also review the rural drinking water and sanitation sector 
policies and institutions, and recommend measures for addressing  key concerns in the sector   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
While the project interventions will not adversely affect the indigenous people (Tribals) , 
these groups may require special attention from the view point of ensuring inclusion and equity. 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Further, need to take account of the Indian Constitutional provision as applicable to the Tribal 
Areas (5th Schedule Area) is essential while designing the institutional arrangements. A Social 
Assessment study identifying all the stakeholder groups and developing a framework for 
ensuring inclusion, participation and involvement of the key stakeholders, is planned as part of 
the project preparation activities and would provide directions on the preparation of an 
Indigenous (Tribal) People Development Plan (IPDP). The project design will be consistent with 
the Bank safeguard policy (OP 4.10) relating to flow of benefits to tribal communities through 
their informed participation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Will be decided during preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/11/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Will be completed before November 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Smita Misra 
02/02/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/07/2007 
Comments:  Decision to transfer to SASEI for safeguards oversight will be made when decision of 
triggering / non-triggering of OP4.12 is made (QER). 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
02/05/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
