Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2381 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P100789 
Project Name: Andhra Pradesh Community-Based Tank Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Deepak Ahluwalia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (70%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(30%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
105.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
60.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Improve tank system based livelihoods and strengthen community management of selected tank 
systems.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project proposes to rehabilitate about 3,000 tank systems with a command area of about 
250,000 hectares in the state of Andhra Pradesh. The rehabilitation work would be undertaken in 
three batches over a five year project period.  
 
There are likely to be four main components:  
 
a. 
Strengthening community-based institutions to assume responsibility for tank system 
improvement and management.  This would include, inter alia, development of human resources, 
formation and/or strengthening of local institutions for tank improvement and management, and 
developing mechanisms whereby the needs of traditionally vulnerable stakeholders can be 
addressed.  
Page  2
b. 
Tank systems improvements.  This would include physical investments in tank systems 
with command area of 40 hectares and above. The actual rehabilitation work required would be 
determined for each tank system individually with an upfront ?tank improvement and 
management plan? prepared in consultation with tank users prior to undertaking any investments.  
In general, interventions are likely to address deficiencies in feeder channels, tank bed and 
structures, and the water distribution and drainage systems.  
 
c. 
Livelihood support services for tank system users.  This would include promotion of 
farmer interest groups, agricultural research and extension support through public agencies and 
private service providers as appropriate, and facilitation of market linkages for agricultural 
producers/groups (including for fisheries and livestock products).  
 
d. 
Project Management.  Activities under this component would help ensure effective 
project management at the state and district levels, information support, communications, and 
concurrent monitoring and evaluation through an independent agency.  
 
A
pilot component on community based groundwater management within tank system areas to 
be designed in partnership with a Bank team currently carrying out AAA work on groundwater 
management in Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra could be included depending on further 
analysis.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The state of Andhra Pradesh.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower is familiar with the Bank's social/environmental requirements as GoAP has 
implemented numerous Bank funded projects in water and other sectors in the past. The state has 
well established institutions dealing with safeguards aspects, and the Bank team will work on 
further strengthening their capacity to deal with issues related to environment, resettlement, and 
tribal development.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASES) 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The impacts of the proposed project on the environment and tanks-associated livelihoods are 
expected to be overall positive. Since there is a possibility that there might be short-term adverse 
environmental impacts associated with some of the project interventions, an Environmental 
Assessment will be conducted to evaluate the potential for such impacts, as a part of the 
Integrated Environmental and Social Assessment (IESA) for the project. One of the outputs of 
the IESA will be the development of a Social and Environmental Management Framework 
(SEMF) for identifying and mitigating the adverse social and environmental impacts, and to 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
enhance the positive impacts of the project interventions.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
To address the possibility that improvements in tank infrastructure and irrigation services 
may lead to increased use of pesticides, the SEMF will include a pest management plan.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
This OP may be triggered from the perspective of the chance finds of objects or sites of 
cultural/ archaeological importance, during the course of the physical works associated with the 
sub-project construction and operation. The SEMF will develop a Cultural Property Plan to 
ensure that objects are not destroyed and that the relevant authorities are informed.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some of the tanks to be covered under the project would be in areas inhabited by indigenous 
peoples (referred as tribal). The proposed project interventions are unlikely to have any direct 
adverse impacts on tribal communities. However, to ensure their inclusion and participation in 
the project and that they access to project benefits at par with others, some operational 
adjustments might be required. The proposed ISEA will identify specific issues related to these 
communities vis a vis the project activities and accordingly develop a tribal plan.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project may involve appropriation of land for the proposed interventions. The adverse 
impacts as a result of the project interventions would be identified and assessed through a 
strategic social impact assessment which would be undertaken as a part of IESA for the project. 
The results of this assessment will provide input to develop SEMF including R&R entitlements 
for different categories of adverse impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Although the tanks taken under the project are unlikely to fall in the category of large dams 
(>15m height), this OP is triggered to ensure the safety of smaller checkdams and tank bunds 
that are an integral component of tanks infrastructure.  The SEMF will contain detailed safety 
guidelines in this regard.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/15/2006 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As part of project preparation a Strategic Integrated Environmental and Social Assessment is 
planned and the assessment report, including the safeguards documents (environment 
management plan, resettlement plan, pest management plan, and an indigenous people's 
(tribal) developmenty plan)are expected to be ready by December 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Deepak Ahluwalia 
07/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/17/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
07/17/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
