Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/16/2006 
Report No.:  AC1530
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P083187 
Project Name:  Uttaranchal Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Midori Makino 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 23, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (80%);Sanitation (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
154.00
154.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to improve effectiveness of rural water supply and 
sanitation (RWSS) services under the control of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and 
local communities in the state of Uttaranchal. The project is also expected to bring 
associated benefits, including improved health resulting in reduced water borne diseases, 
environmental sustainability through protection and management of water catchment 
areas, and well being of the rural population, especially women, through time savings in 
fetching water and community development activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed instrument is a Specific Investment Loan of $120 million, which would 
finance about 44% of the SWAp basket expenditures for the next five years, identified 
under the state’s medium term sector program (MTP). A SWAp has been chosen to 
implement a consistent policy for all new  investments irrespective of the sources of 
financing. The financing partners that consist of IDA, Government of India (GOI), and 
Government of Uttaranchal (GoUA) will agree on their financial contribution to the 
program and rely on common rules and procedures adopted by GoUA to implement the 
program.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The State of Uttaranchal, situated centrally in the long sweep of Himalayas in north India, 
lies in two of its regions -- Garhwal (north-west portion) and Kumaon (south-east 
portion). The state presents a variety of physical and hydro-geological characteristics in 
terms of topography, altitude, rainfall and vegetation. The monsoon in the state 
commences after middle of June till mid September, providing four fifths of total rainfall. 
In high hills rainfall generally occurs throughout the year with some variations. The 
state’s hill regions are well drained by numerous rivers and rivulets (locally known as 
gad, gadhera and raula). The state has three main river systems: i) the Bhagirathi-
Alkananda-Ganga basin, ii) the Yamuna-Tons basin, and iii) the Kali system, which are 
important water resources not only for the state but also for the whole Gangetic plains of 
north India. In general these rivers make a steep descent in the first 10-20km of their 
descent, with a lesser gradient later. Streams and rivulets, both perennial and seasonal, 
which flow down almost in every fold of the mountain ridges, and springs which occur 
all over the mountain region, form the main source of water to rural communities, which 
do not have access to river valleys. The region, being located in unstable Himalayan hills 
and with different river systems, is prone for natural hazards such as earthquakes and 
flash floods. Thus, the state poses challenges for rural water supply and sanitation service 
provision.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASES) 
Mr S. Satish (SASES) 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
1.
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
Page  3
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
1.
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
Environmental Assessment 
–
OP/BP 4.01 -  The project will support single and multiple 
village based rural water supply and sanitation schemes/services (RWSS), which will 
improve overall environmental conditions through expected improvement in quality of 
RWSS services. While there are several positive impacts expected under the project 
(improved hygiene practices, controlled discharge of human and domestic animal waste, 
reduction in faecal contamination and improvement in overall Infant Mortality rate (IMR) 
and Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) the source sustainability (of springs and streams) 
has emerged as a major environmental challenge.  
 
A
comprehensive environmental assessment (EA) has been undertaken. This included 
an analysis of sector specific environmental issues, policy and institutional bottlenecks, 
lessons learned from past and ongoing projects and a focused case study on catchment 
area treatment. Incorporating the key environmental challenges identified under the EA, 
an EMF has been prepared. The EMF includes various environmental management 
strategies to be used during project implementation.. The EMF specifically indicates 
measures required to address and manage risks associated with the following critical 
environmental issues. :  
 
(i) Source Sustainability - The state has around 34989.50 sq kms. of catchment area.  
These catchments’ forest/biomass cover and its moisture retention capacity directly 
influence recharging capacity of the local aquifers. Most of the drinking water supply 
sources lie in these catchments. Considering that majority of the RWSS services are 
dependent upon spring and stream sources, its sustainability becomes critical for the 
project. Experience from past single/multiple village RWSS suggests that 15% of the 
sources have dried out and about 30% sources have significantly declined their source 
discharge rate over the recent past (as identified by the EA). Keeping this in mind, the 
project will ensure that a minimum of 5Ha of land around the source will be protected 
and necessary catchment treatment interventions will be undertaken as part of source 
sustainability measures under the project. Technical design and specifications have been 
finalized with the state government. Besides, the state government through the SWAP 
will ensure that the individual sub-project catchment will be treated on priority by the line 
departments.  
 
(ii) Water Quality – While the chemical and heavy metal contamination is reported as 
insignificant in the state, the bacteriological contamination has been a problem, 
particularly with the increasing evidences of faecal coliform. Out of the 10 districts in the 
state few incidences of increasing nitrate in groundwater pockets were found in two indo-
gangetic plain districts i.e.,“Haridwar” and “Udhamsingh”. However, this cannot be 
generalized as a major concern in the state.  
 
Page  4
(iii) Environmental Sanitation 
–
Open defecation, lack of hygiene practices andpoor 
disposal of solid waste are some of the key attributing factors for the poor environmental 
sanitation condition in the state. Only 16% rural HHs have access to proper sanitation 
facilities and less than 2.2% of rural HHs have garbage/compost pits. Frequent flash 
floods and storm water also carry residues posing environmental risks for water storage 
of the piped water supply schemes.  According to the EA study, cattle generate about 
1600 kg dung/ village/day and most of the villagers do not have cattle sheds. Therefore, 
livestock residues are generally carried by run-off water polluting the downstream water 
sources. Most of this bacteriological contamination gets aggravated during monsoon 
periods.  
 
(iv) Grazing and Fuelwood Pressure on the catchment - Livestock is the second source 
of income for the rural households (HHs) and an integral part of their livelihood system 
in the state. Stall-feeding is not yet a significant practice in the state. Each HH has an 
average of 4.19 livestock.  There is a strong tradition in the districts of Uttaranchal of 
efficient fodder management by using a mix of tree, grass and shrub species.  These three 
mixtures are essentially collected from the catchments, which are already degraded and 
provides water sources for the RWSS under the project.  
 
Apart from the grazing pressure, the villagers are heavily dependent on catchment for 
fuelwood supply.  According to the The EA , the existing fuelwood consumption is ten 
times higher than the state average biomass carrying capacity . Increasing demand of 
wood for fuel and heating in rural areas has substantially reduced the regeneration 
capacity of the community/reserve forest areas. Such degradations are neither supported 
by any catchment treatment measures (for regeneration of biomass base) nor are the rural 
communities supported with any alternative energy sources for fuel and heating.  
 
Forestry OP 4.36: Most water sources are located in forest areas, considering that 
Uttaranchal is primarily a hill state with almost 65% land under forests.  The project 
ensures detailed procedures for use of forest land per those specified by GOI.  These are 
coverd in detail in the section below under “water source”.The EMF provides for 
adequate management measures (during scheme implementation) to mitigate adverse 
impacts of any activity in these areas. The Forestry policy is triggered but the project 
supports the overall objective of the policy and has ensured that the design of the EMF is 
fully consistent with the policy.  
 
Social: Social safeguard issues are discussed under two broad categories: one, land 
related; and the other, tribals, in the context of Operational Policy 4.10.  
 
Land Availability/ Contribution:  
 
Land requirement arises for four purposes: FOR (i) water source; (ii) water treatment 
plants; (iii) construction of ground level or overhead tanks (G/OHT) or cisterns; and (iv) 
water transmission and distribution pipelines as well as sullage/ storm water drains. 
Majority of land requirement will be met out of public/ forest lands. In a few cases, 
private lands will need to be secured. However, it is not essential that a particular piece of 
Page  5
land at a particular place is needed. Rather, lands can be chosen from a number of 
alternatives. The project’s activity/ success does not depend upon having a particular 
piece of land. Thus, lands need not be enquired involuntarily and hence OP 4.12 is not 
triggered. Detailed procedure on securing lands are enumerated below.  
 
Transmission / distribution as well as sullage/ storm drainage in the case of single 
village schemes, are laid mostly in public land or along public streets and no land needs 
to be acquired. In a few cases pipelines may have to pass through private agriculture 
fields.  Since the pipeline are laid at least 90 cms below ground elevation, no land 
acquisition is needed, but permission from the land owner is taken. If such permission is 
not forthcoming, then alternative pipe routing is used, even if it is more expensive to do 
so.  In a few cases, where sources are located in the forests, transmission lines may have 
to be drawn through the forest lands. In such a situation, procedure as described below 
will be adopted.  
 
Water Source: Uttaranchal being a hilly state with about 65 % of lands under forests, 
majority of water sources are located in the forests. Government of India (GOI) as well as 
state government has well laid out rules and procedures for making use of forest lands for 
non-forest purposes. Key principle underpinning the land transactions are:  
 
(i) 
Gram Panchayat will make an application to the concerned Divisional Forest 
Officer (DFO) requesting lands specifying location and area required as well as purpose 
for which it will be used.  
 
(ii) 
DFO will examine and recommends to the state government which has powers to 
accord approval for lands up to one hectare and area beyond one hectare needs approval 
by GOI. Past experience of Swajal (Bank assisted) as well as other projects implemented 
by other sector institutions indicate that a majority of schemes may not require more than 
0.3 Ha (single village schemes) and 0.8 Ha (multi-village schemes). This means, most 
approvals will be sought within the state.  
 
(iii) 
Land transfer will require fees to be paid towards lease amount, annual lease rent, 
and net present value (NPV), amounts will be determined by DFO. The state government 
recently has waived off lease amount and rent for drinking water projects. It may be 
noted that NPV is meant for compensatory afforestation elsewhere in lieu of forests given 
up for the project. NPV varies from location to location and will be calculated on the 
basis of not only area but also forest density.  NPV normally varies between Rs 580,000 
and Rs 10,00,000, average being Rs 750,000 per hectare. Project’s requirement of lands 
being 0.3 to 0.8 Ha, sum required will be a maximum of Rs 225,000 to Rs 600,00,000.  
 
GOHT & Treatment Plant:  When plots of lands are to be acquired for project 
installations, their ownership could be either public or private. While it is easier to access 
public land, arrangements will have to be made for securing privately owned land. All 
land purchases will be voluntary by donations or market led sale-purchase transactions. 
This is being adopted as it is not mandatory that a particular piece of land alone will be 
required without which scheme cannot be grounded.  In other words, the project’s 
activity/ success does not depend upon having a particular piece of land.  
 
Page  6
Single Village Water Supply Schemes: The prevailing normal practice in the state is to 
obtain such land plots either through voluntary donation or by outright purchase. In the 
experience of the recently concluded Bank assisted project, there were about 10 % cases 
wherein communities secured lands by outright purchase. But, again, actual cash 
transactions were very few and most of them were based on a mutual understanding 
between the owner and the community. This practice is expected to continue for the 
proposed project too for single village water supply schemes.  
 
Multi-Village Water Supply Schemes. In this case, the umber of outright purchases with 
cash transaction could be higher .In these cases, responsibility of making available lands 
will rest with GPs/ VWSCs.  Detailed principles underpinning securing lands are 
described below:  
 
(i) 
Project will not resort to involuntary land acquisition.  
 
(ii) 
To a large extent, as a first priority, efforts will be made to secure Public lands 
(lands belonging to revenue or other departments).  
 
(iii) 
In case, public lands are not available, then, private lands will be secured in the 
open market.  
 
(iv) Selection 
of 
Land. 
–
All the three parties - GP, UWSSC and the respective state 
body – together will decide on the selection taking into account suitability from all 
perspectives.  
 
(v) 
Prices. A district level advisory committee headed by the Block Pramukh with 
broad base participation by other functionaries (Block Development Officer, Jr Engineer 
of the state sector agency, Gram Pradhan and Chairman of UWSSC) will involve in 
negotiations with prospective sellers and arrive at a negotiated price. This will be 
endorsed by DWSM.  
 
(vi) 
Right to Refusal. A seller will have a right to refuse to sell his/ her piece of land, 
if s/he so wishes, at any point of time, till that time sale transactions are completed.  
 
(vii) 
Thus, all (private) land transactions will  meet the following criteria:  
 
a. 
the land in question will be free of squatters, encroachers or other claims of 
encumbrances;  
 
b.
no
lands will be secured which has semi/ permanent structures;  
 
c. 
activity for which a specific land is chosen has the general acceptance by the local 
community (as endorsed by the GP through consultations);  
 
d.
verification of the voluntary nature of land sale purchase in each case -- 
independent monitoring and certification by SWSM;  
 
e. 
due transparent measures for publicizing  the rules of securing lands as well as the 
transactions thereof;  
 
f. 
land transfers will be complete, land title will be vested with the (GP/ UWSSC);  
 
g. 
no project activity will start unless payments are made and title transfer are 
completed;  
 
h.
provision will be made for redressal of grievances (ROG)   PMU (SWSM) will 
act as a redressal house with an officer designated particularly for monitoring the land 
purchases.  
Page  7
(viii)    Lands will not be secured from socially poor and vulnerable households (such as 
those belonging to Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes) who, after alienation, will be left 
with less than a minimum holding essential to support livelihood.  
 
Tribal Development  
 
Social Assessment Enquiry, based on detailed analysis of several aspects, has concluded 
that the tribals (scheduled tribes) in Uttarnachal can not be judged as socio-cultural 
groups with identities distinctly different from the other groups in the society. They are 
not among the most marginalized  and vulnerable segments of the population  STs’ have 
continuously participated in and derived benefits from several development interventions 
in the past and that, their social, economic and legal status are in fact, as good, if not 
better, than the other segments. Hence, there is no need to trigger the Bank’s Operational 
Policy  4.10 related to indigenous peoples . Some supporting data are as follows:  
 
i. 
Tribal habitations have better water supply coverage compare to the non-tribal 
counterparts (Table-1).  
 
ii. 
There are very few ‘Partially Covered’ and ‘Not Covered’ tribal 
habitations(Table-2) compared to non-tribals (Table-3).   
 
iii. 
Proposed intervention being a SWAP, the state is committed to address the 
requirements of each and every demanding habitation.   
 
iv. 
Poverty:  Extent of poverty is higher among the non-tribals (Table- 4). Per capita 
availability of land is higher for tribals.  
 
v. 
Literacy:  There are more number of literate women among the tribals than that in 
the non-tribals (Table-5)  
 
vi. 
‘Tribals’ Vs STs. Uttaranchal ST list has several high caste persons including 
Brahmins (Semwals, Sharmas, Chendolas), and Rajputs (Tomars, Chauhans) Labeling of 
ST has been accorded based on an ‘area’(Jaunsar) in Dehradun, wherein themaximum 
STs reside and not based on socio-cultural identities   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environment: Future activities that involve increased pressure on the natural resources 
such as forests can potentially lead to significant changes in hydrology and other climatic 
factors (in the long term) of the region.  
 
Social: No adverse impacts are foresee   
 
Page  8
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environment: Adverse impacts may occur only due to mismanagement during 
implementation of individual schemes.  The EMF provides specifications and 
environmental codes of practices to ensure to mitigate any local level impact. Therefore 
alternative options will be considered during the planning and implementation of 
indvidual schemes.  
 
Social: The project is expected to result in positive impacts only. No negative impacts 
are anticipated   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment: All environmental management measures are integrated with the overall 
project cycle and will be implemented at various stages of single/multiple village 
schemes during planning, execution and post-implementation through an integrated 
Operations Manual.  The State Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) is the 
implementing agency with the overall project management support provided by the PMU. 
The PMU will consist of resource people from different disciplines and government 
departments and will be responsible for managing the entire project. They will be 
supported by the DPMUs in implementing the project at the district level. The PMU will 
nominate one of its members as “Environment Coordinator” (EC) for being exclusively 
responsible for ensuring the implementation of EMF in all the single/multiple village 
water supply schemes. S/he shall be the overall in-charge of implementing and 
coordinating the activities under the EMF of the project. The EC at the state level will be 
supported by an ES at PMU level. The DPMU as the district nodal agency will decide on 
the allocation of the core responsibility and ensure coordination between the GP and the 
UWSSC for better environmental management and mitigation of the adverse impacts. An 
Environment Specialist will be appointed at the district level for proving regular technical 
and monitoring support to each of the schemes. At the village level, the UWSSC will be 
implementing the project with support from a local SO. The SOs could be an NGO/CBO, 
a
technical institution or individuals having necessary technical skills.  
 
Social: A detailed earlier, the required institutional arrangements will be in place to 
ensure voluntariness in land transactions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental: The environmental analysis and catchment studies were undertaken 
through a participatory and consultative approach. Information on various environment 
aspects of environment related to water supply and sanitation were collected through 
structured questionnaires and extensive consultation with the local people and other 
stakeholders as identified. Stakeholder consultation workshops were conducted to discuss 
the EA findings and the EMF among the various agencies that are directly or indirectly 
involved in the water supply and sanitation sector.  
 
Page  9
Social:  Extensive consultations have been conducted primarily as a part of the Social 
Assessment study with a variety of stakeholders at different levels. They include: tribal 
communities, elected representatives including those of the Gram Panchayats, policy 
makers, administorators, NGOs and consultants. These consultations have helped in 
mapping the settlements; analyzing their current status and issues thereof; and drawing 
future course of actions, including deciding on triggering or otherwise the Bank's 
Operational Policy (OP) 4.10. The draft social assessment has been shared with key 
stakeholders and is under finalization. The project’s social assessment report will be 
translated in a booklet in the local language and shared with all the GPs and relevant 
government departments.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/17/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
No 
Page  10
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Midori Makino 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
 
Comments:   
