Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2366 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P091031 
Project Name: India - Capacity Buildng for Industrial Pollution Management 
Task Team Leader: Adriana Jordanova Damiano 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASES 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (40%);Other industry (30%);Solid waste 
management (30%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.00 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - ASSOCIATED IBRD FUND 
10.00
19.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will support the implementation of the new Government policies that emphasize 
enforcement, integration of pollution prevention efforts and social participation. The objective of 
the project is to strengthen the environmental management capacity of state regulatory bodies 
through a ?learning-by-doing? approach and to promote investments in integrated pollution 
management which have a potential for scaling up at state level.  
 
The proposed integrated approach to pollution management is premised on the view that a 
much broader and engaging institutional effort is needed which: (a) builds on a framework of 
regulatory incentives for pollution reduction; (b) promotes partnership between public and 
private entities for improved compliance; (c) facilitates remediation of past environmental 
damage; (d) enhances public awareness through better access to environmental information, and 
(e) introduces measures for reducing environment and health risks to communities.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have the following components:  
 
(a) 
Strengthening environment institutions through ?learning by doing?: This includes 
technical assistance for strengthening the planning, monitoring and enforcement capacity of State 
Pollution Control Boards (SPCB) and the Departments of Environment (DOE) in selected states 
including those where investments in area-based demonstration projects to address local 
pollution problems will be carried out. At state level, the project will promote regulatory 
incentives for improved environmental performance and corporate compliance.  The Project 
support would be in a form of modernization of laboratories, and computerization of 
environmental management data base; targeted assistance for hub training of SPCBs and DOEs. 
Specifically, the project will provide technical assistance support for the development of a 
National Plan for Rehabilitation of Polluted Sites.  It would facilitate the knowledge sharing and 
dissemination of ?best practices? with the aim to build capacity for addressing serious pollution 
problems. The project will use the environmental clearance process as a vehicle to enhance 
community awareness, provide better access to environmental information and engage the public 
in the implementation of integrated pollution management schemes.  
 
(b) 
Investments in integrated pollution management: This will include investments to 
specifically : (i) support the remediation of hazardous waste sites; (ii) promote voluntary 
compliance incentives and self-regulatory measures to improve performance and 
competitiveness of selected industrial clusters; (iii) promote technologies for water 
recovery/minimization, recycling of waste, and efficient resource management; (iv) support 
upgradation of common environmental infrastructure, and (v) support laboratory monitoring and 
analysis. Investments supporting municipal solid waste management include remediation of 
dump sites; cleaning up and rehabilitation of land; improved land reuse and innovative 
institutional and financing models for integrated solid waste management.  This will be included 
in the area-based demonstration state projects. Under these projects opportunities to access 
Carbon Finance will be explored where feasible.  
 
(c) 
Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation and Training. This would cover the cost of 
project management and implementation. It includes a system for monitoring and evaluation of 
project outcomes, staff training, equipment and operational and maintenance expenses for project 
management during implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Implementation details regarding institutional responsibilities and financial aspects will be 
developed during project preparation. A smaller number of states (approximately 3) will be 
selected for demonstration investments based on a set of selection criteria designed to ensure that 
integrated pollution management approaches covering both hazardous and solid waste 
management can be piloted. A larger group of states (approximately 15) which have limited 
institutional capacity will be included in a knowledge network and will receive training aiming at 
improved enforcement, pollution management. This part of the capacity building program will be 
implemented by using ?knowledge hubs? for training, information dissemination and sharing of 
project experience that can be scaled up. The states and subproject sites for demonstration 
investments that will require Environmental and Social Assessment will be decided during 
preparation, once the selection of specific sites is completed.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Project investments in integrated pollution management will be implemented by the State 
Pollution Control Boards and Urban Local Bodies/Municipalities at the state and city levels, 
respectively. For each area selected in a state for demonstration investments, a special purpose 
vehicle (SPV) would be set up to develop and facilitate implementation of the area-based 
pollution management plans. The environmental management capacity of all the above agencies 
is limited and will be built to ensure proper implementation and monitoring of the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Jennifer Solotaroff (SASES) 
Ms Salimah Haiderali Samji (SASES) 
Ms Priti Kumar (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is foreseen that an EA under OP.4.01 will be required. The project is conceived as an 
operation that aims to produce significant environmental improvements through a number of 
site-specific measures. Notwithstanding the anticipated positive impact, a detailed Environment 
Assessment will be prepared because of the potential consequences of management of hazardous 
materials. This includes comprehensive site-specific consultations with key stakeholders and 
formal public disclosure.  
 
The project is a broad sectoral one, comprising technical assistance and sub-project 
investments related to hazardous and municipal solid waste in several states some but not all of 
which will be identified in detail by appraisal. Therefore, it has been decided that a sectoral 
Environmental Assessment (sectoral EA) should be carried out.  This sectoral EA will provide 
the context and justification for the approaches being adopted under the project and will be 
accompanied by an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) which sets out the 
procedures and criteria to be used for individual sub-projects, including the implementation 
arrangements to mainstream various mitigation and monitoring requirements for the expected 
investment activities. The EA will also address the scope and potential impacts (if any) of the 
technical assistance components, which are part of CBIPMP.  
 
Preparation of the project includes detailed preparation of state area based plans to the stage 
at which they can be appraised as part of the overall CBIPMP.Appropriate project EAs will be 
required for each of these projects and would be consistent with the EMF.  It is assumed that 
each of these sub-projects will require a Category A EA but the screening and initial assessment 
of each may result in a different classification. These sub-project EAs will be prepared under 
specific ToRs as part of the technical studies for specific project sites.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
This OP may be triggered in the case of investments in municipal solid waste management 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
that are in close proximity to sites of cultural/ archaeological importance, e.g., temple towns. The 
project will develop a Cultural Property Plan to ensure that these sites are not adversely affected 
and that the relevant authorities are informed well in advance of any instance of potential impact 
on cultural property.  The project also will provide a protocol to notify relevant authorities in the 
event of such occurrences and to act in compliance with India?s relevant policies.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Given that physical interventions are planned only for urban and peri-urban locations, 
interventions should not affect indigenous peoples, unless the selected sites are in scheduled 
areas (i.e. the urban area expanded into tribal lands) or if they were forced to move from their 
ancestral lands to urban areas during their lifetimes. The social assessment will identify whether 
these conditions apply. If, this OP is triggered, the project will include an indigenous peoples 
plan in consultation with the indigenous peoples.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Some people may be affected by project activities in terms of loss of income or loss of 
housing/shelter.  Those potentially affected by project activities will be identified well in 
advance of project appraisal through extensive consultations with all stake-holders in project 
sites.  Consultations will be supplemented with data collection in the form of household surveys 
and appropriate qualitative methods of data collection to ensure that all potentially affected 
peoples are recognized, and all ways in which they may be affected are specified.  For events in 
which people incur loss of income and/or housing/shelter due to project activities, a framework 
will be prepared to ensure equitable income restoration and restoration of housing or shelter for 
affected people.  A draft of the framework will be ready prior to project appraisal.  The 
framework for resettlement and income restoration will identify and address issues relevant to 
vulnerable people and households.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/10/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/06/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
October 12, 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/18/2006 
Comments:  The Task Teams proposal of EA category "A" is endorsed, with the caveat that this issue 
may be revisited should the scope of the project change significantly during preparation. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jeffrey S. Racki 
06/21/2006 
Comments:  Cleared 
