Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/30/2006 
Report No.:  AC2317
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P090585 
Project Name:  Punjab State Roads Project 
Task Team Leader:  Isabel Chatterton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00
150.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's overall development objective (PDO) is to improve operating conditions of 
State roads for road users in Punjab, thus helping to provide the business enabling 
environment necessary to support Punjab's economic development strategy.  
 
The PDO will be achieved by increasing the service levels of the State roads through: 
(a) eliminating the growing bottlenecks in the network; (b) increasing vehicle speeds by 
providing additional geometric capacity; (c) reducing transport costs by reducing road 
roughness; and (d) strengthening GOP's capacity to plan and manage the network.  
 
The outcome indicators include (a) increased vehicle speeds; (b) reduction of highway 
network in poor or bad condition/reduced pavement roughness; (c) improved user 
satisfaction with the Punjab road sector; and (d) adequate road maintenance for network 
sustainability.  The project will also assist in the greater participation of the private sector 
in the development, maintenance and management of the road network, through possible 
support for concessioning, long-term contract maintenance and stakeholder consultation.   
 
3. Project Description 
A
Sector Investment Loan is proposed to finance specific road investments and achieve 
targeted changes in the organization, management and financing of the sector.  This 
Page  2
would be the first Bank operation in the Punjab road sector, and a sector wide approach 
(SWAP) would not be warranted at this stage of the dialogue. A SWAP might be 
considered for future lending, once the institutional development, to be financed under 
this project, has been achieved.  
 
Component 1: Road Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Periodic Maintenance 
(approximately US$390 million):  The project would fund a combination of road 
upgrading/widening, rehabilitation and periodic maintenance in two phases as follows.  
Phase I: (i) upgrading about 153 km of roads; (ii) rehabilitating/strengthening about 204 
km of roads; and (iii) periodic maintenance of about 463 km. Phase II includes 500 km of 
upgrading and rehabilitation including accident Black spot improvement.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (approximately US$10 million):  The 
component will include the following although this may be revised based on the findings 
of the institutional assessment study: (i) E-governance and e-procurement (US$1.0 
million); (ii) Computerization of the PWD, Geographical information system and traffic 
data collection systems (US$1.0 million); (iii) Training (US$1.0 million); (iv) Road 
Safety (US$2.0 million);(v) HIV/AIDS (US$0.2 million); and (vi) Preparation of PPP 
contracts ($4.8 million).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the State of Punjab in north-western India. The proposed works 
include the roads in the upgradation category are of single/intermediate lane width with 
traffic levels in the range of 10000 vehicles per day there by causing high congestion 
levels. The  proposed works will consists of widening the existing roads to two lane (7m) 
with 2.0-2.5m paved shoulders including strengthening of existing pavement, junction 
improvements, bridge widening/reconstruction and improving the current geometry of the 
alignment.  
 
The roads in the rehabilitation component are mostly two lane roads and it is proposed 
to maintain the existing lane configuration with addition of 1.5m hard shoulders and 
strengthening of the existing pavement. An overlay of minimum 40mm bituminous 
concrete over a bituminous profile corrective course, based on the Benkelman Deflection 
Survey method has been proposed. There is no major geometric improvement involved, 
however the culverts/bridges are proposed to be widened for the safety reasons to suit the 
increased pavement width.  
 
The roads under periodic maintenance category are the one which have been recently 
strengthened and widened utilizing the central road fund and are due for the periodic 
maintenance interventions. It is proposed to provide 30 to 40 mm semi dense bituminous 
concrete overlay without any widening or geometric improvement.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASES) 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASES) 
Page  3
Ms Samantha L. Forusz (SASES) 
Mr Kirtan Chandra Sahoo (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01).   The key environmental issues are: (i) 
unavoidable felling of roadside trees (estimated to be 21,800 in no.), (ii) impairment to or 
worsening of the local and regional drainage and flood situations, due to improperly 
designed and built road works, (iii) unavoidable conversion of some fertile agricultural 
land to right of way and road carriageway, (iv) the potential for poorly planned or 
managed development induced by the improved highway, especially close to sites of 
religious importance, (v) possible impacts on water resources used by the people, such as 
community ponds, wells, canals, river / streams, (such as River Beas) (vi) possible 
impacts on sensitive sites such as educational institutions, hospitals, colleges and 
religious sites such as Gurudwaras (vii) construction related temporary impacts such as 
dust from the haul roads, pollution from the plants and machinery required for 
construction.  These potential impacts will be avoided, minimized and/or mitigated 
through sound management practices as detailed in the Environmental Management 
Plans.  Community resources that are impacted will be either relocated or re-built in as 
good or better condition than before the project, with local communities encouraged to 
commit to their maintenance.  None of the project roads traverse any eco-sensitive areas, 
such wild life sanctuaries or wetlands. On the positive side, a number of roadside 
community assets (such as religious properties and hand pumps) and environmental 
resources (like surface water bodies) will be enhanced.  In all, more than 100 such sites 
will be enhanced.  Apart from this, bus-bays and junction improvements will also be 
covered for enhancements.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36).  The road side plantations in Punjab have been declared as 
protected forests.Protected forests comprise 2.28 % of the total forest land.This includes 
strips along roads, railways and canals.  The total forest land is about 6.12 % (sq kms) of 
the total land area in Punjab, out of which only 0.09% is reserve forest. Compensatory 
Page  4
afforestation and plantation will be carried out for the loss of trees due to widening and 
safety requirements.  
 
Cultural Property (OP 4.11).  Punjab is dotted with religious sites of high community 
importance i.e., Gurudwaras and temples. Some structures with high historical value 
(such as kos minars) are located close to the roads.  The potential of chance finds during 
excavation works cannot be discounted.  
 
In summary, there will be no significant and irreversible environmental impacts as a 
result of the project.  
 
Environmental Screening Category:  
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI  
 
Social Screening Category:  
 
[X] S1   [ ] S2   [ ] S3   [ ] FI   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed construction activities related to the upgradation, rehabilitation and 
maintenance works do not anticipate adverse long-term environmental impacts due to 
future activities on the selected roads and state highways.  Due to road improvements, it 
is anticipated that some local drainage problems will be resolved, and road safety would 
be improved.  However, substantial land and property development is expected to follow 
from the proposed improvement.  Poor management of this development may create 
negative impacts in the medium term, by way of additional stress on natural resources or 
by encouraging ribbon development.  Co-ordination is essential with the other line 
agencies such as Departments of Forests Department, Archaeological Survey of India, 
Irrigation, Ground water during construction and operation periods to ensure that 
Gurudwaras, schools and colleges that dot the roadsides can benefit from an increased but 
safe access, while being protected from adverse impacts of improvements to the road 
close to these sites. .  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  Surveys indicate that most road right of ways 
are free of encroachers and do not require extensive resettlement.  While this was 
confirmed by the team during several site visits, roads that will be widened to four lanes 
and roads involving bypasses will require land acquisition and may require some 
resettlement.  For the nearly 358 km of road covered under Phase I, total land acquisition 
is expected to be approximately 31 ha.  On roads identified for rehabilitation during 
Phase I, a total of 112 people from 24 households will be marginally and/or temporarily 
affected, however, none will be displaced by the project.  Wherever possible measures to 
minimize resettlement, suggested during the consultation process, have been incorporated 
into the engineering designs.  The two bypasses proposed along the Malerkotla ? 
Ludhiana link, will save over 300 residences and businesses, and well as two large ponds 
used by the community.  On roads identified for upgrading during Phase I, 4731 people 
from 1233 households will be affected, at least temporarily.  However, only people from 
290 families or 197 households are expected to be displaced by the project.  A 
Page  5
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework, with an entitlement matrix for 
different types of impacts/losses, has been agreed with the Governement of Punjab, is 
consistent with OP 4.12, and has been disclosed to the public in a series of workshops.  
This framework will be applied to all subsequent phases of the project. Resettlement 
Action Plans, as needed, are being developed for Phase I of the project.  A total of 228 
Common Property Resources (CPR) will be affected of which 139 CPRs would be 
affected of which 139 CPRs would be affected on rehabilitation roads and 89 on 
upgradation roads.  
 
Among the state's total population, Sikhs constitute 63 percent and Hindus about 35 
percent, with Sikhs predominating in the countryside, and Hindus in the towns.  In 2001, 
Scheduled Castes (SCs) of both communities comprised 35 percent of the population. 
The R&R Policy Framework includes additional provisions for vulnerable groups and the 
RAP would ensure coverage of essential items required by the Bank safeguard polices.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20, being revised as OP 4.10).  According to the 2001 
census, there are no Scheduled Tribes (STs) living in the state of Punjab, and this has 
been confirmed through the course of detailed survey work undertaken during project 
preparation.  As a result, the policy on Indigenous Peoples does not apply.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project will widen the selected roads largely along the existing alignment only.  
Route alternatives have only been investigated for short by-passes at Gill (2.200kms) and 
Pohir (1.400kms) where technical, cost, social and environmental considerations were all 
factored into the decision on the final alignment.  For the rest of the project, during the 
detailed feasibility studies and the EA and SIA, cross-sectional, structural and geometric 
design alternatives were considered.  The factors which have influenced the designs of 
various components of the road improvements include resettlement, tree cutting, loss of 
arable land vis-a-vis the traffic-carrying performance and safety of the roads, and impacts 
on cultural properties.  As far as feasible, concentric widening has been adopted in the 
built up stretches to minimize impacts on properties and land acquisition.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguard policy issues have been assessed by carrying out EA (OP 4.01, OP 4.36, OP 4. 
11) and SIA (OP 4.12 and OP 4.10) resulting in distinct EMPs and RAPs respectively. 
These have been integrated into the project in the form of various avoidance, 
minimization, and enhancement measures stated in the EMPs.  To ensure that these 
measures are implemented, they are reflected and cross referenced in the design 
drawings, contract conditions and items of Bills of Quantities. For example avoidance or 
minimization of negative impacts on trees, land acquisition, water bodies, religious 
properties, community utilities and road-side communities is being addressed through 
realignment/ design alterations, incorporation of safety, enhanced junction treatments 
especially accessing Gurudwaras, and other provisions.  Examples of other mitigation 
measures included in the EMPs cover restoration of borrow pits, noise restrictions at 
Page  6
sensitive sites, prevention measures against siltation, restriction on the siting of crushers 
and asphalt plants and slope protection. The project also plans for environmental 
enhancements such as improved aesthetics,through landscape, junction treatments, 
increased safety, enhancement of sites and cultural properties of importance to the local 
residents, improved local drainage and preservation and improvement of water bodies 
used as water resources.  
 
Borrower Capacity :  to implement the safeguard management plans will be developed 
through creation of an Environment and Social Management Cell within PRBDB. The 
cell will (a) adequately maintain the personnel and resources required to supervise, 
monitor and implement EMP and RAP (b) acquire land in a timely fashion (c) obtain and 
comply with the provisions of regulatory clearances from Forest Dept., and any other 
necessary government clearances/permissions such as from Irrigation, Ground Water and 
Punjab Pollution Control Board (d) ensure the satisfactory implementation of the 
environmental and social protection measures stipulated in the EMPs and RAPs 
respectively (e) furnish to the Bank quarterly environmental supervision and monitoring 
reports and (f) commission external consultants to evaluate the impact of the RAP after 
each phase is complete.  
 
The Borrower will also be supported by Independent Supervision Consultants (SC) who 
will be responsible for overseeing and monitoring all aspects of the project, and their 
team will also include inputs from environmental specialists as specified in their TORs.  
Regular training and orientation programs will be conducted for all field level staff of 
PWD (involved in the project), Contractors and other stakeholders to enhance the over-all 
capacity for effective implementation of EMP and RAP. This will include on-site training 
and exposure as well.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA process has involved public consultation at various stages, including screening 
and scoping. An integrated strategy was proposed along with the social assessment study. 
The public consultation carried out at the feasibility/screening and during the EA/SA 
process includes personal interviews, village meetings, focus group discussions, 
consultations with experts and local NGOs. The consultations involved the rural, semi-
urban and urban population along the project roads. The process also includes 
consultation at community, district and state level. Follow up consultation will also be 
conducted through out pre-construction and construction stages of the project.  
 
The project authorities have estimated that 4843 people will be affected during Phase I 
of the project.  The consultations were designed such that (1) affected people were 
included in the decision making process (2) links between communities and their natural 
resource base adjacent to project locations were explored (3) public awareness 
information sharing on project alternatives, benefits and entitlements was promoted and 
(4) views and design solutions from the communities were solicited.   Outputs from this 
process were integrated into the design to the extent possible.  The main concerns 
highlighted by people living along project roads related to high road accident rates; 
Page  7
compensation and resettlement and rehabilitation issues; disturbances to cultural property 
including shrines, water sources; roadside drainage; employment; traffic congestion; and 
air and noise pollution. All these have been addressed during design and preparation of 
EMPs and RAP to the extent possible through appropriate design solutions.  
 
Disclosure:  
 
The following environmental and social documents were disclosed to InfoShop as 
indicated:  
 
(i)  
Final Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy on June 12, 2006;  
 
(ii)  
Draft Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) on June 21, 2006;  
 
(iii)   Draft Resettlement Action Plan (RAPs) on June 21, 2006 (except for RAPs 
concerning three upgradation roads); and  
 
(iv)  
Final Environmental Screening Report on June 22, 2006  
 
Final EMPs and RAPs will be disclosed in the InfoShop upon finalization during the 
appraisal mission.  Local disclosure of all the latest available EMPs and RAPs will be 
conducted prior to initiating the appraisal.  Including the three RAPs corresponding to the 
upgrading works for Phase I.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/13/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/22/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/16/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/21/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  8
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Isabel Chatterton 
06/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu 
06/23/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Samantha L. Forusz 
06/22/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/30/2006 
Comments:  Date of In-Country Disclosure of RAP needs to be entered prior to submission to 
InfoShop. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
06/23/2006 
Comments:   
