Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2327 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P100589 
Project Name: Sustainable Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: Ke Fang 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
25.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.50 
 
LOCAL GOVTS. (PROV., DISTRICT, CITY) OF BORROWING COUNTRY
600.00
610.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The long-term goal of the project is to reduce GHG emissions through promotion of modal shift 
to more energy efficient modes of urban transport in India. The project development objective 
(PDO) is to remove institutional, policy, and financial barriers for implementing climate friendly 
sustainable urban transport policies and programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
It is envisaged that the SUTP will consist of two components to be implemented in four years:  
 
•
Component 1: Capacity Development and Technical Assistance at National and State 
Levels;  
 
•
Component 2: Demonstration Investments and Technical Assistance in Selected Cities  
 
Component 1 will target national and local agencies which are dealing with urban transport 
matters. At national level, Component 1 will help to:  
 
•
Strengthen national technical capacity in areas which are critical to promoting sustainable 
urban transport development, e.g., policy and regulation development, investment programming, 
Page  2
research and high-level education, monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of national 
policies, etc.  
 
•
Develop technical guidelines which will incorporate requirements for sustainable urban 
transport to the planning, design, construction, and operation of urban transport investments.  
 
•
Explore options for establishing a national program to support sustainable urban transport 
development in states and cities.  
 
At local level, Component 1 will support the following technical assistance and capacity 
development activities in selected 3-4 states:  
 
•
Develop strategies and action plans for implementing the National Urban Transport 
Policy in the local context;  
 
•
Strengthen technical capacity of the Urban Development Department (UDD) for 
coordinating urban transport development;  
 
•
Facilitate integration of urban transport and land use planning.  
 
Component 2 will support pilot investments and technical assistance in selected cities. In 
consistent with the World Bank’s priorities and GEF priorities for climate change mitigation in 
the urban transport sector,   the project will co-finance interventions in the following five 
thematic “Windows”:  
 
•
Freight management;  
 
•
Public transport improvement;  
 
•
Non-motorized transport and walking facilities;  
 
•
Integrated land-use and transport planning;  
 
•
Transport demand management.  
 
In total, a four year implementation period is envisioned.  The overall resource requested is 
estimated to be US$ 636 million, including US$25.5 million from GEF, US$10.5 million from 
GoI, and US$600 million (estimated) from participating states/cities as well as other sources.  
Detailed co-financing arrangements will be examined during preparation of the project.  Subject 
to an agreement with DEA, the World Bank may provide loans for co-financing of the 
demonstration investment.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The civil works under this project will take place in four to eight participating cities to be 
identified during the further project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower in this project is the Ministry of Urban Development. Its institutional capacity for 
Safeguard Policies needs to be assessed during the further project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sameer Akbar (SASES) 
Ms Mridula Singh (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Construction and operation of some demonstration investments under Component 2 will 
cause some minor and localized negative environmental impacts. Such impacts are expected to 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
consist essentially of noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disruption. Additional negative impacts 
during construction will occur due to haulage and final disposal of materials from the 
construction sites.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will not include activities that will involve large size land acquisition and 
resettlement.  Almost all civil works under the project will follow the alignments of existing 
roads and right of way, but some of them may affect people without title to land.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
Social and Environmental Assessment will be carried out for the project after GEF pipeline 
entry is approved.  The assessment will be completed before appraisal of the Project, which 
is planned for April 2007.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ke Fang 
04/26/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/27/2006 
Comments:  This project is cleared at PCN stage as a Category "B". Oversight of safeguards is 
transferred to SASEI with the proviso that if esettlement issues arise SASES will review /clear relevant 
documents 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
04/26/2006 
Comments:  The ISDS is cleared by me for submission to infoshop. 
