Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/17/2007 
Report No.:  AC3018
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P102328 
Project Name:  Karnataka Community Based Tank Management Project (Supplement) 
Task Team Leader:  Prabir Joardar 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (60%);Sub-national government administration 
(15%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%);Other social services 
(10%);Micro- and SME finance (5%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Gender (S);Rural markets (S);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
48.38 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.13 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
21.50 
 Local 
Communities 
5.00
26.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective for this additional financing (as for the original 
project) is to develop and strengthen community-based approaches to managing selected 
tank systems in order to improve rural livelihoods.  The project proposes to cover 2,000 
tanks in 9 districts -- a subset of the approximately 37,000 tanks in Karnataka.  The 
project aims to demonstrate the viability of a community-based tank improvement and 
management approach by returning the main responsibility of tank development to 
people on a selected basis.If successful, the project would provide a useful model for 
scaling up this innovative approach statewide.  The poverty focus of the project is based 
on geographic targeting of talukas across the state with a high incidence of poverty.  
Within these talukas, the selection of individual tank systems will be based on 
community demand.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project adopts a programmatic approach to community-based tank management and 
covers the first slice of the program ? 2,000 tanks of the tanks in the state or about 67,570 
ha of command area irrigated by tanks.  The project consists of three components: (a) 
establishing an enabling, environment for the sustainable, decentralized management of 
tank systems; (b) strengthening community-based institutions to assume responsibility for 
tank system development and management; and (c) undertaking tank system 
improvements: (i) improving the operational performance of selected tank systems 
through a menu of physical interventions identified and executed by local users and (ii) 
facilitating technical training and on-farm demonstrations in water management, 
agriculture and horticulture development, fisheries, forestry, and fodder production to 
help ensure that improved water storage and efficiency is translated into increased 
household incomes.  
 
The Additional Financing for the project proposes to cover an additional set of tanks 
(about 1200).  
 
Components  
 
1.
Enabling Environment  US $12.6 million)  
 
i) policy, planning, and legal environment, and  
 
ii) project management  
 
2. Community Development(US $18.8 million)  
 
(i) human and institutional resource development,  
 
(ii) inclusion of vulnerable groups, and  
 
(iii) planning and management support to TUGs  
 
3. Tank System Improvements (US $76.9 million)  
 
(i) tank civil works improvement,  
 
(ii) agricultural and horticulture development,  
 
(iii) technical assistance for other income generation, and  
 
(iv) technology development  
 
[Note: All costs are indicative and are expected to be fine-tuned.  The costs do not 
include physical and price contingencies.  The estimated overall project costs including 
contingencies is US$122.4 million]   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in eastern and northern Karnataka and aims to rehabilitate about 
1200 tank systems in 39 talukas of 9 districts with an approximate command area of 
about 80,000 hectares The areas fall into six agro-ecological zones, ranging from areas of 
heavy precipitation on the west coast to very arid areas of the east (where the project is 
primarily concentrated). Karnataka has the second-largest arid area after Rajasthan in 
Page  3
India.  No National Parks of Wildlife Sanctuaries are located in the 39 talukas, and 
therefore, the project will not negatively impact any critical natural habitats.  
 
The proposed project area targeted for tank improvements has been determined by 
selecting talukas that exhibit the following attributes: a) high incidence of poverty; b) 
female illiteracy; c) high level of SC/ST population; d) high level of non-working 
population; and e) a significant number of minor irrigation tanks.  Tank systems located 
in the Cauvery Basin are excluded from the project due to an unresolved inter-state river 
dispute.  
 
The tanks are of varying sizes, with different institutional controls for each (e.g. tanks 
irrigating less than 4 ha are managed by village local governments or Gram Panchayats; 
those from 4-40 ha managed by the Zilla Parishad or district local government; and those 
greater than 40 ha managed by the Department of Minor Irrigation) prior to the project.  
Many of the tanks were central to the village economy and have been in existence for 
hundreds of years but have deteriorated over time due to a host of institutional, technical, 
and demographic reasons.Some tanks also have informal stakeholder groups and a 
community-employed regulator to help manage its operation.  In the context of 
landownership patterns in the tank command area, the preparatory studies have indicated 
that it is usually members of the dominant caste who now own a major portion of the 
command area.However, other castes and weaker sections of the village may depend on 
the tank system in other ways (e.g. groundwater recharge, fisheries, livestock, washing, 
etc.). Some of the villages have significant tribal populations; preparatory exercises have 
indicated that the tribal population the project area have already merged with the 
mainstream and have similar socio-economic characteristics as the rest of the village 
population.  Finally, some small cultural properties (places of worship, sacred trees) are 
located within the tank system and often relate to rituals associated with the health of the 
tank and prosperity tank water may bring.  
 
About 1200 tanks proposed for additional financing are expected to cover tanks that 
would irrigate about 20-100 ha of command area for a total command area of about 
80,000 ha.  The tanks are expected to be located in about 39 talukas spread over nine 
additional districts.  The activities are expected to be completed by the year 2012.  These 
estimates are likely to be revised as preparation for the additional financing is finalized.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao (SASDN) 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDS) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Partially because of the tight intertwined relationship between tanks and villages, the 
project has triggered six safeguard policies as indicated in the previous section.   Despite 
the application of several safeguard policies, the community-based approach to the 
project should help ensure that most of the issues are discussed and resolved within the 
community itself. Moreover, the physical interventions of the project are limited and 
focused on rehabilitation of existing tanks.  A screening framework has been designed to 
screen out tanks in which safeguard issues would be overly problematic (e.g. severe, 
contested encroachment).The screening framework would also be used to assess the 
application of each safeguard policy for each tank system.  
 
Resettlement: The most important safeguard issue relates to involuntary resettlement. 
The project involves the rehabilitation of existing tanks ? and not the construction of new 
tanks. Therefore, acquisition of private land and physical displacement are not envisaged 
under the project although there may be a few exceptions.  However, encroachment of 
tank beds is an issue. The project has a well designed R&R policy to restore the 
livelihoods of project affected families. Though the encroachment issues were identified 
in about 50 per cent of the tanks in phase I, only about 9 per cent tanks have qualified for 
rehabilitation as per the project eligibility criteria. It should be noted that GoK has 
reiterated the illegality of all encroachment in tank beds and has voiced its desire to 
prevent further encroachment in the future.  The project however recognizes that not all 
encroachment affects the functioning of the tank system and has therefore attempted to 
minimize the extent of displacement to those whose land practices impede the operation 
of the tank. Details are provided in the R&R policy and RAPs prepared fro the tanks 
under the project.  
 
The recent assessment of RAP implementation, commissioned by the implementing 
agency (JSYS), has revealed that the project interventions did not require any physical 
displacement, the support under R&R policy provided to the affected people helped in 
Page  5
restoring their economic livelihood and established the suitability of the policy for the 
tanks to be covered under additional funding. During planning and implementation at the 
tank level, efforts will continue to minimize the negative imapcts of the project on the 
population, including encroachers, dependent on tank for their livelihood.  Principles for 
assessing the ?voluntary surrender? of encroached land have been developed. The RAP 
prepared at the tanks level would contain mitigation measures to ensure that those 
affected are helped, at least, in restoring their livelihoods to existing levels.  
 
Environmental Assessment: The major environmental issues identified in the EA 
include inter alia: (i) degraded nature of the tank system (e.g. loss of an important 
common property resource; land degradation in the catchment); (ii) the spatial and 
sectoral context of the systems (upstream soil erosion and downstream siltation - both in 
single tank systems and in cascades - with silt accumulation reducing storage, 
groundwater recharge and increasing the need for expensive desiltation); (iii) the physical 
characteristics of the tanks (inadequate dead storage, tank safety concerns due to weak 
bund structure, damaged sluice and surplus/waste weirs leading to shortages, 
waterlogging, and poor water efficiency); (iv) encroachment (of tank bed, foreshore area, 
streams and feeder channels) and potential effects on cultural property; (v) inefficient use 
of water in the command (ill-defined irrigation distribution systems and damaged main 
and field canals lead to low productivity of water and distributional inequities); (vi) 
increasing fertilizer and pesticide use and declining use of organic manure/compost/green 
manure; and (vii) contamination of tank water including poor hygiene and possible 
contamination of drinking water and associated public health concerns.  
 
The impacts of the project on the environment and rural livelihoods are expected to be 
overall positive.  The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and other plans designed 
for the project will help raise environmental awareness; promote the holistic planning of 
tank systems (catchment, tank, command) for individual tanks and cascades; promote 
integrated pest management; improve the tank ecology; and develop an improved 
environmental and social knowledge base for management.  The project will however 
have some negative impacts for which mitigation plans (e.g. EMP, RAP) have been 
developed.  Possible adverse environmental impacts include proper disposal of silt; 
uncertain impacts on groundwater; introduction of fish and trees to the tank system; 
potential induced impacts of increased pesticide use in the area due to command area 
rehabilitation (although the project will not finance pesticides); and potential adverse 
impacts on public health through impacts on the local hydrology and induced pesticide 
and fertilizer use. These issues and impacts have been addressed as part of the combined 
SEA and in the design of the  In addition, measures have been incorporated to enhance 
the activities that could have a positive impact on the environment ? such as improving 
tank ecology, improving environmental awareness and general tank water use hygiene 
(e.g. mixing of village wastewater runoff into tank, protection of drinking water and 
drinking water recharge areas, management of waste and manure on tank beds, etc.) to 
improve water quality and associated public health, improving cropping and input 
practices to reduce chemical pesticide and fertilizer use, and improve tank safety.  
 
Page  6
The experiences of the KCBTMP so far have been overall positive on the environmental 
front.  An update of the Environmental and Social Assessment done for the proposed 
additional financing has not indicated any major environmental problems, and 
suggestions have been made to further improve the environmental benefits under the 
additional financing.  
 
Indigenous Peoples:  The indigenous peoples (referred as tribal) policy applies in this 
project not only to scheduled tribes (ST) but also to scheduled castes and certain 
vulnerable groups that are marginalized from mainstream economy or polity.  The 
percentage of ST population is approximately 30% in the nine districts although there is 
sizable difference between districts.  The objectives of the Tribal Development Plan 
(TDP) are to help ensure that potential benefits of the project are accessible to 
?indigenous peoples? and that fresh sources of social and economic imbalances are 
prevented.  Based on the consultations conducted as part of the SEA with SC and ST and 
other communities, a Tribal Development Strategy (TDS) has been prepared that 
describes the key issues identified by these communities and strategies to address these 
issues.  Broadly, the TDS will help that indigenous peoples are (i) adequately involved 
and effectively represented in project-related decision-making; (ii) priority is provided to 
them in terms of wage labor; small tank-related enterprises such as tank-based fisheries, 
forestry, livestock; and agricultural extension and capacity building for other income 
generation activities; (iii) able to access existing Government schemes for assisting 
?indigenous peoples?; and (iv) able to access agricultural markets and financial services 
provided by banks.  Based on the TDS, Tribal Development Plans (TDP) have been 
prepared and implemented under the project. The focus of TDP plans has been more on 
improving the economic status of ST, SC and other vulnerable groups and this approach 
will continue in the tanks covered under additional financing.  
 
Other Safeguard Policies:  Pest Management, Cultural Property, and Safety of Dams are 
also triggered by the project.  Separate assessments and action plans have been developed 
for each of these safeguards and are part of the EMP.  It should be noted that the Natural 
Habitats policy is not triggered since no critical natural habitat (i.e. National Park nor 
Wildlife Sanctuary) is located near the project tank areas and the project activities are not 
expected to cause any significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats (no 
activities would be taken up with such implications) and the EMP supports measures for 
the improvement of the ecology of the tank system.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project has been implementing the new approach to transfer responsibility for tank 
development and management from the state back to people (via user groups) in 34 
talukas (and this will continue in the additional 39 talukas proposed for additional 
financing).  At the time of the project preparation it was apprehended that this may result 
in demand for safeguard issues (especially resettlement) to be treated similarly in non-
project areas.  The Government of Karnataka had therefore agreed to adopt a similar 
approach to tank development across the entire state.  Therefore, the project treatment of 
safeguard issues ? specifically approaches to address encroachment, tribal participation, 
Page  7
tank safety, and pest management ? thus set an important precedent for non-project areas 
now and in the future  
 
More generally, the project envisages that communities would take a more active role in 
the development, operation, and management of the tank systems in the long term.  The 
role of the government has therefore progressively declined to one of a facilitator. The 
institutional arrangements for community-based tank management involve Tank User 
Groups (TUGs) and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).These institutions contribute to 
the decentralized management of natural resources and are expected to improve 
collaboration across line departments, NGOs, and local communities for the sustainable 
management of tank systems.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project however recognizes that not all encroachment affects the functioning of the 
tank system and has therefore attempted to minimize the extent of displacement to those 
whose land practices impede the operation of the tank. Details are provided in the R&R 
policy and RAPs prepared for the tanks under the project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Specific Action Plans have been developed to mitigate against adverse environmental and 
social impacts and risks and to enhance the potential positive benefits.  These plans 
include the EMP, RAP, TDP, Pest Management Plan, Cultural Property Plan (as part of 
the EMP), and Tank Safety Plan (as part of the EMP).  The plans have been designed to 
be mainstreamed into each tank-specific Integrated Tank Development Plan (ITDP) as an 
integral part of the preparation, capacity-building, implementation, and monitoring and 
learning.  Each Action Plan includes monitoring and learning indicators and estimated 
costs that have been incorporated in the overall project costs.  
 
The experience on social and environmental aspects in the ongoing KCBTMP is 
satisfactory and this additional financing will be build upon the lessons learned.An Social 
and Environmental Assessment update has been prepared to collate these lessons and 
suggest improvements in the way social and environmental issues are addressed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The stakeholder analysis (as part of the SEA) indicated that the main users of tank 
systems have changed dramatically with time. The original stakeholders of tank systems 
have narrowed over time and new stakeholders have emerged who do not necessarily 
have interests entirely consistent with the objectives of the project.  This leads to a 
complex institutional environment in which the project has to operate.  In a rough sense, 
the main stakeholders at the village level include command area farmers (differentiated 
by where in the command they own land and by alternative irrigation tools they may 
possess), catchment area farmers, tank bed cultivators, encroachers of water spread area , 
Page  8
other users of tank water (e.g. women, fisherfolk, tribals, etc.), and non-command 
farmers with and without wells.  
 
The ongoing project has incorporated very good plans and procedures to improve the 
quality of consultations to ensure maximum participation in the case of the following 
critical stages.  First, pre-planning phase consultations with individual stakeholder groups 
before forming the TMIs are necessary especially during identification of stakeholders.  
Second, even in the planning stage, before PRA and after PRA, consultations with 
command area farmers, catchment area farmers and vulnerable families need to be done 
in a systematic and effective manner. Third, during implementation, frequent interactions 
other than the Gram Sabha discussions would result in higher participation and ownership 
amongst all members of TMIs.  
 
Consultations were carried out with a variety of village-level stakeholders (including 
farmers, representatives from the PRIs, women, scheduled castes and tribes and other 
vulnerable groups, affected households, and other local organizations), government 
agencies, researchers and expert groups, NGOs, and the World Bank.  These 
consultations were held in all fifty tanks (and in more depth for six tanks) surveyed by the 
SEA team.  Moreover, the JSYS team also conducted extensive meetings with tank users 
as part of their pilot interventions in about 30 tanks.  
 
The main messages emerging from these consultations are the importance of 
documenting properly the voluntary surrender of land; persuading encroachers (those 
who are large farmers) to surrender encroached land voluntarily and supporting 
vulnerable among the affected families ; providing adequate representation to and 
participation of tribals and scheduled castes in decision-making; dovetailing existing 
government schemes to support vulnerable groups; and disposing of silt in an equitable 
and appropriate manner. Such consultations will continue during the project 
implementation period.  
 
With respect to disclosure, the project implementing agency (JSYS) has adopted a 
transparent approach to safeguards ? especially with respect to resettlement and the 
entitlement framework. Consultations with tank users were preceded by disclosing the 
main elements of the resettlement and tribal development action plans. A major feedback 
workshop was organized at the state level to help evolve the safeguard action plans.  
JSYS has translated all of the Action Plans (including R&R policy and TD strategy) into 
the local language (i.e. Kannada) and disseminated these plans to all Zilla and Taluk 
Panchayat headquarters, NGOs, and potential host organizations for the CFTs.  These 
Action Plans are also being shared with the TUGs formed as part of the pilot initiatives. 
During implementation, CFTs will share all these Action Plans (in the local language) 
with all potential communities interested in participating in the project.  These Action 
Plans have been written in a simple way so that they are meaningful and easily 
understood by the local population.  
 
A
strong consultation framework has been developed to govern project implementation.  
This will primarily be through the participatory process relating to the development of an 
Page  9
Integrated Tank Development Plan (ITDP) by the TUG and facilitated by the CFT, that 
will be used as a basis for all project interventions in each tank system.  This will involve 
conducting participatory rural appraisals (PRAs), joint walkthroughs, facilitation of the 
formation of the TUG, and awareness and capacity-building activities for the ITDP 
preparation.  A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) would be developed for each 
tank to ensure TUG signoff on the ITDP.  The ITDP would indicate the nature and 
prioritization of activities to be conducted, the labor and cash contribution of the 
communities to demonstrate ownership and the proposed schedule and responsibilities for 
implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/04/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/04/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/26/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/26/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2002 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/26/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/26/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2002 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/26/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/26/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2002 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Since it is an additional financing to an existing project in progress, no new resettlement, 
IPDP and Pest management framework are required. However, the ESA has been updated 
and send for disclosure.   
Page  10
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  11
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Prabir Joardar 
06/04/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao 
06/04/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohammed Hasan 
06/04/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh 
06/04/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/05/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
08/17/2007 
Comments:   
