                                                                                           39347


                        INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date preparedJupdated: 03111/07                                              Report No.:

1. Basic Proiect Data
                - - ---~.
              ~  ~




Country: India                                    I Project 03: PO988  11
Project Name: OBA for Rural Water Supply in Andhra Pradesh
Task Team Leader: Cledan Mandri-Perrott
EstimatedAppraisal Date: March 14,2006            I EstimatedBoard   Date: N/A
Managing Unit: Global Partnershipon Output- LendingInstrument: GPOBA Grant
                                                  I
                                                           -
Based Aid (GPOBA)
Sector: Water
Theme: Water supply
GPOBA Grant Amount (US$m):          1.OO
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):                 0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):                 0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):                 0.00
Other financingamountsby source:
         BORROWERRECIPIENT                                                         .OO

EnvironmentalCategory:B - Partial Assessment
SimplifiedProcessing                                Simple [XI            Repeater [I
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (EmergencyRecovery)                 Yes [ ]       No [XI

2. Project Objectives
Naandi Foundation and Water Health International (India) Ltd have approached the Global
Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA), a multi-donor trust fund, with a request for funding
for piloting output-based aid (OBA) approaches in twenty five rural villages in the state of
Andhra Pradesh.). The objective is to provide safe drinlangwater to 10,000families(earning less
than US$20 per month) in the coastal area of Andhra Pradesh, through an innovative village-
based public-privatepartnershipmodel.

Naandi proposes a model whereby a participating Village Panchayat eannarks a common water
source, as in-kind contribution, for the installation of the water treatment plant and storage tank.
The Village Panchayat also contributesby fencing the tank to prevent the water from being used
for bathing, washing or other purposes. For the execution of the treatment plants in 25 villages,
Naandi will partner with WaterHealth International (WHI) - an India based organization that
specializes in distributing cost-effective water purification technologies to villagers. WHI has
been selected by Naandi due to its experience and the technology being the least-cost solution as
compared with other available products in the market (for example Reverse Osmosis), and is the
most suitable to deal with the water conditions in Andhra Pradesh. WHI is also prepared to take
on pre-financingrisk.

3. Project Description

This project will target 500 households (hh) in each of the 25 selected villages. The subscription
subsidywill benefit approximately400 eligble hh (at 6 inhabitantsper hh). The total project cost

is US$50,000 per village and will test the viability of a well targeted OBA approach with full
participation and ownership from the beneficiary community, a private operatorand an NGO.

Villages will be selected where:
        Drinking water resources suffer from bacteriological contamination above the
        permissible limit of 100MPNIml;
        U.V. technology is capable of purifying water to meet standards set by the Bureau of
        Indian Standards;
        Villages are willing to contribute a raw water source, a suitable site for the construction
         of the water purificationplant, and there is a segment of the population that is capable of
        paying at least 20% of the total capital cost (US$10,000) towards the initial investment
        required to set up the water purification plant.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristicsrelevantto the safeguardanalysis

The project activities will be located throughout the coastal towns of Andhra Pradesh. Twenty
five villages have already been selected based on the criteria above. All projects are green-field
operations reliant on use of raw water resource from local river and land where the water
treatment facility can be installed.

Physical conditions

The State of Andhra Pradesh (AP) - where the pilot project is proposed - is considereda leading
reform state in India, with a clear long-term strategy toward infrastructure development laid down
in its Vision 2020 document. It is the fifth most populous state in the country with approximately
80 million people, which account for nearly 8% of the country's total. AP has made considerable
progress in its development agenda during the last few years. Back in the late 1990s,the state was
relativelypoor and in the midst of a fiscal crisis. In I999/2000, APYsGNI per-capita was around
US$385, nearly 22% of its population was below the poverty line, and the state's fiscal deficitto
gross statedevelopmentproduct (GSDP)ratio was reaching the 5% mark. Sincethen, the state
has made impressive progress in all dimensions of development: per-capita income has risen to
nearly US$700 in 2005, which is still slightlybelow the national average.1 The statehas
significantly improved water supply coveragein the past two decades,such that people who have
accessto water has increasedfrom 3% to 65% of the total population.2

Despite these improvements, approximately 17million people, or over 22% of the total state
population,experience bacteriological contaminationof water. Especially, rural householdsat
the coastal districtsof AP (Krishna,East and West Godavari, Prakasam and Guntur) are the most
affected. For example,it is estimated that over 500,000people live with severe fecal
contamination level of >2,000 Most Probable Number per milliliter (MPNIml),whereas the
World Health Organization(WHO) permissible limit for fecal contamination is <I00 MPNIml.
In addition,the GNIper capita in AP is below India's average. Disparitiesbetween rural and
urban development indicatorsin AP is noticeable, gven that the rural population accounts for
73% of the state's total and is relatively poorer. Tremendous disparitiesin infant mortality rates
(73 in rural areasversus 38 in urban areas)as well as in service coverage are found in the state.


 'India-Third Andhra Pradesh EconomicRefonn Creditthan DevelopmentPolicy Lending, Program
Document, 11 December 2006.
  Environmental Health in India-Prioritiesin Andhra Pradesh,WorldBank,2001.

5. Environmental and SocialSafeguardsSpecialists

S Satish (SASES)
Ranjan Samantaray(SASES)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                              X
Safety of Dams (OPtBP 437)                                                         X
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                   X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X

11. Key SafeguardPolicy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1.Describe any safeguard issuesand impacts associatedwith the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant andfor irreversible impacts:

The project will finance investmentsin rural water supply improvement schemesto
serve the rural populations in Andhra Pradesh. The project interventionsare therefore
expectedto result in private and public health benefits in the rural communities,through
improved quality and delivery levels of RWS services. Someof the main environmental
health benefits expected under the project include: increased and better quality water
supply for drinking, cooking, washing, bathing and cleaningpurposes; time and energy
savings in providing water supplycloser to homes; improvementsin personal hygiene
and village sanitation levels; and reduced fecal-oral contaminationof drinking water.
Hence, it is not felt that there will be any irreversible changes on physical or socio-economic
fronts. Overall, the project, if appropriatelymanaged, does have the potential to offer
significantopportunities to further environmental and social developmentobjectives.


1.1.1   Environment Safeguards

An environmental assessment (EA) has been undertaken. This included an analysis of
sector specific environmental issues, policy and institutional bottlenecks and lessons
learned from past and ongoing projects. Considering the small size and the nature of
interventions of the project, it was not desirable to have a detailed Environmental
Management Framework. However, EA included a brief Environment Management Plan
(EMP). The potential risks identified as part of the EA were incorporated into Monitoring
and Evaluation (h4&E) processes. Strategy for continuous water quality is in place. The

impact of the proposed project on the overall environment and surfacelground water
resources associatedrisks are expected to be negligible.

The project plans to install 25 UV treatment units in coastal districts. Most of these
districts are reported to have saline water contamination in groundwater sources.
Therefore, the project primarily depends on surface water sources as raw water, which is
likely to receive pesticide and fertilizer residues (apart from bacteriological
contamination) particularly during monsoon. Since there is a possibility of short-term
adverse environmental impact associated with the source, the EMP outlines specific
mitigation measures for the same. The EMP outlines several critical environmental issues
and has developed specificationsrequired to mitigatelmanage those risks such as surface
water contamination, pesticide residue deposit, solid waste dumping around the water
bodies, water weed, industrial domestic sewerage, water quality (physio-chemical and
micro-biological).

1.1.2    Social Safeguards.Im~actsand Risks.

Two safeguardpolicies which assumessignificancerelate to :(i) securing lands for housingthe
RWS Facility;and (ii) tribals. However,thepolicies arenot triggered as these are addressed
appropriately while designing(details followslater).

SocialImpacts1Risks, however, do assume a large significance.They relate to: inclusion,equity,
participation, local level institutionalcapacitybuilding and empowerment, and transparency. As
envisaged currently,it is likelythat not only the smallervillagesbut also the poor and vulnerable
sectionswithin a larger village too could be excluded.This in turn could have implicationson
project's replicabilityand sustainabilityas well as on reputational risks. Addressingall these
require: (i) carefully designedparticipatory assessmentsso as to identify the relevant issues;and
(ii) plan interventions,accordingly, to address the same. Project is well aware of this and
arrangementshave been made to undertakethese duringthe implementation.



2. Describe any potential indirect andlorlong term impacts due to anticipatedfuture
activitiesin the project area:

No detailed and systematicassessmentshave been made during the project preparation
stage to throw light on this. Nor the Nandi Foundationhas so far made any efforts at
documentingtheir experienceson similar activitiesundertaken during the last 2 years.
Agreements,however, have been reached on the conduction of such studiesI
documentationduring the implementation. Lessons drawn will be ploughed into the
management of the current project.

Environment: The treatment units access raw water fi-om village tanks, which are also
used for irrigation water supply. The project could experience two types of long-term
impacts; (i) shortage of water during the lean period, (ii) with the increasing cropping
intensity, excessive use of pesticide may pose public health risk as the W system can
 only respond to bacteriological contamination. The project has taken adequate measures
to strengthen the embankment of each source tank. Therefore, run-off carrying

contaminants would be restricted to some extent. However, it may be dificult to restrict
seepage of the residues. This may require a larger community consultation during the
course of implementation. It is important to state that the project areas experience
moderately higher rain fall (more than 700mm)every year which may help in dilution of
residues.


3. Describe any project alternatives(if relevant) consideredto help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

Environment: Alternative options will be looked into during the planning of individual
village wise schemes in terms of safe source availability. If required the project may
consider tapping groundwater in some villages where local aquifer is having saline free
water. This would require a detailed hydrology study. Given the size of the project, it
may not be possible under this project to support such a detailed study. Therefore,Naandi
Foundation is trylng to coordinate with the Groundwater Department to get better
understanding of local hydrologicalbehavior.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguardpolicy issues. Provide an
assessmentof borrower capacity to plan and implementthe measuresdescribed.

Environmental Safeward: All environmental management measures are integratedwithin
the overallproject cycle and will be implemented at various stages of planning, execution
and post-implementationthrough an integratedEMP. The EMP can be used as an
OperationsManual. The project staff of Naandi will be directlyresponsible to monitor
environmentalcompliance. The existing staff of Naandi Foundation have gone through
several training exercises to get sensitizedto environmental compliancemeasures.

Social Safewards-Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)
OP 4.12 -Involuntary Resettlement: OP 4.12 is not triggeredbecause project need not
acquire lands involuntarily.     Land availability will be through either alienation or
gifVpurchases. To this effect, the Program will develop specificrules, as detailed below:

    Program's water supply facilities chiefly comprise water treatment plant and
    transmission lines connectingthe source and the plant.

    When plots of lands are required for project installations, their ownership could be
    either public or private. While it is easier to access public land, arrangements will
    have to be made for securing privately owned land. The prevailing normal practice
    adopted by Nandi Foundation is to let VP make availablelands who in turn securethe
    same either through voluntary donation or by outrightpurchase.

    Rules noveminn taking ~ossessionof land. These rules will be binding on the part of
    VP and Nandi and chief elementsof it will include the following:
    o Theproject will not resort to any involuntaryland acquisition

    o All donations and purchases will be voluntary. Mechanisms will be developed
       not only to ensure the voluntariness but also that it will not involve any significant
       adverse impacts upon incomes or physical displacement.
    o All voluntary land transactions will meet the following criteria: (i) the land in
       question will be free of squatters, encroachers or other claims of encumbrances;
       (ii) lands will be chosen (by the community) after ensuring that water indeed will
       be available in that particular piece of land; (iii) verification of the voluntary
       nature of land donations in each case; (iii) due transparent measures will be in
       place; (iv) land transfers will be complete, land title will be vested in the
       community; and (v) provision will be made for redressal of grievances (ROG) if

       any.
    o All voluntary transactions will be documented and signed by both the parties.
    o Nandi will ensure certification of the conduct of the land transactions by
       involving independent external reviewers.

Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). Project villages, as reported by Nandi Foundation, do not
have any tribal settlements.

Public Consultations, Information, Education and Communication Camvaim. The project
well recognizes that the stakeholders need to be prepared adequately and appropriatelyto
enable proper marketing of the project. For this, the project would deploy trained
Facilitators and launch an extensive IEC campaign.

Social Assessment,Baseline Information and Monitoringand Evaluation. Nandi Foundation
will conduct a social assessment in every village before initiating the project so as to enable
developing a socio-economic profile in the context of RWSS scenario. Simultaneously,this will
help in identifying issues relevant in the context of accomplishing the objectives of Inclusion,
Equity, Participation, Transparency, and local level institutional development. Accordingly,
interventions too will be planned for. This will also include a monitoring and evaluation
framework and the indicators thereof Results of these will be captured in a village level micro
plan. Nandi will shareall the micro plans with and seek comments from WSP.


5. Identifythe key stakeholdersand describethe mechanisms for consultationand
disclosure on safeguard policies,with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders include : (i) A ~ e xLevel - Government of Andhra Pradesh's Rural
Development and Panchayat Raj department,Nandi Foundation, WHI, state levelNGOs, external
financingagencies,politicians like MPs and MLAs, financial institutions; (ii) Intermediary Level
-District Administration,GOAP's RWSS engineers,Zilla and Mandal Panchayats,suppliers,
contractors; and (iii) Grassroots Level - rural communities, in general, and the poor and
vulnerable, in particular, women, Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes Households, Fishers,
and Village Panchayats. Systematic efforts at conducting consultations will be made during the
project implementation.Results of which will be incorporated into the preparation of a village
level micro plans.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date

EnvironmentalAssessment/Audit/ManagementPlanlother:
                                                                       February
  Date of receipt by the Bank
                                                                         2007
                                                                        January
  Date of "in-country"disclosure
                                                                         2007
  Date of submission to Infoshop                                      March 2007
  For category A projects, date of distributingthe Executive
  Summaryof the EA to the Executive Directors
ResettlementAction Plan/Framework/PolicyProcess:
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submissioh to InfoShop
* If the projecttriggersthe Pest ManagementandlorPhysicalCulturalResources,the
respective issues are to be addressedand disclosedas part of the Environmental
~s~essment/~udit/or    EMP.
If in-country disclosureof any of the above documents is not expected,please explainwhy:




C. ComplianceMonitoringIndicators at the CorporateLevel (tobefilled in when theISDS is
findized by theproject decision meetingl

OP/BP/GP 4.01 EnvironmentAssessment
                  -
Does the projectrequire a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                  Yes -
                                                                                   EAMF has
                                                                                  been
                                                                                  prepared
If yes, then did the Regional EnvironmentUnit or Sector Manager (SM)review and    Not yet
approvethe EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilitiesfor the EMP incorporated in the creditfloan? Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguardpolicies documentsbeen sent to the World Bank's             Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documentsbeen disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and   Yes
languagethat are understandableand accessible to project-affected groupsand local
NGOs?
All SafeguardPolicies
Have satisfactorycalendar,budget and clear institutionalresponsibilitiesbeen       Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguardpolicy measuresbeen included in the project cost?   Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoringof  Yes
 safeguardimpacts and measuresrelated to safeguardpolicies?
Have satisfactoryimplementationarrangements been agreed with the borrower and      Yes
the same been adequatelyreflected in the project legal documents?

 D. Approvals




                                  Ranjan Samantaray
Social DevelopmentSpecialist
Additional Environmentalandlor
Social Development Specialist(s):

