Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2891 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/04/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P102547 
Project Name: Primary Education (SSA II) 
Task Team Leader: Amit Dar 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: September 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective is to support the government in implementing SSA and making progress towards 
achieving SSA goals of improvements in quality, while reducing gender and social disparities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The SSA program is a centrally sponsored scheme wherein, based on district elementary 
education plans and budgets, the central government contributes 75 percent of the finances and 
the states provide a matching 25 percent.  District Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPBs) are 
developed in consonance with norms and guidelines detailed in the SSA ?Framework for 
Implementation. Among other activities , the program finances innovative state led initiatives to 
get children into school, salaries for new teachers, free textbooks for girls and disadvantaged 
students, provision of teaching and learning materials, setting up local level institutions to 
provide resource support to schools and teachers and strengthening of a monitoring and 
evaluation system. In SSA I the Development Partners supported the program using a SWAp 
approach wherein the partners in a harmonized mode, agreed on meeting a slice of the program 
expenditures above agreed thresholds and also relied on government?s own rules and procedures 
in implementing the program. The experience with the SWAp has been positive and the 
harmonization among development partners has enabled reduction in transaction costs.  
Page  2
As with SSA I, the project will adopt a SWAp approach, with pooled funding.  Under this 
modality, DP funds will be provided alongside domestic funds in an agreed ratio, thereby 
leveraging domestic contribution. The harmonized procedures will be continued through an 
updated MOU with common formats, updates Results Framework, withdrawal claims and Joint 
Review Missions. The lessons learned under SSA I will be used to discuss potential 
improvements in how the system is financed, particularly in the context of diverse capacity 
across and within states, with regard to special focus groups and districts, and rural and urban 
contexts. The preparation will explore how financing can move from norm-based allocations, to 
gradually build in the share of financing that is based on needs (e.g. using the Education 
Development Index developed by MHRD to identify educationally backward districts), 
achievement of policy/institutional milestones and/or performance.  This presupposes further 
strengthening of the M+E systems which will provide this data.  The preparation will also 
appraise government?s own proposals for reaching out to the children yet unreached, and for 
ensuring regularity of  student and teacher attendance and quality improvement in service 
delivery, taking into cognizance provision of basic learning conditions in schools And lessons 
learned during SSA I implementation.  
 
Within this framework, the key issues/areas of focus  in preparing the support for  the next 
phase of the program, which coincides with the government?s XIth five year plan, will include:  
 
Quality and Equity:  
 
Teachers:  Assess successful innovations that states have used to improve motivation or 
accountability of teachers and how these can be scaled up under SSA, including improvement in 
teaching learning conditions.  Examine how SSA can support the introduction of a system of 
good practices including increasing involvement of local bodies in school management and 
putting in place incentives for continuous professional development of teachers.  
 
?
Classroom Processes and learning levels:  Assess how the increasing attention to 
classroom processes and interaction, particularly in relation to teacher ?student behavior and 
equity issues, can be supported and sustained and agree on the role SSA should play in terms of 
bringing about needed changes to pedagogic processes which would promote higher order 
learning. Also examine the extent to which the program will encourage classroom assessment to 
become an integral part of the teaching -learning cycle, to promote grade-appropriate learning in 
children.  
 
Enrolment and Retention:  Assess the proposed approach to ensure quality with equity, so as to  
ensure enrolment, retention and learning for all groups (particularly in respect of girls and special 
focus groups).  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation:  
 
Monitoring of Learning Outcomes:  Understand the various initiatives undertaken at the 
national level and by different states in learning assessments at the systemic level.  Assess the 
XIth plan recommendation to ?create a set of national testing standards and a chain of 
institutions that test and evaluate children according to set norms? and the government?s plans to 
move towards a coherent system of quality monitoring that includes good quality and timely 
Page  3
large scale national and state-level assessments, as well as more disaggregated quality 
monitoring tools.  
 
Other Monitoring and Evaluation aspects:  Assess how the monitoring and evaluation systems 
can be strengthened to ensure that relevant, disaggregated, complete, reliable, timely and useful 
information is available to policy makers, education service providers and civil society to 
influence interventions and decisions. Can rigorous evaluations of specific interventions be built 
into SSA to assess impact, facilitate scaling up of the more successful interventions and to also 
inform mid-course and future corrections of less successful ones?  
 
Program Implementation and Planning:  
 
Decentralization:  Assess the issues related to program implementation at the decentralized 
levels including the role and accountability of PRIs, VECs, PTAs, etc. to the larger community.  
Use experiences of SSA I to derive lessons for how SSA II can enhance the intended centrality 
of PRIs in education service delivery and increase the effectiveness of VECs.  
 
?
Public-private partnerships:  Based on the experience during the first phase, 
identify/estimate further possibilities for encouraging partnerships with the private sector and 
NGOs within the SSA framework, in support of the objectives of quality with equity, particularly 
in respect of meeting the needs of special focus groups, and as initial steps towards developing 
an urban strategy.  
 
Fiduciary Arrangements:  
 
Financial Management and Procurement: Evaluate implementation of the Manual on financial 
management and procurement and its effectiveness vis-a-vis the sub-district implementing 
entities, since a significant part of SSA expenditures occur at this level. Agree on actions that 
need to be taken by states /GoI to address issues of (a) identification of capacity constraints and 
taking appropriate remedial measures; (b) strengthening of internal controls and the external 
audit process and (c) simplification of reporting.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
India   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's capacity is high   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment to be conducted as part of preparation   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Social Assessment to be conducted as part of preparation   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/20/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Env. Assessment - 6/20/2007  
 
Social Assessment - 6/20/2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amit Dar 
04/03/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
