Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/20/2006 
Report No.:  AC1864
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P089484 
Project Name:  Second Uttar Pradesh Diversified Agriculture Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Robert S. Epworth 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (40%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(35%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural 
markets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
74.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
74.60 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
37.30
37.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project would be to increase agricultural productivity and product 
diversity in Uttar Pradesh; and enhance market opportunities and market access for the 
states's farmers, fishers and livestock producers.  
 
In support of this objective, the project would foster increased private sector 
participation and investment in all facets of the agricultural and allied sectors; and to 
promote more effective use of government funds already allocated to these sectors, 
directly to line Departments and to private sector through government sponsored 
investment grant schemes.  
 
Key indicators of success would be (i) increased areas and yields of diversified field and 
tree crops, livestock products and fish - complemented by an increase in the proportion 
marketed as fresh produce or processed; (ii) more effective marketing of produce in 
project supported markets in terms lower transaction costs and reduced wastage; and (iii) 
increased private sector participation and investment in relevant areas of the sector.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Project activities would build on the successful initiatives of the initial project, but with 
the addition of new interventions to address emerging marketing issues, for both fresh 
and processed produce.  Project activities are categorized into two components.  
 
(i)   Promoting Intensification and Diversification of Agricultural Production, by making 
extension and adaptive research more relevant and accessible to farmers; encouraging the 
development and introduction of more effective agricultural production systems; and 
reducing the risk associated with change, especially for small operators.  
 
o
Restructuring Extension and Adaptive Research Delivery. Introduction of a state-
wide decentralized pluralistic extension and adaptive research system, through adoption 
and development of the ATMA management concept, which fosters farmer participation; 
public private partnerships; and collaboration between line Depts. ??? and focuses 
appropriately on marketing as well as production issues.  
 
o
Upgrading Production Systems. Promotion of diversified, innovative agricultural, 
livestock and fish production systems, supported by an investment grant scheme 
specifically targeted at marginal landholders and the landless; along with livestock and 
fish up-grading programs, privatization of artificial insemination services, and improved 
livestock disease surveillance systems.  
 
o
Piloting Risk Mitigation.  Pilot testing of risk mitigation mechanisms for small 
and marginal farmers, involving concepts such as weather-based insurance and 
warehouse receipts, through MOUs with private sector providers.  
 
(ii)  Expanding Market Opportunities and Increasing Access, by increasing market 
infrastructure and making market management more responsive to farmers needs; 
promoting private sector participation  in agribusiness; and  improving market access 
through more market information, a better regulatory framework and improving supply 
chain management;  
 
o
Modernizing Market Infrastructure and Management Systems.  Market-yard  
development and associated piloting of two market management models, involving: (i) 
partnership with the State Agricultural Marketing Board (Mandi Board) to construct one 
specialized market each for fish and fruits/vegetables, and upgrade/expand four more 
markets of each ??? to be operated as regulated markets, but with enhanced governance 
and market stakeholder participation in market design and operation, and outsourcing of 
selected market facilities to the private sector; and, (ii) establishment of new concept 
district agri-markets, under the auspices of local ATMAs, but managed by private sector 
entities, providing also a range of input supplies and general services to farmers on the 
same site.  
 
o
Promoting Agribusiness Investment.  Establishment of a professionally managed 
Agribusiness Development Facility (ABDF) to promote private sector involvement in 
agro-processing and services provision, by increasing access to finance from commercial 
Page  3
banks and GOI schemes; increasing the availability of business development services to 
entrepreneurs; and fostering an enabling business environment. To finance selected 
innovative agribusiness ventures, a small Innovations Grant Fund would be established.  
 
o
Facilitating Market Access.  Through (i) an improved provision of market 
information on prices and volumes traded in the major outlets, product standards, 
certification, and regulatory policies and procedures; (ii) strengthened regulatory 
framework to improve the safety and quality assurance of domestic and export products; 
and (iii) development of both coordinated and uncoordinated supply chains by working 
with the private and cooperative sectors in market identification and promotion; and 
facilitating linkages between producers, traders and processors selected commodities, 
including milk and others to be identified during the project period.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project covers all 70 districts in the state of Uttar Pradesh (32 phase I districts from 
the first project, and 38 new phase II districts).  This encompasses many agro-ecological 
zones and cropping systems.  UP is the most populous state in India with a population of 
about 170 million by the 2001 census. Rice and wheat dominating cropping system in 
most part of the UP.  Fertilizer and pesticide consumption is growing, although integrated 
pest management and composting techniques are also increasing.  
 
The environmental issues and challenges of the different agro-climatic zone may be 
summarized as follows:  
 
-
Bhabhar and Tarai zone often becomes draught prone inspite of good rainfall.  
 
-
Western plains have problems of water logging and salinity.  
 
-
South west semi-arid zone has problem of brakish water and alkalinity  
 
-
Central plains have large stretch of Usar soils.  
 
-
North eastern plains are flood prone  
 
-
Eastern plains have large areas of saline and alkaline soils.  
 
A
detailed description of the environmental and social baseline of the area (covering the 
whole State) can be found in the environmental assessment and social assessment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao (SASES) 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASES) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project activities as designed are not expected to result in any major 
adverse environmental and social impacts. Although the project will not finance 
pesticides and fertilizers, there is a possibility of negative impacts due to induced 
increased pesticide and fertilizer use associated with diversification, and this has been 
addressed by supporting an extensive integrated pest management and integrated nutrient 
management program and encouragement of marketing of organic and safe foods. No 
social safeguard policies are triggered. However, rules for securing lands under the 
project is described in section D- 4.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed project activities are expected to increase agricultural diversification in UP 
State that is currently primarily a Rice-Wheat growing area.  This is expected to improve 
local farmer incomes and contribute to the economic growth of the State.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives designs considered were(i)State-wide vs. Selected districts (state-wide 
approach chosen to build upon the success of the first DASP project that targeted villages 
in half the state; this allows for scaling-up of diversification activities at different levels); 
(ii) Project with a Road component as in the first DASP vs. one without Road component 
(Project chosen without a road component as there is substantial parallel state and 
national investments in rural roads and this would allow focusing of activities on those 
directly relating to diversification approaches, extension and marketing); and (iii) No 
Project (rejected as this would result in slow dissemination of diversification activities)   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has carried out an Environmental Assessment and a Social Assessment to 
be able to better address safeguard issues in the proposed project.  Based on these 
assessments, the measures proposed to address these safeguard issues have been 
described below:  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered because project need not acquire 
lands involuntarily. Lands will be required for establishing the markets under the 
marketing component.  In all,  the project would require a maximum of about 150 acres 
in 50 different places spread all over the state. Of the 50 cases, only 2 may require an area 
of about 5 acres; and the remaining 2-3 acres. Further, it is not essential that a particular 
piece of land at a particular place is needed. Rather, land can be chosen from a number of 
alternatives. Project???s activity/ success does not depend upon having a particular piece 
of land. These in view, the project would ensure that all land transactions will be 
voluntary and market led. Detailed principles underpinning securing lands are described 
below :  
 
-
The project will not resort to involuntary land acquisition.  
 
-
To a large extent, as a first priority, efforts will be made to secure Public lands (lands 
belonging to revenue or other departments).  
 
-
In case, public lands are not available, then, private lands will be secured in the open 
market.  
 
-
Selection of Land.  A number of land pieces will be identified following  both top-
down and bottom up approaches. The former would involve the project searching / 
scanning and identifying pieces. The latter will involve putting up an advertisement in the 
media and call for expression of interests from owners willing to sell their lands.  
 
-
Prices. A district level committee headed by the District Collector with broad base 
participation by other functionaries will involve in negotiations with prospective sellers 
(similar to the practice permissible under the U P Land Acquisition (determination of 
Compensation and Declaration of award by Agreement) Rules 1997; GO No. 1718, dated 
29.9.2001; and   GO No. 1507, dated 14.9.2004 )) and arrive at a negotiated price.  
 
-
Right to Refusal. A seller will have a right to refuse to sell his/ her piece  of land, if 
s/he so wishes, at any  point of time, till that time sale transactions are completed.  
 
Thus, all (private) land transactions will  meet the following criteria:  
 
-
the land in question will be free of squatters, encroachers or other claims of 
encumbrances;  
 
-
no
lands will be secured which has semi/ permanent structures;  
 
-
activity for which a specific land is chosen has the general acceptance by the local 
community (as endorsed by the GP through consultations);  
 
-
verification of the voluntary nature of land sale purchase in each case -- independent 
monitoring and certification by PCU;  
Page  6
-
due transparent measures for publicizing  the rules of securing lands as well as the 
transactions thereof;  
 
-
land transfers will be complete, land title will be vested with the (respective entity);  
 
-
no
project activity will start unless payments are made and title transfer are completed;  
 
-
due
note will be taken care of for standing crops (if any);  
 
-
provision will be made for redressal of grievances (ROG) ??? PCU will act asa 
redressal house with an officer designated particularly for monitoring the land purchases.  
 
Lands will not be secured from socially poor and vulnerable households (such as those 
belonging to Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes) who, after alienation, will be left with 
less than a minimum holding essential to support livelihood.  
 
Environmental Aspects  
 
OP/BP 4.01 & OP 4.09:  These policies are triggered and an Enviornmental Assessment 
has been conducted and a suitable Environmental Management Plan has been formulated 
that covers all key activities proposed under the project.  This integrates approaches to 
effectively manage pests (with a strong Integrated Pest Management focus), agro-
biodiversity, water conservation, waste management (in markets), soil health 
management (with focus on composting techniques such as vermicomposting and 
NADEP), promotion of organic and safe agricultural and milk products and marketing, 
and sustainable livestock (including livestock IPM, disease surveillance, improving 
health services and hygienic milk production) and fisheries management.  This is 
supplemented by capacity-building approaches such as training, development of effective 
environmental knowledge bases and analytical capacity, institution of ???green??? 
awards, and effective stakeholder consultation, awareness, extension and outreach to 
promote environmentally-sustainable agriculture.  
 
A
strong monitoring program has also been designed to monitor various environmental 
and social parameters and to promote their use for adaptive management.  
 
The implementing agency, DASP with its Project Coordination Unit, District Units and 
associated Line Agencies (e.g. those responsible for Agriculture, Horticulture and 
Livestock) have demonstrated during the first DASP project that they can effectively 
mainstream environmental and social opportunities and risk management into project 
activities.  Personnel have been identified to be responsible for the management of 
environmental and social activities in the project.  A strong training program is also 
proposed to further strengthen staff capacity and improve farmer awareness.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key project stakeholders include the farmers of UP State, staff at the DAP PCU and 
district units, associated Line Agency staff (including those responsible for agriculture, 
horticulture, livestock and fisheries), Panchayati Raj Institutions and other local 
government related agencies (including ATMA) and indirectly, marketers and consumers 
of agricultural, horticultural, milk and fish products associated with project activities.  
Page  7
There have been consultations throughout the environmental and social assessments and 
there is a strong consultation framework also proposed in the project itself.  Draft 
Environmental Management Plans have been discussed with multiple stakeholders and 
their views reflected in the revised versions.  All key project staff are being made aware 
of the provisions in the environmental and social assessments and these have been 
budgeted and included into the project budgets.  
 
Social Assessment related consultations: During project preparation, an external 
consultant had been enlisted to conduct a Social Assessment. As a part of which, the 
consultants as well as the staff of Project Coordination Unit have been engaged for over a 
year in extensive field visits and consultations. Stakeholder Mapping has been done 
elaborately to: (i) identify stakeholders at different levels ??? village, Gram Panchayat, 
Nyaya Panchayat, District, State and National; (ii) assess their expectations from the 
project; (iii) record issues and concerns; (iv) develop an impact assessment matrix; and 
(v) identify key issues thereof and measures to address the same. Detailed report is 
available on request as well as on the project???s portal.  Stakeholders identified and 
consulted include: local farming communities, Panchayat Raj Institutions, women, 
marginal and small farmers, scheduled caste; women self help groups, representatives of 
several agencies from government, non-government, academia and consulting fraternity.  
Social Assessment has also been made available in the Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/07/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/01/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Pest management process has been integrated into the Environmental Assessment and 
Environmental Management Plan.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  8
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert S. Epworth 
12/20/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao 
12/20/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish 
12/20/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
12/19/2006 
Comments:   
