Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/03/2006 
Report No.:  AC1953
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P092735 
Project Name:  National Agricultural Innovation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Willem G. Janssen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 23, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]  
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to the sustainable transformation of Indian 
agricultural sector from an orientation of only food self-sufficiency to one in which a 
market orientation is equally important for poverty alleviation and income generation. 
The specific objective is to accelerate the collaborative development and application of 
agricultural innovations between public research organizations, farmers, private sector 
and other stakeholders.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project pursues the further evolution of the Indian agricultural research system as 
supported in the past by National Agricultural Research Project I-II and by National 
Agriculture Technology Project (NATP). The project is planned for six years to be 
implemented by the Department of Agricultural Research and Education, Ministry of 
Agriculture / Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). Under the guidance of a 
multi-stakeholder steering committee four components are foreseen:  
 
Component 1. ICAR as the catalyzing agent for management of change in the Indian 
NARS.  
Page  2
This component will support the following activities: Strengthening information, 
communication and dissemination systems for greater dialogue and interaction within the 
system and among the stakeholders; Enhancing public awareness capacity and improved 
knowledge sharing; Establishing business development models for technology 
commercialization and incubation; Assessing and adapting the current Learning and 
Capacity Building and Human Resource Development initiatives; introducing models 
like e-learning, distance learning and developing training materials to prepare scientists 
and support staff with newly required skills and knowledge; Developing  agricultural and 
research policy capacity including the gender aspects and visioning skills, and 
strengthening impact assessment capacity; and remodeling and advancing financial 
management and procurement for the ICAR system.  
 
Component 2. 
Research on production to consumption systems (PCS).  
 
Consortia will be developed in which public organizations, private sector, farmer 
organizations, NGOs and others are jointly responsible for governance, design and 
implementation of research programs and the application of the resulting innovations on-
farm and in the PCS. Research will be complemented with knowledge management 
activities, such as the organization of seminars, conferences and innovation market 
places, development of networks of users and experts and conventional or Internet based 
communication strategies. Consortia will be selected through a competitive process, 
following conditions on the types of partnership, the contributions of different partners, 
the quality of the expertise in the consortium, the importance of the proposed topic, the 
agenda outlined for the consortium, and the provisions for maintaining the consortium 
when the project closes. The inclusion of international partners will be encouraged. The 
project will finance investment and operational costs of the consortia with the 
understanding that the members will contribute personnel cost.  
 
Component 3. Research on sustainable rural livelihood security.  
 
Similar collaborative research models will be established and supported for rural 
livelihood improvement in disadvantaged areas. This component will also have strong 
roles for non-public stakeholders and strong emphasis on participatory approaches for 
defining and implementing the agenda. Action research to improve rural livelihoods will 
be integrated with the activities of rural development projects (including World Bank 
funded projects), Agricultural Technology Management Agencies, other State extension 
initiatives and NGOs to increase the uptake of the results. This component will have a 
sponsored as well as a competitive grants element.  
 
Component 4. Basic and strategic research in the frontier areas of agricultural science.  
 
This component will support focused research in well-defined areas of frontier science, 
with strong bearings on Indian agriculture. Possible areas of research have been identified 
by intensive process of consultations among those scientists from India and abroad. 
Collaboration of foreign scientific institutions or individual scientists with global 
leadership in the relevant areas of science will be encouraged. Management of 
component 4 will be along the same lines as the management of components 2 and 3.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented by state agricultural universities, ICAR organizations, 
other public organizations, NGOs, farmer organizations and private sector partners, 
selected through competitive criteria. While the specific agencies are not known at this 
point of time, the research and on-farm demonstration would be limited within the 
campus and demonstration sites of these agencies, potentially throughout the country, 
within the period of the project. Successful research activities, eventually, will have the 
potential to be practiced all over India, covering a wide range of geographical and 
ecological landscapes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr S. Satish (SASES) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project aims at harnessing scientific advances in selected priority areas to attain 
global competitiveness with larger spin-off benefits. This in view, the interventions 
proposed essentially relate to the development and dissemination of appropriate 
agricultural technologies  and hence  impacts are expected to be mostly positive, and  
include: increased production and productivity, improved environment, establishment of 
value chains resulting in value addition and increased employment and livelihood 
improvements. However small-scale impacts may arise inadvertently, in the unlikely 
event that the selection, planning, and implementation of the sub-project interventions 
and demonstration sites are inadequate. Although, specific sub-project interventions are 
not known at this point of time (but will be known when sub-projects are selected and 
grounded), the borrowers undertook an environmental assessment, which identified all 
relevant potential impacts for all types of probable interventions. These include issues 
such as stress on and contamination of groundwater; land degradation (increased 
Page  4
salinity/loss of soil fertility, contamination); residual pesticide and insecticides in food 
chain; biodiversity loss (plant/animal); uncontrolled cultivation of genetically engineered 
varieties and gene pool contamination; risk of biopiracy; health and safety hazards; 
generation and management of wastewater and waste (such as crop residue) and 
hazardous bio-wastes; and vulnerability to crop failure/animal diseases.  
 
The issues identified are manageable, and the environmental assessment did not identify 
and potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No such issue has been identified by the environmental assessment. However, to manage 
against unforeseen risks, the project has prepared a few exclusion criteria for potential 
sub-projects, as part of the environmental and social management framework (see 
below).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The identified environmental and social issues in the project (with particular reference to 
the OP/BP4.01 Environmental Assessment and OP4.09 Pest Management) were 
identified through an environmental and social assessment. These identified issues, 
potential impacts are addressed through an environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) for the project.  
 
The ESMF describes (i) the relevant legal and regulatory set up in India for managing 
relevant issues, (ii) an exhaustive list of potential impacts along with a menu of required 
mitigation measures; and (iii) the institutional arrangements for implementation and 
mainstreaming the required environmental and social management measures, including  
monitoring and evaluation requirements.  
 
The project will conform to the applicable GOI environmental and social safeguards, 
such as the rules and regulations related to conservation of forests, conservation of 
wildlife, coastal regulation zone, groundwater resources; guidelines related to 
aquaculture, biotechnology and transgenic research, hazardous micro organisms; 
environmental protection norms related to air quality, surface water quality, bio medical 
and hazardous wastes, hazardous chemicals, pesticides and insecticide; and the applicable 
discharge and emission standards. The project will also conform to the policies such as 
resettlement, agricultural and tribal policies; tribal laws and other relevant legislation for 
indigenous people; laws governing social issues such as protecting rights of women, child 
labour, equal remuneration, labourer’s rights; local self government regulations; and the 
right to information.  
Page  5
The project will mainstream the management of environmental and social issues in the 
planning and selection of sub-projects. Each sub-project proposal will comply with the 
safeguards requirements, as illustrated in distinct checklists provided in the ESMF. Based 
on these checklists, each sub-project consortia will prepare a social and environmental 
safeguards management note (similar to the Bank’s ISDS), as a part of the overall sub-
project proposal. Regular monitoring and evaluation would ensure that the social and 
environmental management measures are implemented duly. The first 6 sub-project 
proposals (2 each for project components 2 and 3 and 4) will be pre-reviewed by the 
Bank for compliance to Bank safeguard policies.  
 
The ESMF also contains a list of types of sub-project to be excluded from the project. 
Sub-projects, which require involuntary land acquisition, or cause direct damage to 
wildlife, forests and other natural habitats; promote use, storage, manufacture and 
distribution of banned/hazardous agro-chemicals; eliminate or replace indigenous 
species, etc., would be excluded from the project. In addition, the ESMF also lists  
activities that will not be financed until implementation experience demonstrates 
adequate local capacity to adequately manage environmental and social impacts.  
 
Institutional/ Implementation Arrangements: Safeguards management forms a part of 
the dedicated institutional arrangement put in place for implementing the project by the 
ICAR. The key elements of this arrangement are: [a] the National Steering Committee – 
which will have an apex role in ensuring that the projects selected do not have adverse 
environment and social impacts; [b] Research Program Committee (RPC), which will 
ensure that environment and social impacts have been adequately identified and 
addressed in the proposals while approving the proposals and workplans from the 
consortia; [c] Technical Advisory Group (TAG) will provide technical and quality 
guidance to the consortia to strengthen the sub-project concept note as well as the full 
proposal, including evaluation of identification of environmental and social risks and 
adequacy of the mitigation measures and management plans suggested in the sub-project 
proposals. TAG will undertake field observations, verification of key environmental and 
social baseline parameters, and stakeholder consultations; [d] National Coordinators, who 
will be primarily responsible for coordination between the consortia and the PIU, and will 
ensure that consortia are meeting their objectives and targets, with due technical and 
quality control during implementation. One of the 4 National Coordinators will be 
responsible for implementing the ESMF in the project and the sub-projects; [e] the 
Consortia Advisory Committee (CAC) that will guide the consortia on the impact 
identification process and in preparation of management plans. [f] Help Desk, which will 
respond to any queries/issues raised by consortia, including on the management of 
environmental and social issues.  
 
Monitoring on environmental and social issues will be a part of the overall sub-project 
progress monitoring. The ESMF has outlined environmental and social monitoring 
parameters and arrangements. In addition, independent and external evaluation of the 
implementation of the ESMF and social/environmental outcomes will be conducted two 
times during the two interim reviews (at 18 and 36 months of implementation).  Results 
of these evaluations will be used for midcourse corrections (if need be).   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholder participation had been integral to the preparation of the project, and is 
planned to be integral to the implementation. During project preparation, ICAR had 
established a working group (WG), headed by an eminent agricultural scientist, and 
comprising of 15 members representing scientists, academia, NGOs and private sector. 
The WG, in turn, created as many as 11 Sub-WGs (2-5 members), each of whom 
deliberated on a particular theme. This way, project preparation has been enriched by 
contributions from a large number of subject matter specialists. Findings of the sub-
groups were discussed iteratively in 4 workshops, all of which, cumulatively contributed 
towards the design of the project including the elaboration of the implementation 
arrangements. For preparing the ESMF, the ICAR identified some 10 experts from 
different spheres, who each developed a special technical note. These were shared with a 
range of stakeholders, discussed and finalized in 2 meetings. Simultaneously, making use 
of the results emanating from the above deliberations, ICAR conducted 5 stakeholder 
consultation meetings in 5 regions the country [Bangalore in the South, Pune in the West, 
Bubaneshwar in the East, Shillong in the North-East, and Delhi in the North]. Eminent 
scientists and administrators chaired these workshops which in all had about 200 
participants. In addition to these, 3 special stakeholder consultations were arranged in 
Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. External consultants assisted ICAR in consolidating and 
documenting these stakeholder participation sessions.  
 
Disclosures: The ESMF report, an executive summary of the ESMF report (in English 
and Hindi), the 10 background papers/presentations reports prepared for the ESMF, and 
other detailed reports, including stakeholder consultation deliberations had been disclosed 
through the ICAR website. An executive summary of the ESMF, and its Hindi translation 
has been and will be disseminated widely across the country through the ICAR 
institutions as well as State Agricultural Universities. The ESMF has been disclosed to 
the Bank’s Infoshop.  
 
During implementation of the project, the environmental and social safeguards 
management notes prepared as a part of each sub-project proposal will be disclosed 
through the ICAR website, and will be disseminated locally in public places for the 
benefit of stakeholders and local communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/09/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/15/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Willem G. Janssen 
12/21/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Tapas Paul 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr S. Satish 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
 
Comments:   
