Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2384 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P093136 
Project Name: National Agricultural Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader: Robert S. Epworth 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 29, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 2, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (45%);Agricultural extension and research 
(35%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and 
institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project would be to foster the development of more competitive marketing 
systems; and improve market access for farmers and livestock producers through enhanced 
knowledge and more effective producer organization.  
 
Supporting the objective, the project would also aim to (i) increase private sector investment in 
agricultural and allied sectors; and (ii) promote more effective use of government funds already 
being allocated to line Depts. for extension and adaptive research, and to private entrepreneurs 
under various GOI sponsored schemes.  
 
The project would contribute to the broader goal of poverty reduction, by increasing 
productivity and incomes of small and marginal landholders, and improving opportunities for 
employment and livelihood support both on-farm and in the non-farm rural economy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would have a national, multi-state focus, coordinated through the Ministry of 
Agriculture ? made up of discrete, state managed projects. States would only be considered if (i) 
Page  2
they have amended their Agricultural Produce Marketing Acts to allow private sector 
involvement in provision of basic services to farmers for marketing of fresh produce, agro 
processing and other forms of value addition; and (ii) are actively interested in reforming their 
extension services, in line with the new GOI extension policy, that promotes the introduction of 
the ATMA management concept nation-wide.  The first multi-state project would comprise three 
or four state projects. Based on experience from the initial project, as more reforming states are 
ready to join, a series of similar multi-state projects could be envisaged ? with subsequent 
projects not necessarily waiting for the earlier ones to finish before they are initiated.  
 
Within each state project, project activities would be grouped into three components ? with 
each state choosing some or all sub-component activities that address their development needs  
 
(i)  Expanding Market Infrastructure and Opportunities ? by improving physical 
communications in rural areas and the infrastructure needed to facilitate trade  
 
o
Diversifying Marketing Channels.  Constructing and/or rehabilitating well designed 
strategically placed market yards to facilitate trade and reduce transaction costs ? linked directly 
to initiatives to improve market yard management   This could include haat painths (village 
markets) and the development and testing of market-yard models, such as establishment of new 
concept district agri-markets, owned and/or managed by private sector entities, in a range of PPP 
business models - providing also a range of input supplies and general services to farmers on the 
same site, including piloting of integrated farm grading/collection systems and more transparent 
auction systems.  
 
o
Improvement of Existing Market Systems. In partnership with the Marketing Boards 
(Mandi Parishads), upgrading and development of existing specialized markets for 
fruits/vegetables and fish, to be operated within the existing Mandi Parishads system, piloting 
private sector management or, as a minimum, with private sector management of ancillary 
facilities (cold stores, packing facilities etc) and enhanced governance and greater participation 
of market stakeholders in design and operation/maintenance of the market, through constitution 
of properly functioning market committees.  
 
o
Upgrading Market Access Roads. Upgrading and maintaining critical rural roads to 
connect production centers to the markets ? to reduce post harvest production losses by 
shortening transport time and reducing physical losses. Only roads absolutely essential to 
improving farmer market access would be considered, and in no case would this activity exceed 
10% of total project costs.  
 
o
Fostering Agribusiness Development.  Establishment of a professionally managed 
Agribusiness Development Facility (ABDF) to promote private sector involvement in agro-
processing and services provision (eg testing laboratories and quality assurance) ? by enhancing 
the availability of business services to assist promoters identify business opportunities, prepare 
marketing and business plans; working with existing GOI sponsored schemes and commercial 
banks to increase access to finance by streamlining processes and developing new lending 
instrument; and improving the business environment for small and medium investors.  
 
Page  3
(ii)   Increasing Farmer Access to Market Opportunities ? by improving the relevance of market 
information and regulatory framework; improving supply chain management; increasing market 
infrastructure and making market management more responsive to farmers needs; and promoting 
private sector investment in agribusiness  
 
o
Expanding Market Information.  Support for provision of comprehensive information 
systems for growers, traders, processors and exporters on the prices and volumes traded in the 
major outlets - linked eventually with information on product standards, certification, and 
regulatory policies and procedures,  
 
o
Strengthening Regulatory Frameworks.  Strengthening of regulatory services designed to 
improve the safety and quality assurance of domestic and export products ? through direct 
support to necessary public services and by ensuring a competitive policy environment to 
encourage private participants wherever feasible.  
 
o
Strengthening Supply Chains.  Improving the management of both coordinated and 
traditional supply chains by working with the private sector to identify and promote domestic 
and export market opportunities through market surveys, trade fairs etc; and facilitating linkages 
between growers, traders, processors and exporters. Promoting and empowering producer 
organizations in all relevant sub-sectors (agriculture, horticulture, dairying, livestock and 
fisheries) to better capture economies of scale and value-addition opportunities..  
 
(iii)   Facilitating Intensification and Diversification of Production ? by making extension and 
adaptive research more relevant and accessible to farmers; encouraging the development and 
introduction of more effective agricultural production systems; and reducing the risk associated 
with change, especially for small operators.  
 
o
Making Extension Systems more Relevant.  Introduction/further development of 
decentralized pluralistic extension and adaptive research system through adoption of the ATMA 
management concept, based on the underlying principles of farmer participation; collaboration 
between line depts.; and, public private partnerships. All public funds allocated for these 
activities should be converged under this management approach, and the project would therefore 
be supporting a time-slice of all extension activities of the relevant line Depts.  
 
&#61656; 
District Agricultural Diversification and Marketing Strategies (DADMS). These 
would be developed with the pro-active involvement of farmer advisory committees, and be 
central to this restructuring activity - and would dictate how all public funding for adaptive 
research and extension is allocated at the district level.  
 
&#61656; 
Market-Led Extension.  To facilitate introduction of innovative agricultural and 
livestock production systems, there is a need to incorporate sufficient marketing expertise within 
the extension services.  For this purpose the project would support an extensive training program 
aimed at transforming the existing production-oriented approach of the extension service towards 
an approach that puts markets and market-demand at the center of knowledge transfer activities 
conducted by the extension service  
 
Page  4
&#61656; 
Production System Innovation.  Drawing on funding from existing GOI sponsored 
schemes, Introduction of innovative agricultural and livestock production systems would be 
actively promoted; along with livestock upgrading programs for dairy cattle, small ruminants and 
poultry; the latter underpinned by project supported promotion of private parapets to deliver AI 
services and basis first aid, and improved disease surveillance and control by veterinary services.  
 
Piloting Risk Management Mechanisms.  Introduction of risk mitigation mechanisms for small 
and marginal farmers - such as appropriate insurance products, warehouse receipts and 
commodity futures - would be tested, through MOUs with private sector providers.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a national, multi-state project, where state participation would be subject to pre-
conditions related to policy shifts allowing enhanced private sector participation, and to reforms 
in agricultural extension services. [Initial possibilities include states of Punjab, Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Haryana.]. Choice of states would be finalized 
during preparation of the project. However, once implementation starts in any state, activities 
will be state-wide. The potential states include a large physiographic range ? arid and semi-arid 
areas, coastal zones, floodplains, ravines and degraded land, forests and hills.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined once State selection to participate in the project is finalised.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr S. Satish (SASES) 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Given the limited physical interventions, and the orientation to market and policy reforms, 
the direct environmental impacts of the project is expected to be low. These low but direct 
impacts will relate to the establishment (including construction and restoration) and operation of 
market yards, expansion of facilities in the district agri-market and specialized markets; and the 
limited upgrading of the market access roads. The indirect but potentially more pervasive 
environmental impacts relate to the components of agro-processing and service provision, and of 
facilitating intensification and diversification of production, which include risks associated with 
bio-prospecting and conservation of biodiversity; shift to genetically modified crops; stress on 
soil nutrient and water from improved technologies; food safety standards: pest and nutrient 
management; and, livestock safety and diseases. An environmental assessment (EA) will be 
undertaken by the borrowers, and an environmental management framework (EMF) will be 
prepared for the project to mitigate and manage these potential environmental risks.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Although unlikely, the project activities could be located close to forest areas, and may have 
some impacts on the helath of forests. This issue will be examined by the EA.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project does not propose to promote chemical fertilizers or pesticides. Any residual risk 
of promoting pesticides, as well as the scope of further improvement in and/or extension of the 
integrated pest management practices already developed and implemented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture will be covered as part of the EMF.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Direct impact on known physical cultural resources is unlikely in the project. However, the 
potential for indirect impact on physical cultural resources, and chance finds from the planned 
establishment or expansion of the market yards will be examined as part of the EA   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Proposed Project interventions are unlikely to have any direct adverse impacts on tribal 
communities. However, to ensure their ?inclusion? , and provide for their participation, 
particularly in the ?tribal? areas, some operational adjustments may be required.    
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Market Infrastructure component require lands. Mechanisms to make lands available needs to 
be worked out.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/02/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage 
ISDS would be prepared:  
 
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS:  
 
April 2007 (before planned appraisal of the project).  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  
 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:  
 
The borrowers will initiate preparation of the EA/ SA by June 2006. All required safeguard 
analysis and documentation, including disclosure as per required by the Bank?s  Disclosure 
Policy, will be completed by April 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert S. Epworth 
05/31/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal 
06/05/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
05/31/2006 
Comments:   
