Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2401 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/04/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P100101 
Project Name: Coal Fired Generation Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Rajesh Sinha 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P100531 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: August 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
117.70 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
45.40 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
27.50 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
154.50
182.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective is "Improved energy efficiency and environmental performance and 
practices of selected coal-fired power generating units".  The Project proposes to prepare and 
finance EE R&M at selected generating units within the GoI Program. Technical Assistance 
resources will be used to comprehensively address barriers inhibiting R&M, and GEF grants will 
be used to finance the incremental capital cost of EE R&M (as compared to traditional R&M 
where energy efficiency was not optimized).  
 
The Global Environmental Objective is "Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions". The Project, 
by focusing on optimization of energy efficiency in R&M project design, helps reduce the 
carbon intensity of generation vis-a-vis what they would have achieved with traditional R&M 
projects.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The Project will include borrowers/companies/states who are prepared to undertake EE R&M 
investments, make up-front commitment toward reducing barriers to EE R&M to make such 
investments sustainable, and who demonstrate such commitment during project preparation.  
 
The project will include the following two main components:  
 
Component 1:  Technical Assistance (US$ 7.4 million of GEF Grant). Technical assistance 
activities will be focused on two aspects : (i) Project preparation and barrier reduction aspects 
which include, financing of energy audits and R&M project design; financing studies on 
technical and regulatory approaches to EE R&M; financing capacity building support for state 
generators; development and implementation of Monitoring and Evaluation systems; (ii) 
Dissemination aspects which include, organization of workshops to disseminate results of studies 
and of EE R&M outcomes.  
 
Component 2:  Coal R&M Energy Efficiency Financing Window (US$ 118 million IBRD and  
US$38 million GEF Grant). This component is proposed to finance directly several EE R&M 
projects.  The envisioned EE R&M schemes will go beyond restoring plants to their original 
operating capacity, and include replacing some equipment and systems with uprated 
replacements operating at higher outputs with lower fuel inputs. The alternative for state 
generators is to undertake Traditional R&M schemes without energy efficiency orientation.  
US$37.9 million of GEF grant will finance the incremental cost of EE R&M with IBRD and 
borrower financing for the remaining capital cost.  
 
This component has a two-fold goals: (i) to incentivize state generators to volunteer to 
undertake an energy audit, design projects incorporating higher capital cost but better energy 
efficiency than the past experience, implement the project and a system for monitoring, and in 
addition undertake the necessary safeguard measures; and (ii) demonstrate the viability of EE 
R&M under the GoI Program and disseminate lessons as they emerge.  
 
The Bank and GoI have agreed to focus on 110MW and 210MW units which are in urgent need 
for R&M in India - 3,960MW of this configuration are included in the GoI Program of a total of 
32,000 MW becoming due for R&M over the next 5-8 years.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined. However, the location of generating plants or subprojects to be included in the 
project could be impacted by the air pollution baseline and the potential gains that the project 
will bring in terms of ambient air quality, particularly in case of degraded airsheds. Hence each 
of the candidate generating plants may need to be assessed in light of the existing national 
regulatory framework (including the status of compliance), as well as the World Bank guidelines 
on thermal power plants as provided in the Pollution Prevention and Abatement Handbook.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No significant adverse environmental impacts are expected under the project.  Indeed, the project 
is likely to result in major positive environmental benefits, in terms of improved energy 
efficiency, reduced local and global air pollutants, which will be measured and quantified during 
the project. The project does not envisage any land appropriation for the proposed interventions 
Page  3
and therefore, no adverse social impacts are expected under the project. However, this will be 
determined during project preparation.  
 
However, the borrower's capacity to manage social and environmental issues at the subproject 
level is likely to be poor. Given the likelihood of NTPC's involvement in capacity strengthening, 
their resources could be used to augment social and environmental management capacity of the 
borrower.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sameer Akbar (SASES) 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The Project addresses existing coal fired generation stations and as such no land acquisition 
is expected.  However, this will be further reviewed during preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/08/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
It is proposed that an environmental (and if required, social) safeguards framework will be 
developed to cover all subprojects. All sub-projects will need to be (environmentally and 
socially) screened soon after identification. The guidelines for environmental and social 
screening of each sub-project will be developed as part of the environmental and social 
safeguard framework. The operations manual / guidelines, to be followed for subproject 
appraisal, will also include the environmental screening guidelines. This screening process 
will define the level and scope of the environmental and social assessment and management 
of impacts that needs to be accomplished for each subproject. The environment and social 
safeguard framework will be developed before appraisal planned in April 2007.  Based on 
screening of individual sub-projects safeguard related studies as required will be carried out 
before finalizing appraisal of individual sub-projects.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Rajesh Sinha 
06/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/20/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Vladislav Vucetic 
06/27/2006 
Comments:   
