Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC2869
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P096023 
Project Name:  India Orissa State Roads Project 
Task Team Leader:  Binyam Reja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 4, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
70.00
70.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to remove transport bottlenecks in 
targeted transport corridors for greater economic and social development activities.  
 
2.
The PDO will be achieved by (a) improving the performance, safety and carrying 
capacity of priority roads in the state in an environmentally and socially sustainable way, 
(b) modernizing and strengthening OWD?s management structure and procedures, (c) 
increasing the role of the private sector in road infrastructure financing and management, 
(d) assisting GOO to establish conducive policy, institutional and governance 
frameworks to improve road sector management, financing and safety.   
 
3. Project Description 
3. 
The proposed project comprises two components: (a) Road Corridor Improvement 
Component, (b) PPP Enabling, Sector Policy and Institutional Development Component.  
 
Component A: Road Corridor Improvement Component  
 
Page  2
4. 
This component will support the widening and upgrading of about 906 km of 
existing single and intermediate-lane roads to double-lane standard, comprising 11 State 
Highways and 3 Major Districts Roads. Once improved, the separate road links will form 
five logical transport corridors, serving 16 (out of 30) districts in the state and cover over 
50 percent of the state?s area and population. The corridors will connect industrial, 
mining and tourist areas to major National Highways and ports in Orissa and neighboring 
Andhra Pradesh, as well as enhance the availability of transport services for the poor and 
tribal communities living along the road corridors.  
 
5. 
The widening to double-lanes entails widening to 7-meter carriageway and 2.5-
meter shoulders on each side, for a total road with of 12-meter. However, in some 
environmentally sensitive areas and heavily built up locations, the road width will be 
narrower to minimize environmental and social impacts. The road design includes safety 
enhancement in road geometry and provides for uninterrupted flow of traffic along the 
road corridors and reduction of frictions by providing truck parks/rest areas, bus stops 
and designated space for curbside commercial activities. In addition to the physical 
works, the project will finance costs associated with supervision consultants, 
Environment Management Plans, Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R), Indigenous 
People (Tribal) Development Plan (TDP), land acquisition, utility clearing, HIV/AIDS 
mitigation measures, and road safety awareness campaign in project road corridors.  
 
Component B: PPP Enabling, and Sector Policy and Institutional Development 
Component  
 
6. 
This component will assist GOO to introduce private sector financing and 
management in the road sector, and improve OWD?s institutional capacity to delivery 
effective and sustainable road infrastructure in the state.  
 
7. 
PPP Enabling Support. The project will facilitate private sector financing for 
roads by financing transaction advisers to help the state develop high-traffic roads under 
PPP scheme. The transaction adviser will undertake techno-economic feasibility, prepare 
the concession agreement for each road, managing the procurement process and, if 
required, assist the state in processing the application for VGF from GOI. Should any of 
the roads require more than 20 percent grant, the proposed project has earmarked some 
funds to finance the state?s contribution, also up to a maximum of 20 percent of the 
project cost. Finally, the project will support technical assistance and advisory services to 
further develop government capacity to conceive, implement and regulate PPP 
transactions in the road sector, as well as improve the management of toll roads in the 
state.  
 
8. 
OWD Modernization Support. The project will finance technical assistance and 
advisory services to OWD (a) establish Road Asset Management System in OWD, 
including the creation of a Road Information System, development of software 
applications for maintenance planning and optimal resource allocation; (b) establish 
and/or build capacity in core business units/cells in OWD, including Environment and 
Social Management, Road Safety, Road Asset Management, and PPP Transactions; (c) 
Page  3
revise and update the PWD Codes and Manuals to improve contract management and 
procurement practices in OWD; (d) implement IT/ICT/MIS to modernize financial 
management system, computerize record keeping, and introduce e-procurement; (e) 
support the implementation of GAAP and compliance with RTI suo moto disclosures; 
and (f) extensive training and core skills development program for OWD staff.  
 
9. 
Policy and Institutional Development. The project will finance technical 
assistance and advisory service to assist GOO improve its road sector policy, institutional 
and legal framework to align it with the rapidly changing environment and context. This 
will included support to (a) establish O&M structure for managing the State?s Core Road 
Network initially within a restructured OWD, and later through a separate Road 
Development Corporation; (b) establish sustainable road maintenance financing options; 
(c) policy directive to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various road agencies in 
the state on the one hand, and the public and private sectors on the other; (d) creation of 
an apex road authority to coordinate the various road agencies in the state; (e) preparation 
of a Road Master Plan, including revision/update of the road network classification 
system and assignment of responsibility among various road agencies, (f) update/define 
the legal right of way for the state?s road network; (g)  developing Road Safety Policy 
Action Plan; (h) develop axel load control policy and strategy.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
10. 
Orissa, India.  The proposed project roads will be located across many parts of the 
State. The covered districts will be: Cuttack, Kendrapara, Bhadrak, Keonjhar, 
Mayurbhanj, Rayagada, Kalahandi, Bolangir, Nuapada, Ganjam, Gajapati, Nayagarh, 
Dhenkanal, and Angul.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDS) 
Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
11. 
The project has triggered six safeguard policies as indicated above. The physical 
interventions proposed under the project may have social and environmental impacts 
including those related to involuntary resettlement of the communities in certain stretches 
of project roads. As part of project preparation, social and environmental assessments 
were undertaken to identify and assess the impacts associated with the proposed project 
activities and develop mitigation measures.  
 
12. 
 Involuntary Resettlement: The most important safeguard issue associated with 
the proposed project relates to involuntary resettlement in some stretches of the project 
roads. The project involves widening and strengthening of selected road stretches, and in 
some areas where population concentration is high, bypasses have been proposed to 
avoid large population resettlement. Therefore, acquisition of private land and physical 
displacement are envisaged under the project. Encroachment of the right of way (RoW) is 
also an important issue and the proposed physical works under the project will result in 
displacement of significant number of squatters found within the RoW. However, not all 
encroachers/squatters are required to be disturbed and attempts are made to minimize the 
extent of displacement by confining it to the corridor of impact, which is less than RoW 
at several places. In order to address the issue of involuntary resettlement, the project has 
a
well designed Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) policy framework to help those 
affected in their resettlement process and restore their livelihoods. Details are provided in 
the R&R Entitlement Framework agreed for the project and the Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) prepared for the stretches proposed to be developed in the first year of the project. 
During project implementation, efforts will continue to minimize the negative impacts of 
the project on the local people, including encroachers and squatters.  The Resettlement 
Plans prepared for the first year works include measures to minimize displacement and to 
ensure that those affected are helped to improve or at least restore their livelihoods.  
 
13. 
The indigenous peoples (referred as tribal) policy (OP 4.10) applies in this project 
to tribal and other vulnerable groups. There are road stretches proposed under the project 
which pass through the tribal areas. As part of the Social Assessment, detailed assessment 
of policies, regulations and development schemes applicable to tribal communities was 
carried out to identify and assess issues concerning them vis-?-vis the proposed project 
activities. Specific consultations were also conducted with tribal communities to inform 
the tribal communities about the project interventions and expected benefits and solicit 
their views on the proposed measures to help them benefit from the project. The 
assessment revealed that though the project interventions are not expected to have any 
adverse impacts on the tribal communities, a tribal development (TD) strategy has been 
prepared to help them access project benefits. If tribal families are affected adversely on 
individual basis, they will be supported as per the provisions of the R&R policy and 
measures included in the RAP. The TD strategy prepared for the project includes 
measures to help tribal communities to access project benefits, in terms of wage 
employment and community development works. Based on this strategy, tribal 
Page  5
development plans (TDP) have been prepared for each of the packages (of the first year) 
located in tribal areas. These plans are included in each of the RAPs prepared so far.  
 
14. 
Environmental Impacts. The Environmental Assessment has identified that the 
project intervention may have environmental impacts as follows: (i) direct/indirect 
impacts on forests and wildlife; (ii) felling of roadside trees; (iii) impacts on water 
resources used by the people such as ponds, river/streams, hand pumps and canals; (iv) 
construction phase impacts including those related to camp site operation, dust generation 
and pollution, and  workers? health and safety; (v) improper management and disposal of 
debris and other wastes. The environmental impacts may also include some adverse 
impacts on schools, hospitals and religious properties located along the existing right of 
way due to increased noise and air pollution during construction and operation stages of 
the project.  
 
15. 
Project interventions may also cause undesirable impacts on the rich biodiversity 
found in adjoining areas of project corridors as some project roads traverse through 
Reserved and/or Protected Forest Areas. Typical impacts that may adversely affect plants 
and animals in such biodiversity rich areas include pressure on habitats, movement zone 
restrictions threat from increased risk of collision with vehicles and pollution of habitat 
zone and pressure on water sources from various construction stage activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
16. 
The long-term social impact will be generally positive as the project will bring 
economic and social development in the region. In addition, the project treatment of 
safeguard issues specifically approaches to address issues related to encroachers, 
squatters and tribal groups may set an important precedent for non-project areas now and 
in the future. The experience when gained during the project implementation would help 
the implementing agencies to address these issues more systematically in their regular 
operations. At the same time, the long-term environmental impacts may include increased 
development and alteration of land-use patterns, away from agriculture and forest to other 
economic activities. Increased truck traffic may result in increase of HIV/AIDS and other 
communicable diseases in project corridors. The road improvements and increases in 
vehicle speed may also lead to increase in accidents.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
17. 
The various alternatives considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts 
include: (i) realignments, (ii) bypasses (iii) changes in pavement cross section (iv) 
provision of road safety and traffic calming measures (v) reuse of waste material (vi) 
slope protection (bio-engineering) and erosion protection measures (vii) provision of 
crossing sites, signage, plantation, water holes etc. for wildlife and (viii) various 
protection and enhancement measures for common property resources, religious 
properties and water bodies.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
18. 
Specific environment and social impact mitigation action plans have been 
developed to mitigate adverse environmental and social impacts and risks and to enhance 
the potential positive benefits of the project. These action plans include the EMP, RAP 
(including TDP) and Cultural Property Plan (as part of the EMP), Biodiversity 
Management Plan (integrated within corridor-specific EMPs) and HIV/AIDS Action 
Plan. These plans have been integrated into each package as an integral part of the 
preparation, capacity-building, implementation and monitoring. Each Action Plan 
includes monitoring indicators and estimated costs that have been incorporated in the 
overall project costs.  
 
19. 
Social Aspects. The institutional arrangements for implementing the social 
management plans have been outlined in the RAP. The Social and Environmental Cell 
within the Project Management Unit (PMU) is the institution responsible for overseeing 
the implementation of these plans by package level staff and nodal NGOs. The nodal 
NGO at the project level will focus specifically on social safeguards and will ensure 
adequate treatment of the issues related to losers of land, physically displaced families, 
encroachers, squatters, tribal development, HIV/AIDS, and road safety. NGOs at the 
Package level will be engaged to facilitate implementation of social management plans. 
The state implementing agencies responsible for land acquisition and RAP 
implementation will also be involved in the planning and implementation of these plans. 
The costs and implementation arrangements have been integrated into the project design 
and are described in the RAPs for each Package, HIV/AIDS Action Plan, Project 
Implementation Plan (PIP) and other project documents. An external agency which will 
be engaged for project level monitoring and evaluation will also monitor implementation 
of social management plans of the project. Finally, the PMU will recruit an experienced 
Social Development Adviser/Specialist from the market to support the Social and 
Environment Cell in monitoring the implementation of the RAP.  
 
20. 
Environment Aspect. The Social and Environment Cell in the PMU with expertise 
on environment management, forestry and wildlife expert has been set-up to handle the 
environmental management aspects of the project. This unit is headed by an Executive 
Engineer and will act as the core team at HQ. The project will require substantial 
strengthening of the existing capacity to effectively and timely handle the multiple tasks 
identified in the EMPs. Orientation and basic training has already been provided to 
initiate this capacity building process.  An environmental expert is also being recruited 
from the market to help in the monitoring of the implementation of EMPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Social Aspects  
 
21. 
Consultations were conducted with a variety of project stakeholders at various 
levels - village, block and district. Besides the census survey of affected families, these 
consultations included in-depth interviews, focus group discussions, thematic 
Page  7
discussions, village meetings and district level stakeholders? consultation workshops. 
Specific discussions with the project staff and functionaries of other government 
departments including Revenue, Forest, Rural Development, Tribal Development, 
financial institutions, local NGOs formed an important aspect of the consultation process. 
The stakeholders, with whom consultations were held included, affected people, truckers, 
other road users and project beneficiaries, peoples? representatives including 
Panchayat/local body members, road side communities including those engaged in 
business, hotel, and other services along the road, women, scheduled castes and tribes, 
other vulnerable groups, project staff, government agencies, researchers, expert groups, 
civil societies and others.  These consultations were held in all the road stretches 
proposed to be included in the project but specific consultations were held in the road 
stretches that formed the first year packages. The objectives of these consultations were 
to involve the affected communities and other stakeholders in the decision making 
process, making them aware of the proposed project activities and evolving measures to 
help the local communities benefit from the project.  
 
22. 
The key messages emerging from these consultations include the importance of 
addressing issues related to alternate alignments, proposals for bypasses, compensating 
land and other assets at their replacement value, supporting encroachers and squatters 
affected due to the project in their resettlement, specific measures to support vulnerable 
among the affected communities, particularly in accessing wage employment and other 
project benefits at par with others. The consultations also explicitly brought out the need 
for adequate opportunities for the tribal and other vulnerable sections in planning and 
implementing mitigation measures and help them access project benefits along with 
others. Such consultations will continue during the project implementation period.  
 
Environmental Aspects  
 
23. 
The key stakeholders include (i) roadside communities (ii) project affected 
households within the roadside communities (iii) road users (iv) local government (v) 
implementing agency (vi) other state government departments, particularly those 
regulating the environment such as Department of Environment and Forests (including 
Wildlife Wing) and Orissa State Pollution Control Board.  
 
24. 
Public consultation at local, district and state levels were carried out all along the 
project roads. Stakeholder consultation included shopkeepers, farmers and businessmen, 
local residents; project affected persons; local bodies like village panchayats and 
municipalities; temple committees; truckers and local market associations; roadside 
communities; local NGOs; and selected government departments such as Public Works, 
Forests, Irrigation, Agriculture, Horticulture, Mining, Tourism and Archeology.  
 
25. 
The consultation process carried out for the project included a range of formal and 
informal on-site discussions, interviews and focus group discussions (information 
included in EA report). Local disclosure of environment documents was carried out 
through public consultation and dissemination workshops across the state from 
November 2006 to June 2007. District level consultations (in 13 districts through which 
Page  8
project roads traverse) were also carried out during the EA to obtain inputs to modify 
designs to minimize and/or mitigate potential negative impacts on people and 
environmental resources. Expert opinion was sought on specific issues related to forests, 
wildlife and environmental regulations. Outputs from this process have been integrated 
into the design where technically feasible. Follow up consultations have been/will be 
carried out at sensitive locations to share information related to the final project design.  
 
26. 
The main concerns raised by people living along project roads related to: (i) 
drainage; (ii) accidents and road safety, (iii) disturbance to properties, employment 
sources and water sources; (iv) disposal of debris; (v) damage to ponds, other water 
sources, properties, trees and farmlands during construction and; (vi) resettlement.  
 
27. 
The public consultations were designed in a way that: (i) affected people were 
included in the decision making process; (ii) links between communities and their natural 
resource base adjacent to project locations were explored; (iii) public awareness and 
information sharing on project alternatives, benefits and entitlements were promoted; and 
(iv) views on designs and solutions from the communities were solicited.  
 
28. 
The Environmental Screening, EA, EMPs and other related documents have 
been/will be made public through the Bank's Public Information Center, OWD/PIU's 
website and in the districts affected by the Project (in public libraries, offices of the 
district collector and schools of affected villages).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/29/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/30/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/30/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  9
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Binyam Reja 
10/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra 
10/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohammed Hasan 
10/05/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
10/10/2007 
Comments:   
