Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2379 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P096020 
Project Name: Second Rural Roads Project 
Task Team Leader: Simon Thomas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 8, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
125.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
375.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
250.00
250.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to achieve broader and more sustainable access to 
markets and social services by the rural population in participating districts.  The project is the 
second loan/credit to support the Government of India's Prime Minister's Rural Road Program 
(PMGSY). The proposed project will provide parallel financing to an ongoing Government 
scheme to enhance the speed and quality of delivery.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is envisaged to have three components as follows.  
 
1.
New construction and upgradation of rural roads that form part of the core rural road 
network, including necessary environmental management measures, land acquisition/regulatory 
clearances (financed by states), as well as resettlement and rehabilitation of any vulnerable 
project affected persons.  
 
2. 
Annual implementation of periodic and routine maintenance programs of the remaining 
core rural network in a maintainable state in those districts receiving Bank funding under 
component (1), to be entirely funded by proposed states.  
Page  2
3. 
Technical assistance and goods to (a) National Rural Road Development Agency 
(NRRDA) to further develop/disseminate appropriate guidelines, tools and systems for 
application across the entire PMGSY; (b) rural road agencies in proposed states to help them 
plan, procure, supervise and report on the management of their road assets; and (c) local 
contractors for training in planning, technical and environmental areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in up to 60% of districts in each of the states of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Mizoram and Uttaranchal.  The districts are to be chosen on the basis 
of (i) investment needs (ii) poverty levels (iii) implementation capacity (iv) security and (v) 
geographic clustering as feasible. Bihar is part of the Ganga basin.  Floods, torrential flows and 
drainage are the main challenges in that state. The other states, geologically of recent origin, are 
hilly, characterised by steep slopes, high landslides and erosion problems, high forest cover, as 
well as abundant rivers and rivulets.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There is growing though still limited capacity within the central government National Rural 
Road Development Agency to address safeguard issues at the policy/strategy level.  Some 
aspects of safeguard management are, however, already mainstreamed into the PMGSY program 
(see the program Operations Manual and Technical Specifications available at 
www.pmgsy.nic.in).  Actual implementation is done by designated rural road agencies in the 
proposed states. The capacity of these agencies to implement and document safeguard measures 
is to be assessed during preparation and a rectification strategy agreed and implemented at the 
appropriate time throughout the project cycle.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mridula Singh (SASES) 
Mr N. S. Srinivas (SASEI) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Adverse environment impacts are likely to occur if selected roads are not properly planned, 
designed or constructed. A number of issues can become significant if not addressed 
appropriately at various stages including: inadequate provisions to conserve natural drainage 
patterns; poor disposal of debris and embankment/slope stability; and inadequate construction 
management such as in borrow area and quarry operations. Some roads required to connect very 
remote villages may traverse through forests or other protected or ecologically sensitive areas 
leading to higher risk of negative impact. Hill roads in particular face risks of slope failure 
leading to accentuated landslides, erosion and destruction of forests. Debris disposal in these 
areas is also a major environmental issue. The Bank will agree an environmental management 
framework with the proposed states (based on the existing framework applied for the ongoing 
Bank funded Rural Road Project adapted for the circumstances of the proposed states).  The 
framework will provide a means to screen sub projects and subject such sub
-
projects to 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
appropriate levels of design scrutiny and mitigatory measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project will have the flexibility to intervene in cologically sensitive areas wherever 
required to fulfill the objective of the PMGSY. It is possible that roads will be planned through 
protected natural habitats.  In these few cases, sub-projects will be designed and constructed as 
per required norms and standards in accordance with existing Management Plans of such 
protected natural habitats. For any unprotected natural habitat identified during screening, a sub-
project specific EA will determine the impacts of the proposed road and a plan for mitigating or 
managing these would be prepared.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Except for Bihar, all the other 4 states participating in the project are hilly states, with 50-
80% of land area under forest cover. Consequently a number of villages eligible under the 
PMGSY are likely to be within or adjacent to forest areas. To provide connectivity to these 
villages, it is possible that a number of roads will pass through or be adjacent to good quality 
community or state forests. Such sub-projects identified during screening would be subject to 
applicable regulatory clearance and scrutiny. Moreover, as necessary, a sub-project specific EA 
will determine the extent of impact on the quality and health of forests from the road and 
prescribe any mitigatory and management measures required.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The proposed states have a number of cultural property sites, including (i) sites of 
archaeological (prehistoric and neolithic), historical, and unique natural values; (ii) religious 
properties and sacred groves. The environmental management framework to be agreed for the 
project will provide a means for determining the extent of direct or indirect impacts on these 
cultural properties by any sub-project. Mitigation measures will be incorporated in designs and 
bidding documents as necessary.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Most of the proposed states are tribal dominated i.e. Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and the 
Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir. The tribal population risks losing land or structures or 
being unfairly treated with respect to allocation of project resources. The Bank will agree with 
the proposed states a process of free, prior, and informed consultation with the affected 
communities at each stage of the sub-project cycle, which the states will then implement.  The 
process will focus in particular on sub-project preparation to fully identify the views of 
indigenous people and ascertain whether there is broad community support for the sub-project. 
At the project level, the framework for applying this OP would be set down in the Social 
Management Framework (see next para).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The PMGSY's objective to connect villages with an all weather road is in most cases met 
through upgrading an existing earthen track to a prescribed formation width of 7.5 meters (6 
metres in hilly areas).  To upgrade the existing track, the program guidelines (clause 6.12, see 
www.pmgsy.nic.in) require that states or local government ensure land is available and they 
certify to that effect.  The MORD does not finance land acquisition; but this does not preclude 
states from acquiring land if they need to. Traditionally, governments have relied on voluntary 
donation of land for any widening or realignment required to meet prescribed technical standards 
for rural roads (but not for highways, where land is invariably acquired through applicable 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
eminent domain law). Alternatively, designs have also often been compromised.  As in the first 
Bank project to support the PMGSY, this project will follow this traditional procedure of 
voluntary donation with additional safeguards with respect to (i) level of consultation in decision 
making (ii) documentation of the process (iii) dispute redressal and (iv) provision of assistance 
for vulnerable affected persons.  
 
A
Social Assessment will be carried out in the proposed states by a consultant 
commissioned by the NRRDA to identify issues related to adverse social impacts of the 
PMGSY.  The objective is to review current policies and procedures to address and manage 
adverse impacts and modify, in the light of the proposed states' specific circumstances, the 
existing environment and social management framework (ESMF) being used in the ongoing 
Bank funded Rural Roads Project.  The proposed study will (a) verify whether the status of 
ownership of land within the ROW was established during sub-project preparation; (b) identify 
gaps; (c) assess current practices of up-dating land records (d) propose a plan for updating land 
records.; (e) assess the scope and level of stakeholder participation,; and (d) assess institutional 
capacity to implement the Bank's safeguard policies.  The output would be a revised Social 
Management Framework to be endorsed by state governments and implemented by rural road 
agencies.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
Arunachal Pradesh is listed in the Indian Constitution as a State of the Republic of India and 
is administered as such. However, the Republic of China has claimed part of the territory. India 
bases her claim on an international agreement (following a conference held in Simla from 
October 1912 to July 1914) while China denies the existence of such agreement. Both countries 
have also put forth other arguments based on international law to support their respective claims.  
However, the roads to be constructed/improved do not fall within the areas disputed between the 
two countries.  
 
Jammu and Kashmir is disputed between India and Pakistan and during preparation, the 
Bank will determine the implication of this dispute and, in consultation with the Borrower, agree 
a
plan for abiding by any remedy that may be required under the OP.   
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/28/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Award service contract by end July 2006  
 
Complete Study by end November 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simon Thomas 
06/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/20/2007 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
06/20/2007 
Comments:  cleared. this ISDS should have been sent to the infoshop after the PCN review last year. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
