Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.: 
39480
 
Date prepared/updated:  March 29, 2007 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P101553 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
P104649 
Project Name:  Mumbai Improved Electricity Access for Indian Slum Dwellers Project
 
Task Team Leader:  Cledan Mandri-Perrott 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
Managing Unit:  Global Partnership on Output-
Based Aid (GPOBA) 
Lending Instrument:  GPOBA Grant 
Sector:  Energy 
Theme:  Energy supply 
GPOBA Grant Amount (US$m.):  1.57 million 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Environmental Category: B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [x] 
    No [ ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [x] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [x] 
2. Project Objectives: 
The objective of the proposed project is to demonstrate the use of an OBA approach to 
make a significant difference to the level of access to safe and adequate electricity supply 
in the Indian slum context. Successful demonstration will lead to substantial potential for 
scale-up in slum communities in Mumbai and across India. This scheme benefits from 
considerable upfront support from USAID via a community outreach and education 
program.  
 
3. Project Description: 
The city of Mumbai has over 6 million slum dwellers, a large number of whom do not 
have access to legal electricity service.  Reliance Energy Limited1 (REL), a major private 
1
Reliance Energy is India’s largest integrated private sector power utility company. The company is into generation, transmission, 
distribution and trading of power. It distributes over 5,000 MW of power - the largest in the country. REL is part of the Reliance 
industries-India's private sector company ranked among the world's 175 largest companies in terms of net profit and the 500 largest 
companies in terms of sales. Reliance Energy and its affiliate companies power 2 out of 3 homes in Mumbai and 1 out of 2 in Delhi 
and has a consumer base of 5 million catering to an estimated population of 25 million in Mumbai, Delhi and Orissa.
 
Page  2
2
utility is the distribution concessionaire (REL purchases power from the State Electricity 
Board), and serves over 2.2 million customers in urban and suburban Mumbai.  REL is 
regulated by Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission and has an obligation to 
provide an electricity connection to all slum dwellers upon their request regardless of 
land tenure.  Thus, REL is responsible for all costs, including generation, transmission 
and distribution costs as well as the costs of providing the individual connections to 
metered points of service.  End users pay a regulated service connection charge which is 
meant to allow REL to recover its costs of providing individual connections. End users 
then have to pay licensed electricity contractors (LECs) to carry out wiring between the 
point of service and the house, and for internal wiring.  
 
Scope of the project is to make new electricity connections to slum dwellers in the city of 
Mumbai, India. It is estimated that a total of 27,500 connections (22,500 for new 
connections and 5,000 for regularized connection for the substandard service) will be 
taken up.  
 
The proposed project subsidizes the cost of connections from the point of service to the 
house and for internal wiring.  The cost of a new connection will be $213/connection, of 
which $110 will be incurred by REL as part of its upstream network investment and $103 
is borne by the end users. These upfront connection costs for the end users in the slum 
areas are typically greater than their monthly household income. According to the survey, 
32% of the targeted slum households earn up to $56 per month and 54% earn between 
$56 and $113.  Of the $103, it is proposed that on average GPOBA would be paying $56 
per household for a new connection and $47 for regularization.  
 
The project uses an innovative design to tie in all the key stakeholders. All stakeholders 
have to demonstrate performance before being paid.  Some key characteristics of the 
project design include: 
·
Implement community awareness programs run by REL jointly with Community 
Based Organizations (CBOs) and Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) to 
increase customer interest in the scheme.  
·
REL will provide a customer installment payment program whereby the 
connection costs (including utility fees and wiring) would be allowed to be paid in 
monthly installments recovered through the utility bill over a six month period.  
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis: 
The project activities will be located in the peri-urban areas of the city of Mumbai that 
two specific slum areas have been targeted: the East Division of Shivajinagar and the 
South Division of Golibar #3. Further parts of Shivajinagar with characteristics similar to 
those already surveyed have been identified as being part of the scheme. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Sanjay Srivastava, Sr. Environmental Sepcielist, SAES  
Ramachandran R. Mohan, Sr. Social Development Sepcialist, SAES 
 
Page  3
3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)   
x
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 x 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 x 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 x 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 x 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 x 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 x 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 x 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 x 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 x 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts: 
Social safeguards
:
During project development it has been confirmed that there will be 
no involuntary land acquisition nor there would be any access restrictions or loss of 
livelihoods due to project interventions.  Hence OP 4.12 is not triggered. Given the 
cosmopolitan urbanized nature of the population, OP 4.10 will not be triggered. The 
project recognizes the need for community involvement and acceptance.  Hence a well 
planned Information, Education and Communication (IEC) would be necessary to ensure 
that the slum dwellers clearly understand the project interventions and benefit from this 
opportunity.  CBOs and NGOs will be appointed to undertake IEC activities and mobilize 
the slum communities. They will need to assess and address potential conflicts that could 
undermine the benefits that the poor/vulnerable poor households could derive from the 
project. 
 
Environmental safeguards:
There are reportedly a number of cottage industries running 
within the slums, such as waste plastic palletizing units; thread weaving and dyeing; 
stitching and tailoring etc. Some of these cottage units operate in extremely confined 
space posing health and safety risks to inhabitants. At several locations there are free 
hanging live wires in the open through illegal connections, which the project will address 
as part of its objective to improve overall electrical safety by securing these connections 
and junctions. It is expected that the project would use consultation and communication 
tools to discourage residents from using the available electricity for non-domestic 
purposes within confined areas of slums. The project proponent would also capture for 
each slum (based on consultation with local communities) existing environmental 
baseline conditions,  inventory of hazardous operations within slum areas, and 
assessment of environment, health and safety risks due to prevalent unhygienic 
conditions of sanitation, sewage and garbage disposal. Thus, an environmental audit is 
suggested to be undertaken on the proposed slum locations, leading to develop an 
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan that could be implemented. 
 
Page  4
4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area: 
Many slums lanes (with width between 1-2 meters wide at most locations) would be dug 
up to put underground electrical cables. This may lead to huge disruption of slum 
dwellers, and would require to be addressed through a community driven environmental 
management plan.  
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts: 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. 
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures 
described: 
The client, REL, has developed strong procedures and systems for planning and 
implementation of environmental measures in its business operations. This systems and 
procedures have been applied by REL to its large operations such as power generating 
facility near Mumbai (BSES, Dhanua). However, it is not known if the same 
environmental management systems and procedures will be applied by the environmental 
team of REL for implementation of environmental mitigation measures. The project 
implementing agency which will include members of REL, contractors as well as NGO 
groups will have an agreement with local communities in implementation of mitigation 
measures and monitoring.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
Key stakeholders include slum dwellers as the project beneficiary end-users, REL as the 
main implementing agency, USAID as a main organizer of the community outreach and 
education programs, and CBOs and NGOs as the primary interface between the slum 
dwellers and the key project implementing partners.  
 
An environmental audit is proposed to be undertaken by REL at the proposed slum 
locations, leading to development an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan 
that would be implemented. The scope of the work for the audit would include but not 
limited to the following key aspects: 
 
·
Environment Baseline which includes a location map indicating slum site in relation 
to surrounding residential and industrial properties, sanitation and waste water 
disposal; drains and waste disposal; conservation areas; sources and quality of water 
supply; and state of submergence during rain and cases of flood, etc.   It also includes 
a
layout plan of all existing distribution lines as well as sub station sites; summary of 
the history of the slum site; summary of current commercial and industrial activities 
Page  5
5
at the site; organization chart indicating who will be responsible for environmental 
matters during and after the implementation.  
·
Records of environmental incidents and remedial actions, which relates to any 
environmental violations, pollution incidents (air, water, effluent, wastes, noise), 
flood, spills, smoke, and fugitive dust, etc.  It also includes detailed outcome of 
complaints if any (plus correspondence). 
·
Health and safety, which include past record of fires, emergency, fire drills and 
evacuation plans, and accident records and reports. 
·
Summary assessment of institutional capacity and adequacy of REL’s procedures to 
manage potential environmental risks at the proposed locations (e.g. emergency 
response, flood, electrical fire, oil spill containment, waste handling and disposal). 
·
Environmental management and monitoring plan.  
 
USAID would have primary responsibility for overall project coordination as well as 
implementation of the demand-side and socio-economic aspects to the project.  This 
would include mobilizing community-based groups to facilitate legalization of 
connections and reduction in theft, promotion of end-use energy efficiency measures, 
development and implementation of outreach and training programs that lead to efficient 
and safe use of electricity and discussions with key partners and government officials on 
policy implications for project implementation.  
 
CBOs and NGOs, together with REL, will conduct outreach sessions in the communities 
to inform slum dwellers about the project and its components.  Slum dwellers will be 
encouraged to participate and will be educated about the benefits of legalized electricity 
connections and upgraded wiring schemes. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
April 2007 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
April 2007 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
April 2007 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Page  6
6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [x]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
Not yet 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [ x ]          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [x ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [x  ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [x  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
Page  7
7
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [ x ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [x  ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [ x ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Page  8
8
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [x  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Yes and will be covered as part of 
the activities done by CBOs and 
NGOs funded by USAID  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Cledan Mandri-Perrott 
March 30, 2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Sanjay Srivastava 
April 3, 2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ramachandran R. Mohan 
April 4, 2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Erick Edmund Brusberg 
April 3, 2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Patricia Veevers-Carter 
April 5, 2007 
Comments:   
Page  9
9
