Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/18/2007 
Report No.:  AC3111
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P102547 
Project Name:  Elementary Education (SSA II) 
Task Team Leader:  Amit Dar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 9, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6,212.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 375.00
6,587.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
6. 
The project's development objective is to significantly increase the number of 6-
14 year old children, especially from special focus groups, enrolled, regularly attending 
and completing elementary education and demonstrating basic learning levels.   
 
3. Project Description 
SSA II is the second phase of the Development Partners (DPs) support to the 
Government's ongoing and evolving SSA program. SSA is a ten year Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) of GoI running from 2001 to 2010.  The project will finance 
State and District Annual Work Programs which support the above Project Development 
Objective.  The key thrust and categories of activities financed under SSA II include:  
 
Improving quality:  The thrust on quality in the second phase of the program is reflected 
broadly in the proposed quality enhancement framework with a clear focus on capacity 
building and ensuring basic learning skills. The framework has the following main 
pillars: ensuring basic provisioning to create enabling learning conditions for all children; 
capacity building and academic support to state and sub-state structures;  monitoring 
learning outcomes and research and evaluation of quality initiatives.  
Page  2
Universalizing access and promoting equity:  A combination of demand and supply side 
interventions are being financed to enable the hard to reach to attend school.  These 
include the establishment, construction and extension of primary and upper primary 
schools in districts where access is still an issue, and provision of teachers.  Demand-side 
interventions include provision of free textbooks, providing stipends for girls and SC/ST 
students, residential schools for girls where access and security issues persist and mid-
day meals (including through convergence with other programs outside of SSA).  
Financial subventions are also provided to private aided schools to encourage them to 
subsidize enrolment of students.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All India   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Samantha L. Forusz (SASDS) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASDN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01):  The environmental issues in this project relate 
to site location and planning(natural hazards, sensitive ecological regions, site drainage); 
building design and construction (sanitation facilities, and waste management, water 
supply); and maintenance during the operation period (site cleanliness and hygiene, 
prevention of enteric infections). An Environment Assessment has been carried out by 
the client and issues and processes identified.  
 
Involuntary  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12):  Involuntary resettlement would not occur as 
the Borrower will utilize only government or panchayt (community) owned or donated 
Page  3
land for construction of educational buildings.  The SSA program will not fund 
construction on any land for which the title is not clear.  
 
Indigenous Peoples: (OP/BP 4.10):  A Tribal Development Plan has been prepared 
within the SSA Framework to ensure equitable educational benefits to tribal children.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No large scale significant and /or irreversible impact is anticipated in this project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
OP/BP 4.01: Environmental Assessment: The GOI has prepared an EA Report, which 
identifies the probable environmental issues in the SSA; it describes the manuals, 
directives and guidelines, which have been prepared and shared with all the states to 
address the environmental issues; and the arrangements of implementing and monitoring 
to ensure that the environmental issues are mainstreamed in the planning and 
implementation of the program.  In order to improve environmental management 
practices, under SSA II, several new risk mitigation measures have been proposed, 
including: (a) all States will prepare campus maps for the new schools/classrooms to be 
built to ensure planned expansion of schools/classrooms; (b) use of cost-effective 
construction technologies will be emphasised through national quarterly reviews and 
workshops and through specific instructions to States; (c) sanitation and cleanliness will 
be improved with all SSA schools having water supply and separate toilets for girls by 
2010, and MHRD will initiate a dialogue with Department of Drinking Water Supply 
address concerns about lack of potability tests of drinking water in schools; (d) to build 
staff capacity on environmental management, beginning 2007-8 all States will modify 
engineers' training programs to include environmental issues and safeguard mechanisms.  
 
Other specific strategies include incorporation of environmental parameters in appraisal 
of annual work plans, in annual review of program implementation, and in the joint 
review missions. Independent third-party evaluations of civil works in SSA will be 
conducted across several states to examine the implementation of the environmental 
management measures.  In addition, internal environmental audits will be undertaken. 
The audits will be conducted by special team constituted out of existing lot of engineers 
within the State, and will assess the environmental condition of schools and the 
implementation of risk mitigation measures.  All States and UTs will be covered in a 
three-year cycle. A major objective of this audit is to help the State technical teams to 
learn about environmental issues and environmental mitigation measures through self-
evaluation.  
 
Page  4
OP/BP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement. Participatory and transparent processes will 
continue to be followed to obtain land for construction of educational structures both in 
rural and urban areas. Normal government procedures will continue to be followed for 
documentation of transfer of government/panchayat-owned and donated land.  In some 
states the records would be available at the Tehsil Office, while in others they are 
maintained by the village Patwari (Accountant).  The documentation would be accessible 
to JRMs to ascertain that no displacement (loss of residence or livelihood) has taken 
place in obtaining the land. The processes of obtaining land and transfer of ownership 
would be covered in the planned third party evaluation of civil works.  All sites for 
construction are expected to fall in the above categories. Land will not be purchased nor 
will land be acquired under the Land Acquisition Act.  SSA would not fund construction 
on any land for which clear title is not already available.  
 
OP/BP 4.10: Indigenous People.  A Tribal Development Plan (TDP) has been prepared. 
In view of SSA's framework approach, the TDP aims to ensure that (i) ST children are a 
focus of the district plans and their appraisal; (ii) a wide range of interventions is 
available in the program for districts to adopt to provide benefits to tribal children, i.e., to 
enhance their school enrolment, retention, and learning outcomes; (iii) ST representatives 
participate in all educational structures and processes, formal and informal; and (iv) key 
monitoring indicators and processes measure the results being achieved for tribal 
children.  While the overall SSA strategy will continue to be in the same direction as in 
SSA I with regard to social equity, 74 districts with high tribal concentration have been 
identified for focused and targeted intervention and 52 districts identified by Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs are being targeted for focused attention on the tribal girl's education, 
infrastructure, and convergence with Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 13% of the total outlay 
provided under SSA is focused on 106 tribal focus districts in the year 2007-08.  The 
Results Framework for SSAII provides for monitoring of Special Focus Groups, 
including tribal children. For each of the KPIs, the progress will be tracked on a 
disaggregated basis for each of the special focus groups. While in SSA I, the Results 
Framework focused on access and enrolment, in SSA II, this has broadened to include, 
transition, attendance and learning levels for each focus group.  
 
Consultative Process of Planning: SSA utilizes a bottom-up approach of planning 
instead of a top-down approach, as it reflects the reality at the grassroots level.  District 
plans are developed with incorporation of information from the   habitation plans, on the 
basis of these findings as well as on secondary data. Every District Elementary Education 
Plan (DEEP) and Annual Work Plan is expected to articulate clearly the district?s 
strategy and approach to tribal education and adopt specific programs and interventions 
to translate the strategy into action. It provides disaggregated data on tribal demography 
and education, spells out the educational problems of ST children, the interventions, 
quality improvement efforts, and convergence with programs of NGOs and other 
Government departments such as the Tribal Department etc. The assessment of problems 
related to the education of tribal children is made through household surveys and micro 
planning exercises.  
 
Page  5
Grievance Redressal Mechanism. Systemic provisions are in place for redressal of 
grievances. States have their own specific institutional mechanisms established at all 
administrative levels. A statutory body, the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes 
has been established with a mandate interalia, to investigate and monitor all matters 
relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes under the Constitution or 
under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and 
to evaluate the working of such safeguards.  It also, inquires into specific complaints with 
respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Tribes. The National 
Commission for Scheduled Tribes   has six regional offices covering all the States and 
Union Territories. The Collector or the District Magistrate heads the District Level 
Implementation Society for SSA and is responsible for addressing local grievances.  At 
the level of the community, the village and ward based bodies (village education 
committees and ward education committees) responsible for addressing grievances.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In SSA, community consultation is an integral part of the program. The planning 
approach is bottom-up, where communities and local level institutions including the 
village education committees are involved in identification, planning, design, 
implementation, operation and maintenance of the schools and all other program 
activities.  Consultations with schoolteachers, experts, NGOs and other stakeholders will 
continue throughout the implementation period. The GOI has a program-specific website 
for SSA (www.ssa.nic.in), wherein important aspects of the program are disclosed for 
dissemination.  
 
The project documents, including the EA and the TDP are being disclosed at this 
website.  In addition, the documents are being disclosed in project offices in all states and 
comments are being solicited from the community.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/14/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2007 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amit Dar 
09/17/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Tapas Paul 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Samantha L. Forusz 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/18/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
 
Comments:   
