Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:39840 
Date ISDS Prepared: May 9, 2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P104961 
Project Name: India Energy Efficiency at 
SME Steel Forging Cluster 
Task Team Leader: Jeremy Levin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 09/28/07 
Estimated ERPA Signature Date: 01/04/08     
Managing Unit: SASSD 
Lending Instrument: CN-Carbon Offset 
Sector:  Other Industry (100%)  
Theme:  Climate Change (P), Other 
Environment and Natural Resources Mgt (S)  
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Sanjay Srivastava 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  NA 
Other financing amounts by source:   
Carbon Finance Upfront Payment 
Owner Equity 
Domestic Loan   
 
$.1m 
$5.8m 
$11.0m 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The proposed development objectives of the Carbon Offset Project are: 
 

Reduce energy intensity in the identified steel forging cluster in Punjab 

Reduce global emissions of carbon dioxide.  
 
The implementation of the Carbon Offset Project will provide the following additional benefits: 
improving the profitability and competitiveness of the SME units engaged in steel forging in the 
Punjab and reduce the local environmental impacts of fossil fuel consumption. The project will 
also demonstrate the use of a cluster-based mechanism to access CDM revenues, a mechanism 
which has high potential for replication within the other 400 SME clusters in India  
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The project consists of purchase of emission reductions generated from implementation of 
energy efficiency investments at the 310 SME units in the identified cluster in Punjab.  The 
technical interventions may include optimization of furnace combustion efficiencies, installation 
of recuperators, improved insulation, improved control systems, waste heat recovery, motor and 
pump system replacement and optimization, and other measures which shall be identified after 
the completion of investment grade energy audits. 
 
Page  2
This project falls under the small-scale CDM project activity with total electricity generation 
within the limit of 60 GWh. The project will lead to reduced GHG emissions by: 

Reduction of fuel oil use 

Reduction of coal use 

Reduced demand for electricity 
 
The project will be implemented by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) formed for this transaction.  
The SPV shall: Coordinate outreach and mobilization efforts within the cluster; Coordinate 
collection of baseline data and initiation of energy audits at participating units; Coordinate and 
oversee the work of various project stakeholders on preparation of CFD, PDD and other project 
related work, and will act as an interface between stakeholders and participating units; Secure 
financing for the bundled investment in efficiency and sign the emission reduction purchase 
agreement with the World Bank on behalf of the units; Have overall responsibility for 
implementation & management of the CDM project including collection of data and submission 
of annual Emission Reduction Reports; and distribute Carbon Finance revenues to the 
participating units as agreed 
 
The participating units of the SPV would sign a back to back agreement with the SPV on the 
project implementation, sale of CERs and will undertake the energy efficiency improvement 
interventions in their units leading to GHG reductions.  Provision of financing to the SPV itself 
on a project finance basis, partially securitized by the future carbon finance revenues, is an 
innovative financial structure which will be explored during project preparation.  
 
D.  Project location 
 
The project location is an industrial cluster, located in the city of Ludhiana in the state of Punjab 
and is about 250 km north of Delhi. The cluster has about 300 units in the secondary steel sector 
that are engaged in the production of hand tools, auto component, and general forging 
applications.  There are also 10 free forging units involved in manufacture of rolls for steel re 
rolling mills and allied products.  These SME steel units engage in re-rolling, forging, foundry 
and arc furnace melting at energy intensities which are much higher than they could be with the 
adoption of cost-effective energy efficient technologies. 
 
E.  Borrower뭩 Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The project will be implemented by the Ludhiana Hand Tools & Forging Envirocare Private 
Limited, a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) formed for this transaction.  The SPV would represent 
the participating SME Steel Forging units and act as a single coordination point for all the project 
stakeholders and bundler of CERs on behalf of the participating SME steel forging units. 
However, the capacity of the borrower (SPV) may be limited particularly due to lack of 
experience, particularly with respect to management of environmental safeguard issues, which 
would be evaluated during the proposed environmental audit of a sample of steel forging units. 
The SPV will leverage the capacity of individual forging units drawing from their lessons of 
addressing compliance with applicable environmental regulations. The Environmental 
Management Plan will include measures to improve institutional capacity for implementing 
Page  3
environmental mitigation measures; monitoring and reporting on key environmental performance 
indicators.  
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[x] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD  
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Yes ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The energy efficiency measures at individual steel forging unit is likely to bring 
environmental benefits and is unlikely to cause adverse environmental impact. 
The payment of Carbon Finance revenues based upon actual realized annual 
savings provides a strong incentive for proper maintenance and upkeep of the new 
equipment, which will also likely improve environmental performance in future. 
However, environmental concerns could possibly arise from the current 
environmental management practices and past record of environmental non-
compliance, if any, including potential environmental liability associated with 
water and air pollution; noise levels in the neighborhood; and disposal of solid 
and hazardous waste.  
[
No] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[No ] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[
No] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[TBD] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
Some of the activities focusing on locally sustainable development may be in 
areas where indigenous peoples may be affected.  
[No] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[No ] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
TBD] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
Project activities may affect cultural properties, though none are currently known 
to exist close to the cluster.  
[
No] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
No] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
The team proposes to commission environmental audit to assess the baseline environmental 
performance. The audit would cover 
7
percent or 20 units
 out of a total 300 die forging and free 
forging units in Ludhiana, Punjab, which would lead to development of an Environmental 
Management and Monitoring Plan for the entire steel forging cluster in Punjab
.
More 
specifically, the audit will include review of environmental aspects and evaluation of 
implementation of mitigation measures based on assessment of production process to identify 
losses; evaluation of the level of compliance with the applicable national and state regulations; 
identify potential (both actual and perceived) environmental and social risks and liabilities and 
define relevant interventions needed to mitigate them. The target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS is September 2007. 
 
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jeremy Levin 
May 9, 2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Brusberg 
May 15, 2007 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Kseniya Lvovsky 
May 16, 2007 
Comments 
