Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2160 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/28/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P099857 
Project Name: Jammu & Kashmir Participatory Watershed Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Daniel M. Sellen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 2, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 6, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
10.00
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed Participatory Watershed Management Project 
(PWMP) is to improve the productive potential of natural resources and increase incomes of the 
rural households in selected watersheds in Jammu & Kashmir using socially inclusive, 
institutionally and environmentally sustainable approaches. A secondary objective is to support 
policy and institutional development in J&K to harmonize watershed development projects and 
programs across the state in accordance with best practices.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This Project is a follow-on from the Integrated Watershed Development Project (IWDP) -- a 
five-state project that included Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, and 
Haryana. IWDP closed in September 30, 2005 with consistent ratings of success in terms of its 
development objective and implementation progress. As a repeater project, the PWMP will 
resemble closely the objectives and components of IWDP, i.e. a focus on protection of 
watersheds, along with community-level capacity-building and promotion of livelihoods. Project 
components are as follows:  
 
Page  2
a. 
Institutional Strengthening: This component would support capacity-building at several 
levels, including communities, PRIs, and state-level agencies. The principal activity at the local 
level would be social mobilization, i.e. training for participatory watershed planning at the 
village level along with establishment and training of watershed development committees.  
 
b. 
Watershed Protection and Development: This component would finance watershed 
treatments (sub-projects) as identified and prioritized through participatory appraisal techniques 
arising from the first component. Communities (or constituent resource user groups) would be 
required to contribute to the costs of each sub-project and be responsible to operate and maintain 
the investments.  The main thrust of this component will not only be on resource protection and 
utilization but on resource regeneration. Agricultural and livestock activities, as well as a small 
number of rural infrastructure activities, will also be included. The following sub-components 
are proposed:  
 
•
Non-arable land development: This includes catchment treatment (soil and water 
conservation works); biological works such as plantations; and water harvesting works.  
 
•
Arable land development: including agricultural land development, crop demonstrations, 
integrated pest management, and organic farming.  
 
•
Forage and livestock development: covering fodder augmentation, development and 
conservation programs; livestock management improvement; genetic upgrading; institutional and 
veterinary treatment, primarily through para-vets.  
 
•
Rural infrastructure: covering short lengths of rural roads, footpaths, and foot bridges, as 
well as potable water supply.  
 
c. 
Enhancing Livelihood Opportunities:  This component would finance investment and 
training aimed at making farming systems more lucrative and supporting income-generating 
activities, primarily related to increased value-added in natural resource use from forested and 
cultivated lands. The following sub-components are proposed:  
 
•
Agricultural marketing and processing: would co-finance sub-projects aimed 
atintroducing cost-effective pre- and post-harvest technologies and supply-chain development for 
promising farm commodities (crops, livestock) as well as non-timber forest products such as 
medicinal plants.  
 
•
Income-generation for vulnerable groups: would finance micro-enterprises for particular 
groups (women, landless, and nomadic tribal groups) who would normally not benefit from 
(land-based) watershed development activities. Tribal action plans would assist nomads in 
defining special development activities.  
 
d. 
Project Coordination: This component will finance staff training, consultancies, vehicles, 
and office infrastructure. It will continue a management information system with GIS capacity. 
The Project Coordination Unit will cover oversight over implementation of the environmental 
and social management framework. This component would also finance a communications 
strategy to increase awareness of the goals, modalities, and accomplishments of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The project will be carried out in the Jammu area, Kashmir valley, and possibly parts of the 
Leh/Kargil region. The Project team is currently in the process of identifying the sub-watersheds 
that will be the focus of this Project. Selection criteria will be weighted on degradation of the 
area (30%); poverty indicators (40%); and access to public and economic services (30%). Some 
priority areas may be ruled out due to security concerns.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The staff members of the J&K project coordination unit are highly experienced with Bank 
projects, and most are expected to be retained for the new project. The vast majority of micro-
project investments in IWDP were clearly environmentally-friendly (e.g. soil and water 
conservation, IPM) and many were targeted specifically at vulnerable groups (e.g. women and 
tribals). However, the application of safeguards in IWDP was somewhat haphazard. The 
proposed ESMF is expected to make safeguard application more systematic.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASES) 
Ms Mridula Singh (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project will use an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to ensure compliance with Bank safeguards.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Project sites may include communities living near protected areas   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Most of the State is forested, and much of the proposed project area will involve 
communities that rely on forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project will directly or indirectly promote more intensive and diversified agriculture, 
which will require a Pest Management Plan. As in IWDP, integrated pest management, organic 
farming and natural pesticides will be promoted.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project area includes nomadic groups such as the Gaddis and Gujjars, and tribal action 
plans will be required to ensure that these groups are able to benefit from the proposed Project. A 
Tribal and Transhumant Strategy will be developed as part of project preparation and included in 
the ESMF.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
Although there are disputed areas in the State, none will be involved in the Project.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/30/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Terms of Reference for the ESMF will be completed with SASES approval and ESMF 
will be completed by September 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel M. Sellen 
03/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
03/09/2006 
Comments:  cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
