Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2550
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P090768 
Project Name:  Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water Resources 
Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Srinivasan Raj Rajagopal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 14, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 25, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (60%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (20%);Sub-national government administration (10%);Crops (5%);Animal 
production (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is to increase productivity of irrigated 
agriculture in selected sub-basins of Tamil Nadu in an integrated water resources 
management framework.  
 
In support of this objective, the project would support investments in (i) improving 
irrigation service delivery including adaptation of modern water-saving irrigation 
technologies and agricultural practices, (ii) agricultural intensification and diversification, 
(iii) enhancing market access and agri-business opportunities; and (iv) in strengthening 
institutions and instruments dealing with water resources management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The above objective is to be achieved through investments as described below for (i) 
modernizing irrigation infrastructure (including main systems rehabilitation, adoption of 
improved on-farm irrigation technologies, piloting innovative irrigation infrastructure 
Page  2
development and management options, technical and managerial upgrading of institutions 
involved in irrigation development, formation and operation of water users? associations 
(WUAs), operation and management of irrigation infrastructure in association with such 
WUAs); (ii)  intensification and diversification of agriculture with appropriate extension 
measures, research and market linkages, accelerating horticulture development, 
improving livelihoods through improvements in animal nutrition through provision of 
irrigated fodder and associated breed improvement and veterinary healthcare, fisheries 
development in the various tanks associated with irrigation and also in farm ponds to be 
demonstrated through the project, promoting public-private partnerships; (iii) 
strengthening the institutions involved in irrigation developments as well as associated 
agriculture and allied activities, developing kiosks and assisting the WUAs with modern 
communication facilities both to receive information from the line agencies and other 
service providers and to facilitate interchange of information amongst WUAs through 
development of websites for each WUA; (iv) re-orienting  and strengthening institutions 
and instruments required for effective integrated water resources management in the State 
(including unbundling resource management from service delivery institutions, 
strengthening and expansion of Basin Development and Management Boards; and (v) 
assistance in the coordinated implementation of this multi-disciplinary project   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is proposed in the State of Tamil Nadu in South-eastern India, which is home 
to about 70 million people.  The State is generally water-stressed as rising demands from 
multiple sectors compete for scarce surface and ground water supplies.  Pollution from 
industry, domestic (including sewage and solid wastes), and agricultural sources also 
threaten these supplies.  The capacity-building activities (e.g. related to irrigated 
agriculture and water resources management) would be state-wide.  The physical 
investments would focus on about 65 sub-basins spread in about 16 major sub-basin 
groups in the State (except the disputed Cauvery Basin where a tribunal award expected 
soon).   Irrigation in many of the sub-basins are dominated by interaction with tank 
systems (which are traditional water bodies), many of which need rehabilitation and 
modernization (e.g. related to supply channels, tank bunds, sluices, distribution channels, 
waste weirs, siltation, productivity in command areas, on-farm development, etc.).  In 
addition, the rest of the irrigation system also needs considerable attention to improve 
irrigated agriculture productivity, achievable in partnerships with other departments.  
 
The irrigation and tank systems are intricately inter-connected and need to be examined 
in a sub-basin context.  The needs and opportunities in each sub-basin are unique and 
sub-basin development and management plans need to be evolved in a customized 
manner.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao (SASES) 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Given that the project physical investments are intended to modernize existing assets, 
there are not anticipated to be any major adverse impacts associated with the proposed 
IAMWARM project.  However, an integrated Environmental and Social Assessment 
(ESA) with an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been developed 
to both manage risks and maximize environmental and social opportunities.  The project 
could have induced impacts of increased fertilizer and pesticide use associated with 
agricultural intensification and diversification.  Safety of tank systems needs to be 
ensured.  Some tank systems could have cultural property (e.g. places of worship) on the 
tank bunds that could be impacted during rehabilitation.  Although not envisaged on any 
large-scale, there is the potential for localized resettlement and rehabilitation 
requirements associated with improvement of existing irrigated agriculture structures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As indicated above, the use of agrochemicals may be indirectly enhanced under the 
project for which strong support is being provided for extension and training associated 
with IPM/INM.  It is anticipated that the support for water-user associations would help 
improve farmer participation in irrigated agriculture decision-making.  It is also expected 
that an improved environmental and social knowledge base throughout the state and 
environmental awareness programs in the selected sub-basins would be supported to 
improve long-term stakeholder involvement   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project alternatives to minimize adverse impacts (and reasons for rejection) include:  
 
&#61607; 
No Project Scenario:  This was rejected as inaction is not the answer to the 
significant irrigated agriculture and water resources management concerns in the State.  
Page  4
&#61607; 
Very Small Pilots:  This was rejected as sufficient work has been done in 
the past to determine the types of interventions needed, and to have confidence in the 
State?s ability to implement a large-scale distributed project such as IAMWARM.  
 
&#61607; 
Focus on New Investments:  This was rejected as many of the systems in 
the State have been fully developed and the key issue is the optimization and sustainable 
management of existing irrigated agriculture assets.  
 
&#61607; 
No consideration of Water Resources Management:  This was rejected as 
the investments proposed need to be considered in a basin/sub-basin framework, and 
modern water resources management is essential to improve irrigated agriculture 
productivity and help manage the resource base for competing uses and future 
generations.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has already set up Environmental Cells in the WRO under a prior project.  
These will be strengthened and broadened in scope with the inclusion of suitably 
qualified and trained Social Development Specialists to ensure adequate focus on a range 
of social issues identified in the ESA.  The project proposes to support significant 
Integrated Pest Management and Integrated Plant Nutrient Management demonstrations 
and training to promote more sustainable practices in the selected sub-basins.  Organic 
farming and the use of water-saving technologies and practices (e.g. drip/sprinkler, SRI 
techniques, farm pond use, etc.) will also be supported through this project.  Adequate 
care will be taken during planning and implementation of tank projects to ensure that any 
cultural property (e.g. places of worship on tank bunds) are adequately taken care of 
during rehabilitation.  Involuntary resettlement is not expected, but will be examined in 
the case of every sub-basin as the modernization needs are identified ? a resettlement 
action framework has been developed as part of the ESA. A Land Acquisition, Economic 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement and Rehabilitation Cell would  be established at the 
MDPU level to address these issues if and when they emerge.  The ESA did not identify 
indegenous communities in the project areas; however, in the unlikely event such 
communities may be found during implementation, necessary IPDPs will be prepared and 
implemented in accordance with bank policy. Dam saafety aspects/safety of water 
retention tank bunds will be  addressed through engineering supervision in accordance 
with the requirements of the Dam safety Policy.A process to ensure environmental and 
social appraisal of all sub-basin plans is being instituted in the Multi-Disciplinary Project 
Unit (MDPU) set up to coordinate project implementation.  Significant training on 
relevant environmental and social issues is anticipated under the project.  Building of 
social capital through water user associations (WUA) formation and capacity-building 
should also help improve stakeholder participation in decision-making in irrigated 
agriculture.  Similarly, basin committees at the sub-basin level, and support for basin 
boards at basin level are expected to help improve stakeholder participation in water 
resources management. Equally important would be training programs to ensure 
enhancement of WRO and allied line department capacity to work effectively in 
partnership with farmers and their WUAs.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the proposed IAMWARM project include:  
 
&#61607; 
Government Agencies:  This includes government departments involved 
with irrigated agriculture and water resources management (including the Water 
Resources Department, Agriculture Department, Horticulture Department, Agricultural 
Engineering Department, Agricultural Marketing Department, Animal Husbandry 
Department, Fisheries Department, etc.).  The District administration is also involved in 
overseeing project implementation.  
 
&#61607; 
Farmers:  This includes farmers in selected sub-basins of the State and 
their Water User Associations  
 
&#61607; 
Other Partners:  This includes academia (the Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University is one of the implementing agencies for the project, and the Water Resources 
Research Fund seeks to continue provision of resources for water partnerships with 
academia, private sector, and NGOs), Agriculture Technology Management Agencies 
(ATMAs) etc..  NGOs are also proposed to be involved in assisting the WRO in the 
formation and strengthening of the Water User Associations.  Other private-public 
partnerships to improve water productivity would also be explored during 
implementation.  The improved knowledge base and outreach efforts are also intended to 
improve awareness of water issues, and associated environmental, social and economic 
issues, in the general public.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/03/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Pest Mgmt and Cultural Property plans integrated into the disclosed Environmental and 
Social Management Framework.   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Srinivasan Raj Rajagopal 
11/01/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao 
11/01/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Shankar Narayanan 
11/01/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
11/13/2006 
Comments:   
