Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/11/2007 
Report No.:  AC2987
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P102768 
Project Name:  Strengthening India's Rural Credit Cooperatives 
Task Team Leader:  Priya Basu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Banking (50%);Agricultural marketing and trade (25%);General finance sector 
(25%) 
Theme:  State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Corporate governance 
(P);Standards and financial reporting (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural non-
farm income generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will help provide marginal and small farmers (the poorest groups in rural 
India) with significantly enhanced access to formal finance (credit, savings, etc.), while 
reducing dependence on usurious moneylenders; this will be achieved by ensuring that 
the potentially viable CCBs in the participating states (PS) are transformed into efficient 
and commercially sustainable institutions. The project supports the Government of India 
Program to reform and revitalize the rural credit cooperative structure.   
 
3. Project Description 
The total cost of the Government of India reform package (at the all-India level) has been 
estimated by GoI at Rs. 13,596 crore (a little over US$3 billion).  The costs will be shared 
by the Central Government (estimated at 68 percent), state governments (estimated at 28 
percent) and the CCS (estimated at 4 percent). The Central Government (GoI) will 
provide its share (a little over US$2 billion) as grants, while the states will meet their 
share from their budget or through open market borrowing. Bank-financing through the 
proposed project would be used to fund a part of GoI?s contribution.  
 
Page  2
The Bank?s funds are expected to flow to the following ?participating states? (PS), all 
of which have signed MoUs with GoI and NABARD: Gujarat, Haryana, Orissa, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh (and possibly, Bihar). The total cost of the reform package 
in the five PS is estimated at US$1.265 billion; the central government (GoI) will fund 
US$860 billion, while the state governments and CCBs will cover the rest. Release of 
funds by the state governments (and CCBs) will be a condition for GoI?s funds to be 
released. The Bank?s resources will fund 70% of GoI?s total contribution to the reform 
package in each of the five states.  
 
Over time, more states could be added to the list of PS, depending upon how the 
program evolves. Additional Financing (as per the Bank?s Revised Guidelines on 
Additional Financing for Investment Lending, June, 2005) from the Bank could be 
considered to support the subsequent scaling up of the project?s development impact, 
provided results achieved under the project meet the criteria for Additional Financing.  
 
Consistent with the key elements of GoI?s reform package, the proposed project has the 
following components:  
 
Component I: Capacity building Technical Assistance (TA) (Bank financing: US$ 20 
mn): This component (corresponding to the human resources development (HRD) 
initiative under GoI?s package) will aim to build up the capabilities of CCBs in all three 
tiers to strengthen their ability to comply with the new legal, regulatory and supervisory 
framework, improve performance, and achieve longer term financial sustainability.  The 
focus will be on capacity building: (a) of the Boards, management and staff of CCBs in 
the following areas: understanding the new legal and regulatory framework and 
governance codes; improved performance tracking and reporting; implementation of a 
new and enhanced common accounting system (CAS), management information system 
(MIS), internal controls, and audit mechanisms; enhanced credit appraisal and risk 
management; business diversification and product development; and HR development; 
(b) to support more effective networking among PACS; and (c) through ?member 
education?, focused on marginal and small farmers who are members of PACS; the latter 
will involve developing and implementing a strategy, focusing on such areas as financial 
literacy, and better awareness of rights and responsibilities, among PACS? members, as 
well as strengthened capacity for self-monitoring.  
 
Assistance will be delivered through a combination of tools, including the provision of 
conventional training programs; training-of-trainers; hands-on, on-the-job training and 
short-term and medium-term advisory services provided by experts; and study 
visits/exposure programs. The conventional training programs would be delivered 
primarily by existing National, Regional, and State Institutes of Cooperative Management 
and sub-state Junior Training Centers  identified by NABARD, which would receive 
capacity building assistance, including training of their faculty to design and deliver basic 
training modules for the CCBs in accounting, auditing, governance, HR management, 
MIS, and members duties and rights, etc. At the level of DCCBs and PACS, on-the-job 
training and advisory services will be provided primarily by a cadre of ?mobile 
trainers/consultants/auditors?. In addition, on-the-job training and advisory services at the 
level of SCBs as needed would be provided by advisors, attached to the SCBs; the 
Page  3
consulting resources would be mainly national, although some presence of international 
expertise may be required, at least on a short-term basis.  
 
Component II: Information technology (IT) (Bank financing: US$ 80 mn): This 
component (corresponding to the computerization initiative under GoI?s package) will 
support the computerization of CCBs within each of the five PS (in a manner that is 
compatible across states), to enhance the efficiency and transparency of the CCS through 
enabling the efficient implementation of the new common accounting system and 
management information system (MIS), and fostering cost efficiencies through 
facilitating the pooling of costs related to back office transactions. The component will 
finance: (a) acquisition of  applications software and its ongoing maintenance and 
enhancement; (b) acquisition of hardware; (c) roll-out services, including data entry of 
the initial database; and (d) users training, provided through conventional training 
programs as well as on-the-job training and advisory services, which, would be provided 
by a cadre of ?mobile trainers/consultants?.  
 
Component III: CCS Financial Restructuring Support (FRS) (Bank Financing: US$ 490 
mn): This component (corresponding to the recapitalization initiative under GoI?s 
package) will support the financial restructuring of potentially viable CCBs by providing 
one-time recapitalization as a grant (not equity) to wipe out accumulated losses, restore 
the value of members? capital in the CCBs, and bring these institutions to a minimum 
capital to risk weighted assets ratio (CRAR) of 7 percent in the first year, which would 
need to increase, within three years of the year of funding, to 9 percent for the PACS and 
to RBI-stipulated ratios for the DCCBs and SCBs.  
 
Prior to any funds flowing under this component, the concerned state governments 
would need to promulgate an ordinance to amend the Cooperative Societies Act that puts 
into effect a set of governance and institutional reforms for the CCBs. The FRS will be 
implemented so that eligible PACS will be the first among the three tiers to be 
recapitalized, since restructuring intermediate (DCCBs) and upper (SCBs) tiers without 
addressing the problems of the lowest tier is impractical. To ensure prudent use of public 
resources, only CCBs that meet the defined eligibility criteria would receive FRS. The 
minimum eligibility criterion for PACS to receive FRS is a recovery rate of at least 30 
percent as on June 30, 2004. Furthermore, PACS must sign up to ?development action 
plans? (DAPs), which commit them to key performance improvements over a three-year 
period. However, not all eligible PACS in a state will receive FRS at the same time; 
eligible PACS will receive one-time recapitalization on a district-wise basis. A set of 
additional criteria will be established by the SLICs to determine the sequence in which 
districts within any state are selected.  
 
Once all eligible PACS in a district have been recapitalized to the required level, the 
DCCB will receive FRS.  The FRS to DCCBs will also be conditional and released on the 
implementation of key governance reforms, including: reconstitution of Boards through 
the induction of professionals meeting the fit and proper criteria as may be stipulated by 
RBI; appointment of professional CEOs satisfying the qualifications as may be 
prescribed by RBI; etc. The SCB will be the last to receive FRS (see Annex 4).  
 
Component IV: Implementation (Bank Financing: US$ 10 mn): This component 
(corresponding to the implementation support envisaged under GoI?s package) will cover 
the following areas: (a) overall capacity building for project implementation; (b) support 
for ensuring effective project monitoring; and (c) support for the preparation and 
Page  4
implementation of a detailed strategy and action plan for enhanced communications, 
covering improved disclosure and accountability mechanisms at all levels (central, state, 
district and village/grassroots levels).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
N/A   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
Mr Kirtan Chandra Sahoo (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The activities envisaged in the project and the investments (recapitalization of CCS) 
supported by the project are not likely to cause any significant adverse environmental 
impacts directly. Bank's lending would help the GoI revive the CCS system, which in 
turn is expected to improve access to finance for the rural population (particularly small 
and marginal farmers). Review of available information shows that the average size of 
individual agricultural loans availed by the farmers through the PACS are in the range of   
US$ 130 ? US$ 160, and that such loans are usually used for agricultural purposes, which 
include among others ploughing and preparing land for sowing, weeding, transplantation 
where necessary, acquiring and applying inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, etc., and labor 
for all operations in the fields for raising and harvesting the crops (Source: NABARD). 
The scale of activities supported by such small individual loans is not expected to lead to 
any significant environmental risks, particularly because the project area is too wide 
(spread across the country). The project is therefore likely to have minimal or no adverse 
environmental impacts.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The activities envisaged in the project and the investments (recapitalization of CCS) 
supported by the project are not likely to cause any significant adverse environmental 
impacts directly. Bank's lending would help the GoI revive the CCS system, which in 
turn is expected to improve access to finance for the rural population (particularly small 
and marginal farmers). Review of available information shows that the average size of 
individual agricultural loans availed by the farmers through the PACS are in the range of   
US$ 130 ? US$ 160, and that such loans are usually used for agricultural purposes, which 
include among others ploughing and preparing land for sowing, weeding, transplantation 
where necessary, acquiring and applying inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, etc., and labor 
for all operations in the fields for raising and harvesting the crops (Source: NABARD). 
The scale of activities supported by such small individual loans is not expected to lead to 
any significant environmental risks, particularly because the project area is too wide 
(spread across the country). The project is therefore likely to have minimal or no adverse 
environmental impacts.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Page  6
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Priya Basu 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Kirtan Chandra Sahoo 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Shankar Narayanan 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
 
Comments:   
