Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/11/2007 
Report No.:  AC2907
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P090764 
Project Name:  Bihar Rural Livelihoods Development "Jeevika" Project 
Task Team Leader:  Parmesh Shah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Other social services 
(20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (10%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Participation 
and civic engagement (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
63.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to enhance social and economic empowerment of the rural poor 
in Bihar  
 
Key performance indicators are:  
 
?
Self managed  community institutions established for a   majority of participant 
households  
 
?
Increase in income for project participant households  
 
?
Increase in  food security  for project participant households   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed operation would finance a five year project.  The project?s four main 
components are:  
 
Component I:  Community Institution Development (US$ 11 million):  This component 
is the core investment of the project and would be implemented in a phased manner.  The 
first phase will involve strengthening and building vibrant and self managed primary 
institutions of the poor including Self Help Groups (SHGs) based on internal thrift and 
Page  2
revolution of savings.  During the second phase, the primary level SHGs will be federated 
at the village level to form village organizations (VOs), which will be provided project 
investments for various activities through a participatory micro planning process.  The 
third phase would involve supporting federation of VOs to aggregate as higher level apex 
federated community organizations at the block or cluster level for taking up livelihood 
enhancement and income generating activities and develop linkages with market 
institutions. This component will facilitate empowering community organizations to 
develop direct linkages with financial service providers including commercial banks.  
The communities will also be provided skills and tools to develop social accountability 
mechanisms to enable transparency and good governance of the institutions of the poor 
and build effective service delivery partnerships with local government.  The component 
will also facilitate better village-level communication strategies on issues affecting social 
and economic activities of interest to the rural poor.  
 
Component II:  Community Investment Fund (US$ 42 million): The Community 
Investment Fund (CIF) is designed to transfer financial and technical resources to the 
CBOs on a demand driven basis through a participatory micro planning process for use as 
a
catalyst to improve their livelihoods and build their institutions. Some of the key 
elements that could be supported using the CIF funds are for a) income generation and 
livelihood improvements; b) addressing food security needs ; c) promoting skill 
development to increase employment and employability of the rural poor households, 
including rural youths and d) investing in limited productive community-level 
infrastructure facilities. (Annex ? 4 for details). In addition, at least 10% of the CIF can 
be used by the Community to pilot-test a) social risk management interventions in areas 
like health and disability ; and b) alternate public service delivery models in cooperation 
with service providers and local governments. These resources would be transferred to 
village organizations as a grant. The VO is expected to use this resource as revolving 
fund to finance various self-help groups in the village based on the micro planning 
process. The VO will be free to fix terms and conditions under which the resource will be 
lent to SHGs. This revolved fund, combined with the savings of self help groups is 
expected to multiply the project funds by two to three times, thus increasing overall credit 
availability for the self help groups.  The experiences gained by community institutions in 
using these funds will also enable them to leverage higher investment from Banks and 
other commercial sector agencies and increase creditworthiness of the poor.  
 
Component III Technical Assistance Fund (US$10 million): The Technical Assistance 
Funds (TAFs) will improve quantity and quality of service provision by public and 
private service providers. The fund will also promote use of Public/Private Partnerships 
in improving the supply of key livelihood services for the community organizations and 
federations. Key elements and/or activities that will be supported by this component 
include:  
 
a) 
Setting-up of a Microfinance Investment and Technical Assistance Fund (MITA) 
to provide technical assistance to self help groups and VOs to undertake financial and 
credit management.  
 
b)
Establishing a business development facility (BDF) to mobilize both public 
(including Agriculture technology Management Agency (ATMA) and cooperatives) and 
Page  3
private sector initiatives (including NGOs and non-profits) in agriculture, livestock and 
non farm sectors  
 
?
to promote vertical integration of smallholder agriculture with private investment 
in extension services, input supply, local level procurement, post-harvest value addition 
initiatives including agro-processing and marketing support  
 
?
to develop livelihood clusters in the non-farm sector and to provide support in 
developing backward and forward linkages to the households and communities engaged 
in the sector  
 
c) 
Supporting NGO capacity building to help them develop into specialist service 
providers with high competency.  
 
d)
Instituting an innovation fund to support innovations by individuals, enterprises, 
organizations and institutions in the public and private sector aimed at improving rural 
livelihoods  
 
Component IV. Project Management (US$ 7 million): This component would facilitate 
overall co-ordination, implementation, and financial management, monitoring and 
learning of the project at state and district levels. It would include setting up and 
strengthening state and district level project units, providing office infrastructure and 
logistic support, and setting up monitoring, evaluation and learning systems. This 
component will be managed by the District Project Coordination Unit (DPCU) and State 
Project Management Unit (SPMU) and the important activities include identification and 
contracting resource/support agencies, disbursement of salaries and other benefits to staff, 
procurement and maintenance of vehicles, office and equipment, and liasioning and 
convergence with other agencies and government departments   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in six districts of Bihar State: Gaya, Khagaria, 
Madhubani, Muzaffarpur, Nalanda and Purnea .  
 
The project seeks to build the social and economic institutions of the poor and 
disadvantaged population in six districts of Bihar State. Of the six project districts, 
significant Scheduled Tribe (ST) population is present only in Purnea district.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Varalakshmi Vemuru (SASES) 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja (SASES) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Separate Social and Environment Assessments were carried out for the project which 
covered the safeguard issues. The assessments reveal no large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts due to the proposed project interventions.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area. The environmental impacts associated with the anticipated 
future activities are not expected to be significant or adverse in the long-term, due to the 
nature and scale of the likely activities. Environmental aspects will be mainstreamed in 
the activity cycle to ensure that environmental concerns are addressed at the planning, 
design and implementation phases of the project-supported activities, and that the 
cumulative environmental impact of the activities is manageable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since the project has adopted a community-based demand-driven approach for 
identifying project investments, the alternative options for environmental management of 
these investments would be considered during the design and planning phase of the 
activities, where applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been devised to address the 
environmental issues and to mainstream them in the planning, design and implementation 
of project-supported activities. The EMF includes activity-specific Technical 
Environmental Guidelines (TEGs), environmental management indicators for the project 
monitoring and evaluation plan, and capacity-building for environmental awareness and 
Page  5
management.  A simple organizational and process structure has been developed to 
ensure adequate and effective implementation of the EMF in the project.  
 
The environmental management process has been developed with the objectives of 
making it simple and user-friendly. The salient environmental aspects of the activities 
likely to be supported by the project are captured in the TEGs, which provide the required 
information to the project functionaries as well as the members of the SHG/producer 
group/federation which is proposing the activity.  
 
?
For each activity, a reference TEG document is to be provided to the BRLP 
functionaries and community institution members, giving an outline of the issues, and 
appropriate technical and management guidelines for action.  
 
?
A
simple front-end TEG document has been prepared for the use of Community 
Coordinator/Community Resource Person/ Bookkeeper/SHG leaders/ SHG federation 
members, for discussion with SHG members/Producer Groups preceding the application 
for credit support. This form will be discussed and completed by the SHG/Producer 
Group members, and attached to the activity proposal/application form for further action.  
 
?
The environmental aspects of the proposed activities will be included in the 
overall appraisal of the proposals. If the environmental aspects are inadequately identified 
and/or addressed in the proposals (e.g. in the case of activities for which no TEGs are 
available), the EMF makes the provision for a rapid environmental evaluation and 
development of appropriate TEGs for the proposed activity, by the state-level 
environment resource agency.  
 
Even though the nature and small scale of the anticipated project investments have 
allowed for a simple and efficient design of the EMF, awareness-raising and capacity-
building for environmental management have been included as integral components of 
the EMF. Therefore, the capacity for environmental management will be strengthened 
with the initiation of the project.  
 
Tribal (Indigenous Peoples) Development Plan  
 
A
Tribal Development Plan as envisaged under OP/BP 4.10 has been developed which 
aims at building strong self reliant and self managing institutions of Tribals, and through 
these institutions enable them to access social and economic opportunities to overcome 
poverty and raise their living standards. The TDP has incorporated strategies identified 
during the Social Assessment, and a range of consultations on the major causes of their 
poverty and approaches and opportunities to overcome them. The tribal population under 
the project is largely restricted to one of the project districts Purnea, which has 4.4% 
tribal population with the other districts having less than 0.1% of dispersed tribal 
population. Though the activities to be implemented with the Tribal population is similar 
to rest of the project  the specific needs and issues for the Tribal community were 
identified based on a process of free, prior and informed consultations.  The key 
interventions and the implementation arrangements have been finalized based on multi-
stakeholder consultations that the project undertook. The project is making plans and 
implementation arrangements to undertake information dissemination and mobilization in 
a
culturally appropriate manner.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA study has been undertaken through a participatory approach, whereby 
stakeholder consultations were undertaken in the project districts, with the objective of 
collecting and validating information on environmental issues pertaining to the identified 
livelihood activities. The EA study and the design of the EMF have been conducted with 
inputs from subject experts as well as the field staff of relevant line agencies.  
 
The key stakeholders of the project are poor households in 42 blocks of six project 
districts of Bihar of whom the Scheduled Tribe (ST) population is an important 
stakeholder. The other stakeholders include local village community, line department 
staff (specifically Agriculture, Fisheries, Livestock, Horticulture, Rural Development, 
etc.), NGO/Civil Society, Academia and Research Organizations.During project 
preparation, all the key stakeholders were consulted through consultation workshops at 
the state, district, block and village level, and individual and group discussions in the 
field. The project through its various components and activities will actively engage with 
the range of stakeholders through project implementation and monitoring and learning.  
The EMF and the TDP will be disclosed as per the Bank?s disclosure policy.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
No 
Page  7
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Parmesh Shah 
04/09/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja 
04/09/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Varalakshmi Vemuru 
04/09/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
04/09/2007 
Comments:  I have reviewed and approve this appraisal version. 
