Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3085 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/17/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P105311 
Project Name: West Bengal Accelerated Development of Minor Irrigation 
Task Team Leader: Prabir Joardar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (90%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(10%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural non-
farm income generation (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
220.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
40.00 
 Local 
Communities 
10.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to enhance the development of agriculture-based income of 
small and marginal farmers through sustainable use of irrigation resources. This would be 
achieved by accelerating the development of minor irrigation infrastructure, strengthening 
community based irrigation management, providing agricultural services, encouraging 
diversification and use of new technologies, facilitating market access and creating income-
generation opportunities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
At an estimated cost of US$ 300 million, the project will bring a total area of about 213,500 
hectares under assured irrigation through rehabilitating and developing some 28,000 public 
minor irrigation schemes spread over 18 districts. The district will be the basic planning unit for 
the project. All minor irrigation schemes will be selected upon a request by the beneficiaries and 
will be implemented with their full participation. Once completed, the schemes will be handed 
over to beneficiary committees for sustainable operations and maintenance, with water charges 
Page  2
collected by the committees and technical support provided by Water Investigation and 
Development Department (WIDD) staff as necessary. The project will combine irrigation system 
investments with the strengthening of community based institutions and with agricultural 
development and support activities. The project will be implemented in a phased manner over a 
six year period, and likely include the following components:  
 
a. 
Strengthening community-based institutions.  The objective of this component is to 
enable community-based institutions to assume responsibility for organization, maintenance and 
management of minor irrigation schemes and for increasing the income potential of irrigated 
agriculture. This will be achieved through training activities and the formation or strengthening 
of local institutions, water user groups and farmer interest groups. Gender issues in access and 
control over land and water resources will be explicitly addressed.  
 
b. 
Irrigation systems development and improvement.  The objective of this component is to 
improve water availability by rehabilitating or developing minor irrigation schemes, and 
introducing water saving technologies and groundwater monitoring in the project areas. This will 
include investments in minor irrigation tank systems with command area of 20 hectares and 
above, and construction of micro-irrigation schemes (0.5-20 ha each) comprising shallow tube 
wells, light duty deep tube wells, dug wells, river lift schemes, water harvesting and detention 
structures, groundwater recharging systems and pilot hydram, drip and sprinkler schemes.  
Interventions will be based on user requests. The actual development activities will be 
determined for each individual irrigation scheme with an “improvement and management plan” 
prepared in consultation with user groups, prior to any intervention. In the light of rising energy 
prices special attention will be given to pump set energy efficiency by implementing pilot 
schemes based on wind, solar and other non-conventional energy sources. Surface water use will 
be emphasized over groundwater, wherever possible, also to avoid toxicity problems.  
 
c. 
Agricultural Development and Support Services.  The objective of this component is to 
ensure that the increased water availability will lead to enhanced incomes from irrigated 
agriculture and related activities. This will be achieved through agricultural intensification and 
diversification, improvements in production and post-harvest technologies, more effective farm 
advisory services and better market integration, following the Agricultural Technology 
Management Agency model.  Agricultural Service Centers will be established to support 
mechanization efforts and to generate off-farm employment for educated youth. Employment 
patterns and marketing opportunities in the target areas will be studied to guide the design of 
project interventions.  
 
d. 
Institutional Development and Project Management.  The objective of this component is 
to strengthen the WRID and to ensure effective project management. Adequate office space and 
facilities will be provided for the Project Implementation Unit. In project management, emphasis 
will be given to information and communication management, safeguards management, 
procurement and financial management. Monitoring, evaluation and impact assessment 
activities, at project and community level, will be outsourced. A multiple functions facility that is 
critical to the delivery of the project activities will be constructed and equipped. It will comprise 
a
training center, a minor irrigation and groundwater data center, laboratories for groundwater 
and surface water quality monitoring, GIS/MIS and M&E centers, conference room and a few 
Page  3
offices for key project staff. This facility will enhance the capacity of the WRIDD in providing 
better irrigation services and technical supports to farm communities in future.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in the state of West Bengal in India (and spread over 18 of the 19 districts 
in the state).   
 
E. 
 Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower, although not familiar with the Bank’s safeguards policies, are implementing 
projects within the national and state environmental policy and legal frameworks, which are, in 
many cases, close to the Bank Safeguard Policies. The state has a number of institutions dealing 
with social and environmental safeguards, albeit with mixed records of implementation and 
enforcement. To initiate the capacity building for management of environmental and social 
issues in the project, the implementing agency has already designated a core team, which would 
be expanded and trained during the project preparation period. The environmental and social 
assessments of the project will emphasize capacity building plans for the implementing agency, 
which would then be duly implemented by the project. Project staff at state and district levels 
will be trained in the planning and implementation of the environmental and social management 
plans and frameworks.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan (SASDS) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The social and environmental impacts of the proposed project are expected to be overall 
positive. However, there may be some adverse environmental impacts associated with 
groundwater and surface irrigation development as well as construction of project works; an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) will be conducted to assess all such impacts. Possible 
environmental issues in the project would include water quality (fluoride, arsenic, pathological 
and chemical contamination) related to irrigation and potable use; silt accumulation in the 
surface flow schemes; increasing energy use in minor irrigation, including changing energy use 
pattern; increasing pesticide and fertilizer use, etc. The Environmental Management Framework 
(EMF) will describe all actions and processes to avoid, manage or mitigate all of the adverse 
impacts, and to enhance the positive impacts of the project interventions.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
It is unlikely that the project will impact any natural habitat, unless specific activities are 
taken up to provide irrigation to communities living within and at the fringes of the natural 
habitats (for example in or around the protected areas in the Sundarban delta). Potential for such 
project interventions, and impacts thereof, will be assessed by the EA, and corresponding 
mitigation and management measures will be incorporated in the EMF.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Some of the project interventions, such as surface flow schemes or the source protection 
works might be located within forests. The EA will asses
s
impacts of the forests and the health of 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
forests from any such project intervention, and the EMP will propose all required mitigation and 
management measures.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
In considering that development of minor irrigation in the project areas may lead to increased 
use of pesticides, the EMF will include a pest management plan. This will be based on the 
current Integrated Pest Management Plan, already being implemented by the state.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The surface flow schemes could potentially impact temple ponds, or land endowed to 
temples (“debottar” land), sacred groves, and other community religious properties. These issues 
will be addressed through the EA and the EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some of the project areas are inhabited by indigenous peoples (referred as tribal). Despite the 
fact that the proposed project interventions are to have beneficial effects on tribal communities, 
in order to ensure their inclusion and participation in the project and their equal access to project 
benefits, the proposed Social Assessment (SA) will identify specific issues related to these 
communities in connection with the project and a tribal development strategy and plan will then 
be developed accordingly.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is not clear at this stage if the project would at all involve any land acquisition, but certain 
activity areas might be occupied by the local people. The adverse impacts as a result of the 
project interventions would be identified and assessed through the social assessment during 
project preparation. The results of this assessment will provide input to develop a Social Impact 
Management Plan including R&R entitlements for different categories of possible adverse 
impacts. This will become the base to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan, where needed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Although the minor irrigation schemes under the Project are unlikely to fall into the category 
of large dams as defined in the OP 4.37, this policy is triggered to ensure the safety of tank bunds 
and detention structures (e.g. check dams), the EA will specify the process of systematically 
identifying and addressing dam safety issues according to the requirements stipulated by the 
Bank’s operational policy on safety of dams, including the requirement pertaining to independent 
dam safety review panel.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Although the project will be located in the Ganga-Meghna-Brahmaputra basin, it is unlikely 
that the project will have any impact on the riparian countries (China, Nepal, Bhutan, and 
Bangladesh). The current Bank (QACU/LEG) policy is to consider the groundwater-based 
triggering of OP/BP 7.50 on a case-by-case basis (although groundwater is not specifically 
covered under the OP/BP). The preliminary studies for the project and the EA will include 
considerations of the proposed project interventions and the hydro-geological characteristics of 
the aquifers which will be used as a source for the proposed minor irrigation schemes. If the 
findings indicate any impact on riparian countries, particularly Bangladesh, a decision to trigger 
OP/BP 7.50 will be taken   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The borrowers have initiated the process of carrying out an EA and a SA. Both these 
assessments will be fully coordinated, and if required, be integrated.  The assessment reports 
and the management plans including an environmental management framework (EMF), an 
integrated pest management plan, an indigenous p
eoples’ development plan; and other 
safeguard documents and resettlement instruments (as required and as determined by the EA 
and the SA) are expected to be ready by the time of the QER, tentatively scheduled for April 
15, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Prabir Joardar 
07/12/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/13/2007 
Comments:  Cleared based on understanding that comments made in the clearance memo are taken 
into consideration and ISDS is revised accordingly prior to submission to InfoShop. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
07/16/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
