Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/05/2007 
Report No.:  AC2620
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P096019 
Project Name:  Himachal Pradesh State Roads Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ke Fang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
206.37 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
71.97
71.97 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to improve access of the HP 
population to markets and essential services. This will be achieved through actions to 
reduce the cost and time of travel on the core road network and to improve its safety.  
The core network consists of 2,160 km of state highways and 2,240 km of major district 
roads as notified by the GOHP in July 2005.  The indicators that are proposed to measure 
performance in achieving the development objective are: (i) condition of core network; 
(ii) speeds on the core network; (iii) number of fatal road accidents on the core network; 
and (iv) road user satisfaction on the core network.  The specific indicator and targets for 
each would be agreed between the GOHP and Bank during appraisal and reconfirmed 
during negotiations.   
 
3. Project Description 
1.  Upgrading works - including widening of formation, realignment, new structures and 
pavement strengthening - on approximately 440 km of state roads in the core network to 
either double (7m) or intermediate (5.5m) lane standard including supervision through 
independent consultants, land acquisition and application of safeguard measures.  
 
Page  2
2.   Civil works on about 2000 km of the 4,000 km core network, to include periodic 
maintenance (overlays and reseals) and minor rehabilitation (replacement of base 
materials and structures within the existing formation width), piloting performance based 
maintenance contracts and accident black spot improvement, all to be supervised by the 
borrower's own staff with independent technical examiner. The component will also 
include various services and goods to assist the GOHP to better manage and finance the 
core network.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Himachal Pradesh, a hilly and mountainous state (area 55,673 
square km, population about 6 million) in Northern India. The state is rich in natural 
resources, and is divided into four agro-climatic zones (Shiwalik Hills, Mid Hills, High 
Hills, and Cold Dry Zone). The majority of the population is concentrated in the Shiwalik 
hills and the Mid-hills ? which also house the majority of the forests, natural habitats, and 
economic infrastructure. The project roads have been selected through a feasibility study 
of a set of 1,670 km of candidate roads identified already by a strategic options study 
(SOS). Roads porposed for upgrading are largely concentrated in the Shiwalik and Mid 
Hills zones.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
Ms Neha Vyas (SASES) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Due to the fragile ecosystem of this mountainous state, the project poses substantial 
environmental risks.  These risks include: (i) direct impacts on rich natural resources 
(reserved/ protected forests and wildlife in particular); (ii) felling of roadside trees; (iii) 
destabilization of slopes (including landslides, mud slips, soil erosion) with consequent 
Page  3
damage to forests, water sources, pastures, properties, orchards and farmlands; (iv) 
improper management and disposal of debris and other wastes arising due to cutting, 
dismantling of bridges and other structures; (v) impacts on water resources such as 
springs, river/streams, hand pumps and canals (vi) impairment to or worsening of the 
local and regional drainage; (vii) conversion of some marginal agricultural lands for road 
works; (viii) road safety concerns due to increased traffic speeds; (ix) moderate impacts 
on sensitive sites including community assets and religious places; and (x) construction 
phase impacts including those related to camp site operation, dust generation and 
pollution from plants, machinery and vehicles. Project interventions may also cause 
undesirable impacts on the rich biodiversity found in adjoining areas of most project 
corridors.  Typical direct impacts that may adversely affect plants and animals include 
loss of habitat, pressure on already fragmented habitats, movement zone restrictions, 
threat from increased risk of collision with vehicles and pollution of habitat zone and 
water sources from various activities.   Further, most project corridors traverse through 
Reserve/Protected Forest Areas.  
 
In phase 1, a total of 2,300 households are affected by the project and 230 households 
will be displaced.  Approximately 50 hectares of land will be acquired for improvement 
of roads.  Two bypasses have also been proposed.  These two bypasses will save over 600 
households and two ponds used by the community.  More than 200 common property 
resources will be affected.  Social impacts on phase 2 roads are to be determined.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential long term impacts includes (i) the potential for poorly planned or managed 
development induced by the improved highway (ii) habitat degradation due to increased 
human access to ecologically sensitive areas, altered hydrology, overall ecological 
disequilibrium, biota contamination and transmission of diseases and (iii) reduction in 
road safety and spread of communicable disease.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The various alternatives considered to help avoid or minimize adverses impacts included: 
(i) realignments (ii) changes in pavement cross section (iii) provision of traffic calming 
measures (iv) reuse of waste material (v) slope protection and bio-enigneering measures 
(vi) provision of animal crossing sites   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will be implemented through the Himachal Pradesh Roads & Other 
Infrastructure Development Corporation (RIDC), primarily using Public Works 
Department staff. Safeguard officers plus supporting staff will be deputed to the RIDC to 
act as the core team at HQ.  The project will be executed through dedicated field 
divisions of the Himachal Pradesh Public Works Department (HPPWD), which is now 
implementing the Bank funded Rural Roads Project (P077977), in which safeguard 
performance to date has been satisfactory.  This project will require further strengthening 
Page  4
of the existing capacity since the resettlement and environmental impacts are expected to 
differ considerably from those experienced with rural roads.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include (i) roadside communities (ii) project affacted households 
within the roadside communities (iii) road users (iv) local government (v) implementing 
agency (vi) other state govenment departments, particularly those regulating the 
environment.  
 
In accordance with applicable domestic regulations, the State?s R&R policy and 
applicable Bank policies, public consultations at local, district and state levels were 
carried out all along the project roads.  Stakeholder consultation included shopkeepers, 
farmers and businessmen, local residents; project affected persons; local bodies like 
village panchayats and municipalities; temple committees; truckers and local market 
associations; roadside communities; local NGOs; and selected government departments 
such as Public Works, Forests, Irrigation, Agriculture, Horticulture, Mining, Tourism and 
Archeology.  The consultation process carried out for the project included a range of 
formal and informal on-site discussions, interviews and focus group discussions (65).  
The public consultations were designed such that: (i) affected people were included in the 
decision making process; (ii) links between communities and their natural resource base 
adjacent to project locations were explored; (iii) public awareness and information 
sharing on project alternatives, benefits and entitlements were promoted; and (iv) views 
on designs and solutions from the communities were solicited.  The main concerns raised 
by people living along project roads related to (i) drainage; (ii) accidents and road safety, 
(iii) disturbance to properties, employment sources and water sources; (iv) disposal of 
debris; (v) damage to properties, orchards and farmlands during construction and (vi) 
resettlement.  District and state level consultations were also carried out during the EA to 
obtain inputs to modify designs to minimize and/or mitigate potential negative impacts on 
people and environmental resources.  Expert opinion was sought on specific issues 
related to forests, wildlife, horticulture and environmental regulations.  Outputs from this 
process have been integrated into the design where technically feasible.  Follow up 
consultations will also be carried out at sensitive locations to share information related to 
the final project design, R&R policy and RAP. These documents will be made public 
through Bank?s PIC, website of HPRIDC and in the districts affected by the project (in 
public libraries, offices of the district collector, PIUs and schools of affected villages).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/15/2007  
Page  5
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ke Fang 
02/02/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Neha Vyas 
02/02/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh 
02/02/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Tapas Paul 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
 
Comments:   
