Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1924 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/07/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P090768 
Project Name: Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water Resources 
Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Srinivasan Raj Rajagopal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 12, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (20%);Sub-national government administration (10%);Crops (5%);Animal 
production (5%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
350.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to improve irrigation service delivery and 
productivity of irrigated agriculture with effective integrated water resources management  in a 
river basin/sub-basin framework in Tamil Nadu.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The above objective is to be achieved through investments for modernizing irrigation 
infrastructure (including systems rehabilitation, on-farm works, technical and managerial 
upgrading of institutions involved in irrigation development, operation and management, 
diversification of agriculture with appropriate extension measures and market linkages,  
promoting public-private partnerships, piloting innovative irrigation infrastructure development 
and management options) and re-orienting  and strengthening institutions and instruments 
required for integrated effective water resources management in the State (including unbundling 
resource management from service delivery institutions). The proposed project would consist of 
the following two primary components:  
Page  2
Component A: Irrigated Agriculture Modernization (US$450 million)  
 
This component is intended to improve the productivity of irrigated agriculture. Project 
supported activities include:  
 
•
Irrigation systems modernization in a sub-basin framework (including participatory and 
sustainable modernization of any water storages and related irrigation infrastructure including 
system/non-system/rainfed tanks (to support of the revival and restoration of traditional water 
bodies outlined by GOI in its Bharat Nirman program) , distribution systems, pumpset 
efficiency; measurement and monitoring) covering about one million hectares expanding on the 
experience of the Hanuman Nadhi pilot.  It is expected that this would be initiated in the Palar, 
Parambikulam Aliyar, Thambiraparani, Vaigai and Kodayar Basins and extended to other basins.  
 
•
Institutional Modernization for Irrigated Agriculture (targeted modernization– improved 
asset inventory and management plans (for instance, dams, tanks, irrigation infrastructure, 
agricultural. Horticultural fisheries data) technical and managerial upgrading of irrigation 
development and service delivery institutions, modernization of manuals/procedures, 
computerization, LAN and WAN, knowledge management software, information management 
and sharing, public interaction, closer integration of WRO/PWD and Agriculture, Horticulture, 
Agricultural Engineering, Livestock/Fisheries Departments.,)  
 
•
Sustainable Agriculture modernization (cropping systems diversification and 
management to improve water conservation and farmer returns, integrated pest and nutrient 
management, public private Partnerships for extension, post-processing, certification, marketing)  
 
An integrated Sub-basin Development and Management Plan would be developed for each sub-
basin to provide a shared vision planning of proposed investments and capacity-building under 
the project.  
 
Component B: Water Resources Management (US$50 million)  
 
This component is intended to strengthen the policy and institutional framework for improved 
sustainable management of water resources in the State.  These activities would include:  
 
•
State-level (converting the WRCRC to a State Water Council, amalgamating the 
associated sub-committees and upgrading the Institute of Water Studies (IWS) and the Surface 
and Groundwater Data Center  (SGDC) to a State Water Resources Agency, establishment of a 
Water Regulator, development of appropriate policy and institutional arrangements, instruments, 
and information tools, to promote flexible water resources management)  
 
•
Basin-level (Strengthening, empowering and expanding Basin Development and 
Management Boards,  development of basin analytical decision support systems targeted to 
support key policy and investment decisions, drought/flood preparedness, participatory 
structured consultations including strategic social and environmental assessments to 
systematically develop sub-basin development and management plans, demonstration pilots)  
 
•
Water Resources Research Fund (WRRF) Capitalizing on the success of the WRRF 
established in the TN WRCP, this investment would expand the activities undertaken using the 
fund for targeted studies, awareness raising and applied research on key water and irrigated 
agriculture issues (including related environmental and social development issues) facing the 
state. A similar approach to that in the previous project is envisaged with  competitive allocation 
of funds with the State providing a matching contribution to the fund.   In addition, partnerships 
Page  3
with relevant Universities and other key institutions throughout the State are envisaged to 
improve the local participation, outreach and sustainability of project technical assistance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The capacity-building activities would be state-wide in scope but the physical investments 
(rehabilitation of existing irrigation/water assets and support for agricultural diversification and 
improved livestock and fisheries management) under the project would be located in selected 
riverbasins/sub-basins throughout the State of Tamil Nadu, India.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The primary implementing agency has excellent skills in social and environmental assessment 
and in implementing measures related to safeguard policies as demonstrated through their 
performance in the recently closed Tamil Nadu Water Resources Consolidation Project. The ICR 
has rated their environmental performance as Highly satisfactory. The implementing agency has 
already carried out Social and Environmental Assessments, Environmental Status Reports and 
special studies of the river basins in the State. Their skills would be further strengthened, 
upgraded and expanded under the proposed investment.  Relevant environmental and social 
knowledge base and analytical capacity would also be built up under the project.  Awareness-
building and training activities related to environmental and social development issues would be 
strengthened.  A multi-disciplinary project unit (including environmental and social experts) is 
being set up to facilitate the preparation and implementation of this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Harshadeep Nagaraja Rao (SASES) 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Significant adverse social or environmental impacts are not expected as all significant 
physical investments are expected to be in the nature of rehabilitation of existing assets.  
However, an integrated Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) with an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) to both manage risks and maximize environmental and social 
opportunities will be finalized based on earlier work and experiences of the TN WRCP project 
and consideration of new activities proposed in the TN IAMWARM project   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
No adverse impacts on natural habitats expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
No pesticides and fertilizers are expected to be financed directly by the project; however, 
there may be induced impacts of increased fertilizer and pesticide use due to improved 
agricultural intensification and diversification.  The project will support scaling-up state-wide 
Integrated Pest Management and Integrated Nutrient Management efforts and support for safer 
and organic food production and marketing.  A pest management plan will be proposed as part of 
the ESA and ESMP.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
No significant adverse impacts on cultural property expected, but this issue will be examined 
during the ESA (particularly in relation to proper management of any religious and other 
physical cultural property associated with tanks during rehabilitation).   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
No adverse impacts on tribals expected, but the project will examine ways to improve 
benefits to tribals, women, and other vulnerable groups as part of the ESA.  
 
No significant resettlement expected 
–
but
these will be examined further in the ESA. The 
successful   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The project will support safety of dams associated with the project areas (unless already 
addressed under other parallel projects). The project will also support safety improvement of 
tank systems as part of tank rehabilitation.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Although the project physical investments are expected to be of a rehabilitation nature, a full 
assessment required as pet Category A will be undertaken, given the large scale of 
investments proposed.  
 
An Environmental and Social Assessment (with an associated Social and Environmental 
Management Framework), already initiated at the end of the prior WRCP, will be updated by 
end-March, 2006.  The sub-basin development and management plans for the first year 
(drafted by appraisal) will apply this framework to also include key environmental and social 
development issues and support under the project.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Srinivasan Raj Rajagopal 
02/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
 
Comments:   
