Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2353 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/21/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P096021 
Project Name: Andhra Pradesh Road Sector Project 
Task Team Leader: A.K. Swaminathan 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: February 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (95%);General transportation sector (5%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
320.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
80.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Since this is the second roads project in AP, the main objective would be to further improve the 
state road network by providing better quality and safer roads to the users in a sustainable 
manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
As of now, it is proposed that the project would include three components, namely:  
 
(i) 
Road Improvement Works component (about 90-92% of loan size): This component will 
primarily focus on (a) widening, upgrading and strengthening of key road corridors with 
moderate to high traffic (about 800-850 km); (b) maintenance of previously improved key road 
corridors through long term performance-based contracts(about 1500 km); (c) supporting road 
development and management contracts/concessions through Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) 
with the viability gap funding support. Funding for this component will include works, goods 
and consultant and NGO services required for monitoring, supervising and preparing the designs 
and bidding documents wherever Bank-financed.  
 
(ii) 
Institutional Strengthening component (about 4% of the loan size):  The previous project 
had undertaken studies and initiated actions for institutional strengthening and capacity building 
Page  2
of the RBD and RDC.  Many of these actions could not be completed during the life of the 
project and some were taken up by the GoAP/RBD later after the project closed.  The proposed 
project will focus on completing some of the remaining actions like (a) ensuring proper 
management of the core road netwrok (CRN)- either by fully operationalising the RDC or as a 
fallback option by creating a separate division in the RBD to manage the CRN;(b) strengthening 
RBD since the larger part of the road network (non-core) would still be with its responsibility; 
and (c) finalizing and passing of the AP State Road Act consistent with the policy developed in 
2005 to give a legal basis to the road agencies to manage the roads. Consultant services and any 
goods and equipment required will be financed under this component.  
 
(iii) 
???Safe Roads??? component (about 4% of the loan size):  The option of merging this 
component with either or both the above components, as appropriate, will be considered during 
the preparation of the project. This component will strive to make the road corridors safe for its 
users and other beneficiaries and will cut across various departments of the State like the Police, 
Health, RBD and Transport and the Road Safety Council/s. The approach here would be two 
pronged - (a) making effective contributions to improve the road safety aspects on the core 
network which can then be scaled up to the remaining state roads; and (b) spreading awareness 
about spreading and prevention of HIV/AIDs and other sexually transmitted diseases focused 
specifically on populations by the side of roads and users. Small works, consultant services, 
goods and equipment could be financed under this.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
State of Andhra Pradesh in India.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The State road agencies have reasonable experience in dealing with aspects like engineering 
design, construction, project coordination etc. There are good institutions doing research work 
and training. The State is also familiar with the Bank's social/environmental requirements, as the 
State has been engaged with Bank funded projects in the water and road sectors. However, the 
project envisages possible creation of some new institutional arrangements as well as 
strengthening and capacity building of the relevant agencies.  
 
To take care of R&R and land acquisition aspects of the project, there is an officer deputed 
from the Revenue Department in the project team. The additional requirement of a sociologist 
for taking care of the R&R and social impacts have been discussed with the RBD and is expected 
to be recruited from the open market soon. With regard to environmental management there is 
one environmental officer (EO) deputed from the State Forest Department. There is a likely 
requirement of an additional EO with environmental engineering background, trained in 
highways sector to strengthen institutional capacity. This requirement has also been discussed 
with RBD as part of the project identification missions and would soon be in place. The social 
and environmental management skills need to be further enhanced by training for: (a) project 
preparation (b) integration of safeguards measures in project design and implementation 
mechanism (c) effective implementation and post project monitoring of RAP/EMP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASES) 
Mr Sita Ramakrisna Addepalli (SASES) 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
As observed during the project identification mission, the likely environmental impacts, 
depending on the finally proposed road alignments, are: (a) loss of road side trees, which are 
found along many of the road corridors in AP; (b) impact of road improvements on natural 
habitats, wild life areas, reserve forest and social forestry areas (c) impacts on water bodies and 
natural drainage areas (d) impacts on religious structures, historical and archeological sites. Thus 
the applicability of the above referred safeguard policies is evident during the identification 
missions.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Pls refer to text above.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pls refer to text under "Environmental Assessment" above.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Pls refer to text under "Environmental Assessment" above.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Pls see below.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
While most road widening will be carried out within the right of way of the roads, this may 
be encroached in some places and some project roads may pass through tribal areas. In some 
sections four-laning & bypasses may be required. The details of likely social impacts will be 
available once the feasibility study is completed. A Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy 
framework, with an entitlement matrix for different types of impacts/losses, will be prepared and 
Resettlement Actions Plans and Indigenous development Plans, as needed, will be developed for 
First Year roads. The framework will be applied for development of the action plans for the 
subsequent phases.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As part of project preparation, environmental and social assessments will be carried out to 
ascertain potential impacts, prepare mitigation plans and develop strategy to involve 
stakeholders in the project planning and implementation. Currently, Strategic Options Study 
(SOS) is ongoing to prioritize the proposed road links. The SOS study will identify 
environmental hotspots and expected social impacts to facilitate decision making on road 
prioritization. Further, the TOR for the services of detailed feasibility, engineering, 
environmental and social study is being finalized.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr A.K. Swaminathan 
05/19/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/07/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
06/05/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
