Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2463 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/21/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P100954 
Project Name: Andhra Pradesh Water Sector Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Radhey .S. Pathak 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (85%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(15%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
435.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the proposed APWSIP will be (i) to improve irrigation service 
delivery on a sustainable basis to increase productivity of irrigated agriculture in the Nagarjuna 
Sagar Scheme command, and (ii) to strengthen the state?s institutional capacity for multisectoral 
planning, development and management of its water resources.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
An initial description of the likely components is listed below. The team envisages the project to 
cost about $485, with a loan component of about $435 million. The final size of the project and 
loan component will be determined during preparation, keeping in view the state?s fiscal 
situation and ability to meet counterpart-funding requirements.  Specifically, the project would 
support the following four components (if required, will be appropriately modified/fine tuned 
during project preparation):  
 
(A) 
Component A: Improving irrigation service delivery and management in Nagarjuna Sagar 
Scheme (about $ 443.5 million, 91.5 %): This component consists of six sub components in 
Page  2
Nagarjuna Sagar Scheme (NSS), having a command area of about 1 million hectare in AP: (a) 
participatory rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation system, (b) dam safety works, (c) 
fostering and capacity building of WUAs at all levels, (d) improved water management practices, 
including bench marking, administration of water entitle, and bulk supply of water to users, (e) 
agricultural support services, and (f) environmental and social management plan.  
 
(B) 
Component B: Water sector institutional restructuring and capacity building (about $ 24.5 
million, 5%): This component consists of four sub components: (a) establishment, fostering and 
operationalization of regulatory framework in water sector, namely, AP Water Resources 
Regulatory Authority (APWRRA), (b) restructuring and capacity building of I&CADD, (c) 
strengthening and capacity building of WALMTARI, and (d) integrated computerized 
information system.  
 
(C) 
Component C: Innovative pilots (about $ 9.7 million, 2 %): This components consists of 
three sub components: (a) piloting users centered aquifer level ground water management in 2 
pilot areas, (b) piloting commercialized irrigated agriculture in 2 pilot areas, and (c) piloting 
water efficient technologies (drip and sprinkler systems).  
 
(D) 
Component D: Project management (about $ 7.3 million, 1.5%): This component consists 
of three sub components: (a) establishment of state level project preparation and management 
unit (PPMU), (b) monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and (c) information, education, and 
communication program (IEC).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in the state of Andhra Pradesh in India.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower is familiar with the Bank?s social/environmental requirements, as the State has 
been engaged with the Bank funded projects in the water and other sectors and has well 
established institutions dealing with these issues.  However, to improve implementation, the 
team will work on further strengthening of these institutions and their capacity building.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASES) 
Mr Sanjay Pahuja (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The social and environmental impacts of the proposed project are expected to be overall 
positive. Since there is a possibility that there might be short-term adverse environmental 
impacts associated with some of the project interventions, an Environmental Assessment will be 
conducted to evaluate the potential for such impacts, as a part of the Integrated Social and 
Environmental Assessment (ISEA) for the project. One of the outputs of the ISEA will be the 
development of a Social and Environmental Management Framework (SEMF) for identifying 
and mitigating the adverse social and environmental impacts, and to enhance the positive impacts 
of the project interventions.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
To address the possibility that improvements in infrastructure and irrigation services may 
lead to increased use of pesticides, the SEMF will include a pest management plan.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
To address the posibility of chance finding, the SEMF will include a physical cultural 
resources plan.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some of the areas under Nagarjuna Sagar scheme could be inhabited by indigenous peoples 
(referred as tribal). The proposed project interventions are unlikely to have any direct adverse 
impacts on tribal communities. However, to ensure their inclusion and participation in the project 
and that they access to project benefits at par with others, some operational adjustments might be 
required. The proposed ISEA will identify specific issues related to these communities vis a vis 
the project activities and accordingly develop a tribal development strategy and plan.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Since the main component of the project is improving the irrigation service delivery and 
management in the existing Nagarjuna Sagar scheme, the project may not involve any land 
acquisition but certain activity areas might be occupied by the local people. The adverse impacts 
as a result of the project interventions would be identified and assessed through the social impact 
assessment which would be undertaken up as part of ISEA during project preparation. The 
results of this assessment will provide input to develop R&R entitlements for different categories 
of adverse impacts. This will become the base to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The project will include dam safety and rehabilitation works on a large dam (the Nagarjuna 
Sagar dam). The SEMF will be designed to ensure that dam safety issues are systematically 
identified and addressed according to the requirements stipulated by World Bank OP on Safety 
of Dams, including the requirement pertaining to independent dam safety experts panel   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As indicated above, as part of project preparation, an integrated social and environmental 
assessment is planned and assessment report including safeguard documents: resettlement 
plan, environmental management plan, pest management, physical cultural resources plan 
and Indigenous Peoples (tribal) development plan, etc. are expected to be ready be end 
October 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Radhey .S. Pathak 
12/21/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/20/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
12/20/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
