Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/10/2006 
Report No.:  AC1985
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P083742 
Project Name:  Famers Empowerment for Agricultural Technology and Information 
Task Team Leader:  Shobha Shetty 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASRD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (70%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (30%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Analysis of economic growth (P);Other 
public sector governance (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective of the project is to develop a demand-driven, market 
oriented agricultural services system, based on partnerships between farmer groups, 
public agencies and private sector enterprises at all levels.The outcome of increased 
accountability and effectiveness of public service provision in support of diversified 
farmer incomes would be achieved through:  
 
•
Emphasis on improved governance of the process for award of grants for 
activities by farmer groups to ensure that the process of prioritization at village, district 
and provincial levels is controlled by farmers whilst the extension and research services 
provide necessary support services to farmers organizations  
 
(management skills, information access and research) and ensure good governance in 
environmental and social safeguards.  
 
Emphasis on making larger partnerships work in practice through: district and 
provincial level funds to scale up successful farmer-managed activities (FMAs), and 
implement supporting district and provincial planning and technical support .  
Page  2
The project is intended to contribute to the attainment of the WB Country Assistance 
Strategy (CAS) objectives of: (i) improving the climate for high quality investment by, 
among other ways, creating income opportunities for poorer households and farmers; and 
(ii) making service delivery responsive to the needs of the poor.  The Project supports the 
GoI’s National Medium-Term Development Plan (Rencana Pembangunan Jangka 
Menengah Nasional, RPJMN) economic agenda related to agricultural development that 
includes, among others: (i) agricultural revitalization; (ii) poverty alleviation; (iii) rural 
development; and (iv) improvement of natural resources and environment management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Ministry of Agriculture is the Implementing Agency. The project interventions that 
are necessary for attaining the objectives are grouped into the following components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Farmer-Driven Extension  
 
This component will help farmers to increase their income and livelihoods through 
strengthening their capacity to adopt improved technology, agribusiness management 
practices and to develop partnerships.  Measures will primarily include institutional 
reforms, human resource development and strengthening of training institutions. This 
component will cover 16 provinces and 53 districts. This component will be implemented 
by the Agency for Agricultural and Human Resource Development (AAHRD). The sub-
component pertaining to support to farmer groups will improve the technical and 
organizational capacity of Farmer Organizations (FOs) to deliver the services needed by 
their members, with a focus particularly on FOs that are involved in research, extension 
and agri-business.  Farmer organizations will register their requests for assistance from 
the project and appropriate eligibility criteria will be set.  The support will cover 10 pre-
selected provinces.  This component will work with FOs at all levels (village to national 
level) and provides a foundation for all other project components. AAHRD will be 
responsible for this component.  
 
Component2: Research-Extension-Farmer Linkages  
 
This component will improve the capacity of Indonesia’s provincial network of adaptive 
research institutes (AIATs) and strengthening their linkages with extension organizations, 
the private sector, NGOs and farmers in order to make them more demand driven.  This 
will include strategies to ensure that farmers are more responsive to the results of 
demonstration plots on the relationships between inputs and yields.  The component will 
provide national coverage via support to AIATs in 16 provinces. This component will be 
managed by the Agency for Agricultural Research and Development (AARD).  
 
Component 3: Provision of Knowledge and Information Services  
 
This component supports the development of connectivity, the e-petani web-based 
advice, commodity price and market information, dissemination of new technologies and 
best practices, and funding to support innovative and high impact knowledge and service 
initiatives.  It will provide national coverage. This component will be carried out by the 
Center for Data and Information (CADI).  
 
Page  3
Component 4: Project Management  
 
Project Management support will be provided to ensure appropriate collection, 
monitoring, evaluation and consolidation of data and information for reporting and 
management purposes. The central project coordination unit (CPCU) will be responsible 
inter alia, for coordinating the supervision missions, mid-term review, overall M&E, 
supervision of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and the preparation of the 
Implementation Completion Report. The central PMU will be located in the Office of the 
Secretary General.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
From a physical environmental perspective, the project will cover a range of agro-
ecological production zones, including areas of differing natural resource related 
environmental stress.  The principal zones include: lowland irrigated rice; lowland non-
irrigated rice; upland rain-fed mixed cropping; smallholder tree crops; and agro-forestry. 
Within these zones, a wide variety of farming systems have evolved, many of which are 
facing problems relating to decline in soil fertility and ground water quality as well as 
increasing incidence of pests resulting from poor farming practices.  Shortages in water 
supply and erosion and landslides associated with inappropriate watershed management 
practices are also common.  
 
Some of the project areas may have isolated vulnerable groups and all of the areas will 
have vulnerable disadvantaged groups such as poor women, landless and minority ethnic 
farmers. These include farmers that work as share-croppers or do tumpang sari farming in 
production forests or plantations. Although isolated vulnerable groups are unlikely to be 
found in West, Central, East Java and in West Sumatra, they could be found in other 
areas covered under the project.  Both categories of vulnerable groups are likely to be 
under-
represented in farmers’ group activities and farmers’ associations, while at the 
same time being disproportionately impacted by the environmental issues described 
above.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Safeguards policies under the project will be addressed in the following manner:  
 
The project will not lead to land conversion, involuntary resettlement, destruction of 
environmentally sensitive areas or historically significant sites and/or other cultural 
resources. Although the primary focus is on intensification, this is set within the context 
of improved agricultural extension services, access to information and support of various 
kinds that will result in farmers achieving a greater level of control over farming 
techniques, including the minimum application of agricultural inputs. Project preparation 
has also been based on a review (based on environmental questions integrated into PRA 
techniques) of existing environmental constraints and pressures faced by poor farmers.  
The results of this analysis have been used to shape the research and development 
component of the project, ensuring that it reflects specific needs of farmers faced with 
adapting to environmental shocks and stresses.  The project will apply the following 
approaches to minimizing environmental risks and maximizing environmental benefits:  
 
•
ensuring that demand driven research and development takes into account 
environmental criteria such as the ecological situation for which it is intended, and the 
skills and knowledge base of farmers to adapt to environmental shocks and stresses;  
 
•
ensuring that extension agents are sufficiently well trained to address the 
environmental implications of the introduction of new cropping systems and farming 
technologies (for example by ensuring that information conveyed to farmers on the use of 
new pesticides to reduce losses from pests is accompanied by information and training on 
safe handling of chemicals, timing and dosage advice to optimize effectiveness);  
 
•
ensuring that guidelines for accessing grants for farmer managed activities at 
village and district level are revised to be (i) more equitable; (ii) gender-sensitive; and 
(iii) environmentally sustainable (use of negative environmental list and promoting the 
use of simple environmentally friendly technologiesand appropriate pest management 
procedures);  
 
•
strengthening environmental management capacity in agricultural extension 
colleges and training centers, particularly in terms of strengthening curricula and capacity 
of lecturers;  
 
•
expanding the capacity and outreach of IPPHTI, the national network of IPM 
farmers;  
 
•
ensuring that knowledge and information services are comprehensive in 
illustrating the opportunities that exist to improve farming systems based on 
environmentally sustainable approaches within the 5 main farming systems  
 
The main social risks are that the vulnerable and disadvantaged groups such as poor 
women, landless and minority ethnic farmers who will be relatively excluded in the 
farmers groups decision making processes and their interest in Farmers Association may 
not be sufficiently well represented.  Specific approaches to addressing these risks will 
include (i) development of appropriate guidelines (adapted from the DAFEP project) for 
integration of social concerns (including gender) into the farmer driven extension 
component, and (ii) the introduction of appropriate selection criteria that would help to 
Page  5
identify and reward farmer organizations that are more inclusive in decision making 
processes, and are keen to develop their capacities in this area.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Most of the environmental impacts of the project are indirect and long-term in nature, as 
described in preceding sections.  The FEATI project itself will have few direct negative 
impacts.  In the longer term it is likely to induce a range of positive environmental 
impacts by increasing the efficiency and relevance of research and extension systems, 
and potentially negative impacts associated with agricultural intensification.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) is the implementing agency but has limited to address 
environmental issues associated with agricultural development and intensification, even 
though its regulations contain environmental safeguards and operate in close coordination 
with the Ministry of Environment’s environmental management regulations and 
procedures.  Capacity for environmental management and monitoring at province and 
district/sub district is also weak.  However, since the mid 1980s the MoA has been 
supporting Integrated Pest Management (IPM) principles which have been widely applied 
in Indonesia.  The reform and strengthening of extension systems is a principal 
component of FEATI, which will build on lessons learned from previous phases in the 
implementation of IPM. In addition, under the support to Farmer Organizations 
component, the project will work closely, inter alia, with IPPHTI, the national network of 
IPM farmers to expand its outreach. Environmental support to the PMU will be provided 
in order to address the capacity gap at the MoA as well as a program of training for 
province, district and sub-district officials.  
 
Since this project is in a sense, a follow-on and scaling-up of DAFEP, the experience of 
DAFEP could be used as a proxy of the willingness and the capacity of the Borrower to 
address the social safeguard issues. Reviewing the DAFEP project, the Borrower has 
been relatively successful in encouraging grass-roots participation and the involvement of 
poor women farmers. It is less clear how far it has been able to address the other 
vulnerable disadvantaged groups.  Consequently the field manual for the Farmer 
Managed Activities (FMAs) will put more emphasis on encouraging the involvement of 
landless farmers (which in many cases are also minority isolated groups and the poorest 
farmer) such as farmers engaged in tumpang sari farming in production forest area. The 
guidelines for the farmer-managed activities (FMAs) will build on the lessons learned 
under DAFEP to incorporate equity considerations. Through the introduction of by-laws 
in the functioning of the Village Extension Management Units (UPKG), the UPKG 
leaders are expected to become more accountable to the farmers who elected them. The 
component will ensure that UPKG is inclusive and not serving a few large or influential 
Page  6
farmers. The Agency for Agricultural and Human Resource Development (AAHRD) in 
the MoA which will be responsible for the implementation of this component has agreed 
to incorporate these proposed changes. The proposed pilot district-level FMAs will have 
implementation guidelines which will specifically include an environment-related 
negative list.  
 
The borrower has prepared a social and environmental management plan based on the 
key elements presented in section D1.  The plan sets out the existing regulatory context 
for environment and social issues, identifies key risks and mitigation and monitoring 
measures, assesses capacities to implement mitigation and monitoring, and identifies 
additional expertise, training and capacity building needs.  In order to oversee 
implementation of the plan, community development/gender advisers will be recruited at 
the national and provincial PMU levels. Additional environmental expertise will also be 
required to oversee measures to integrate environmentally sustainable approaches into 
several project components.  The environmental adviser(s) will develop an overall 
monitoring program to track progress made with the different elements of EMP, and be 
responsible for sensitizing the PIUs (national, provincial and district) in the area of pest 
management.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the ultimate project beneficiaries, that is to say individual 
farmers and their households with a focus on the poorest.  The principal tool used in 
identifying stakeholders and in raising awareness of environmental and social issues has 
been Participatory Rapid Appraisal (PRA), tailored to take specific account of the 
environmental dimension to farming systems.  A sample of 16 villages were selected 
located in West Java, Central Java, Banten, North Sulawesi, North Sumatra and East 
Kalimantan. The results of these assessments and discussions were supplemented by 
district and province level discussions in order to disseminate the main findings and 
identify additional issues. The PRAs formed the basis of the development of a draft social 
and environmental management plan.  The EMP was then presented at an MoA national 
level workshop on February 3, 2006. The final EMP was disclosed locally on  the MOA 
website on March 3, 2006. The national, provincial and district PMUs will be trained on 
safeguards particularly in the area of pesticides management and will carry out similar 
training for key stakeholders at the sub-district level. The environmental and social 
management plan was made available to the public through the Bank's Project 
Information Centers in Jakarta and Washington on February 23, 2006 and will also be 
published in the project manuals.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2006 
 
Page  7
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shobha Shetty 
02/22/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Angus Mackay 
02/22/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Isono Sadoko 
02/22/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
03/01/2006 
Comments:   
