Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2903 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/07/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P099757 
Project Name: Indonesia Geothermal Sector Reform 
Task Team Leader: Migara Jayawardena 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 17, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (75%);Power (25%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to assist the GoI to prepare and implement their 
geothermal reform program designed to address key policy, institutional, and risk associated 
barriers in order to promote the progressively greater utilization of geothermal resources that will 
provide renewable energy to the electricity market in an efficient, cost-effective, and 
environmentally friendly manner.  
 
Project Proposed Global Environment Objective(s): The global environment objective of the 
project is to help address climate change (Priority #4) through the reduction of GHG emissions.  
The proposed project falls in the operational areas of the GEF's Operational Program 6 
(Promotion the Adoption of Renewable Energy by Removing Barriers and Reducing 
Implementation Costs). It will primarily address GEF's strategic priority of CC-3 (power sector 
policy frameworks supportive of renewable energy).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project mainly involves an integrated set of actions that will help remove several 
key barriers that presently prevents greater levels of geothermal development in Indonesia.  
 
Key Barriers to Developing Geothermal in Indonesia  
 
-
Lack of an adequate policy framework that incorporates the environmental benefits of 
geothermal and provides sufficient incentives for investing in the sector.  
 
-
Lack of management, planning, and implementing capabilities to identify, prepare tender and 
supervise the development of feasible geothermal resources.  
 
-
Technical risks associated with developing upstream geothermal resources, particularly in 
unexplored areas (greenfields).  
 
-
Lack of domestic technical capabilities.  
 
Proposed Project Components  
 
The proposed project is designed to address some of these key barriers in an integrated manner 
so that investments in geothermal can be mobilized quickly for fields that are ready to be 
developed while also including measures that will strengthen the long-term development 
prospects.  The components that make up this integrated geothermal policy reform project are:  
 
Component 1: Policy Framework for Scaling-Up the Development of Geothermal Power. The 
project will aim to assist the GoI improve the present set of policies in order to enhance the 
investment climate for high quality geothermal development. This will include policies to 
implement the geothermal law, address the incremental costs associated with developing 
geothermal, and mitigate technical risks associated with upstream development of geothermal 
resources.  
 
Component 2: Transactions to Mobilize Investments in the Geothermal Sector.  Through this 
component, the project will leverage its assistance to directly mobilize investment funds in the 
geothermal sector.  The focus will be on two types of investments since there are unique 
differences between geothermal fields that are already under the control of developers (with 
some already exploited) and areas for future development under the Geothermal Law which fall 
under the authority of the GoI.  Therefore, when engaging investors, the GoI will need to address 
these two opportunities differently.  
 
Component 3: Technical Capacity Building.  This component will be designed to address the 
limited domestic capacity in Indonesia for handling most geothermal related activities, and 
support the long-term development prospects of the sector.  This will include awareness 
programs for stakeholders, training to facilitate geothermal transactions, and the development of 
a
strategy for targeted cost reduction for increased domestic participation in the sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is primarily capacity building and assistance for development of policy frameworks 
and approaches.  However, the project will also assist MEMR to develop model procedures and 
processes, including environmental and social assessments and management plans as well as 
Page  3
bidding documents, for transacting geothermal fields in an efficient and transparent manner.  The 
location of these fields is as yet unknown, but is likely to be national in scope.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
GOI's AMDAL (environmental and social assessment) requirements are generally adequate for 
the energy sector, but their implementation often falls short of the standard desired by the 
Ministry of Environment.  As part of the development of model procedures and processes in  
Component 2, the project will:  
 
-Identify the GOI environmental and social impact assessment and management requirements 
applicable to geothermal power plants;  
 
-
Identify any areas in which international good practice may call for elements of impact 
assessment and management in addition to GOI requirements, using comparators such as The 
Equator Principles, World Bank Operational Policies, IFC Performance Standards, etc.;  
 
-Identify  the responsibilities of all parties involved in a geothermal transaction for AMDAL 
and other environmental and social management activities, assess in general their capacities, and 
describe any areas that require institutional strengthening; and  
 
-
Develop a guidance document for geothermal power investors and agencies responsible for 
environmental review, licensing, monitoring and oversight that provides (a) guidelines and 
models for compliance with GOI environmental and social requirements and (b) suggestions 
based on international good practice for additional features to enhance the scope and quality of 
assessments and management plans and hence the "bankability" of potential projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTTR) 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (EASTE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
GOI's AMDAL (environmental and social assessment) requirements are generally adequate 
for the energy sector, but their implementation often falls short of the standard desired by the 
Ministry of Environment.  As part of the development of model procedures and processes in  
Component 2, the project will:  
 
-Identify the GOI environmental and social impact assessment and management 
requirements applicable to geothermal power plants;  
 
-
Identify any areas in which international good practice may call for elements of impact 
assessment and management in addition to GOI requirements, using comparators such as The 
Equator Principles, World Bank Operational Policies, IFC Performance Standards, etc.;  
 
-Identify  the responsibilities of all parties involved in a geothermal transaction for AMDAL 
and other environmental and social management activities, assess in general their capacities, and 
describe any areas that require institutional strengthening; and  
 
-
Develop a guidance document for geothermal power investors and agencies responsible 
for environmental review, licensing, monitoring and oversight that provides (a) guidelines and 
models for compliance with GOI environmental and social requirements and 
(b) suggestions 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
based on international good practice for additional features to enhance the scope and quality of 
assessments and management plans and hence the "bankability" of potential projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/21/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable during project preparation.  The guidelines for investors with regards to 
safeguard obligations will be developed during project implementation as a part of 
Component 2 on Transactions.  They would be completed and included as a part of the bid 
package.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Migara Jayawardena 
11/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/07/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
11/07/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
