Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2305
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P079906 
Project Name:  Strategic Roads Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jerry A. Lebo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Other economic management (P);Decentralization (S);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
195.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
51.00
51.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to improve economic competitiveness by reducing traffic 
congestion on key economic corridors in the Borrower's islands of Java and Sumatra and 
increase the efficiency, quality and transparency of civil works procurement and 
implementation in the Ministry of Public Works.   
 
3. Project Description 
The US$265 million Project includes the following components:  
 
Component 1- Improvements to Strategic National Roads (US$244 million).  This 
component consists of  
 
(a) 
Betterment of approximately 152 kilometers of roads consisting of urban roads 
and inter-urban roads;  
 
(b) 
Expansion of road capacity on approximately 95 kilometers of roads, consisting 
of urban roads and inter-urban roads;  
 
Page  2
(c) 
Construction of approximately 47 kilometers of inter-urban roads on new right-of-
way;  
 
(d) 
Construction of approximately 430 meters of urban bridges and flyovers and a 50 
meter bridge on an inter-urban road; and  
 
(e) 
Implementation of a pilot program Performance-Based Contract on an 
approximately 110 kilometer section of the North Java Corridor involving betterment of 
approximately 10 kilometers and maintenance of approximately 100 kilometers for a 
period of approximately five years.  
 
Component 2- Implementation Support (US$18.95 million).  This component covers 
consulting services and a small amount of equipment required to support implementation 
of the Project, as well as provision of funds to meet the incremental operating costs to be 
incurred by the Directorate of Planning and its Project Management Unit in DGH in the 
implementation of the Project.  
 
(a) 
Supporting the Directorate of Planning (DOP) and its Project Management Unit in 
Project implementation, including environmental management, project performance 
monitoring, implementation of the Anti-Corruption Action Plan, financial management 
monitoring, and reporting.  These services will be provided by Core Team Consultants 
(CTC) whose terms of reference are available in the project files, and the Borrower's 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). This sub-component includes supply of office and 
communications equipment to support management and implementation of the Project by 
Directorate of Planning and financing of incremental operating costs such as staff travel, 
per diems, communications, consumables, web page establishment and maintenance, 
advertising of bidding, printing and publication of project information, rental of meeting 
facilities; however, its excludes staff salaries, costs related to technical audits by the 
Inspectorate General of Ministry of Public Works which expenditures would not have 
been incurred absent the Project.  
 
(b) 
Assisting MPW in the design of works and activities for Sub-Projects under Work 
Program 2 and 3, pre-contract activities, supervision of construction of all works, and 
implementation management under all Work Programs;  
 
(c) 
Assisting MPW in managing and supervising the Performance-Based Contract 
pilot program;  
 
(d) 
Assisting MPW in the procurement of consulting services, good and works, 
including in implementation of the Anti-Corruption Action Plan; and  
 
(e) 
Assisting MPW in carrying out of financial and technical audits on Project works.  
 
Component 3 - Road Sector Institutional Development (US$2.1 million).  This 
component consists of technical assistance and training required to support the road 
sector in Indonesia (with emphasis on Java and Sumatra).  Discussions are underway with 
Page  3
the MPW regarding the need to address various aspects, including: Updating the standard 
Indonesian Road Design Manual with emphasis on filling in gaps in technical base, 
identifying sections which require updating to meet best practices appropriate for 
Indonesian conditions and affecting those updates, and setting up an appropriate 
institutional structure for distribution of the revised manual and the training of all local 
agencies involved in highway development; Identifying the changes to be made to the 
Indonesian Highway Capacity Manual and developing the terms of reference, budget cost 
estimate, and time schedule to affect those changes and to train staff in the use of the 
revised manual; Extend the initiative started under EIRTP-1 in the development of 
planning, programming, and budgeting procedures to cover three (3) provinces in 
Sumatra and five (5) provinces in Java; and Continuation of the successful axle-load 
control pilot that was developed under an earlier Bank supported project. There are 
various funding agencies active in the road sector and some of these activities will be 
taken up under their financing. For example the new Road Sector Development Loan 
supported by the Asian Development Bank included a component on axle-load control. 
Specifically funded under this Project are only the Road Safety Program and training 
program.  
 
(a) 
Supporting road safety programs (US$1.5 million) by clarifying the roles of the 
government agencies involved in traffic safety including MPW, Ministry of Transport, 
and the Police and establishing self sustaining procedures and facilities for personnel 
development for those responsible for traffic management, traffic control and road safety.  
 
(b) 
Training (US$0.6 million) of: (i) DGH Project Managers, staff and procurement 
committees in the application of the Project Management Manual, including procurement 
procedures and (ii) PMU staff, Bapedaldas (at provincial and local levels in the Project 
Provinces), DGH staff assigned to the Project activities in the application of the Project 
Management Manual, including Anti-Corruption Action Plan and Environmental and 
Social Assessment Monitoring Plan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Java and Sumatra.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Asger Christensen (EASSD) 
Ms Sulistiowati Nainggolan (EASSD) 
Ms Farida Zaituni (EASEN) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01):  
 
These types of road investments will have significant impacts during the construction 
and operation stages. During the construction stage the significant impacts are expected 
to be associated with soil erosion and sediment transport and deposition, soil 
contamination, water quality, air quality, quarry management, and spoil deposition and 
noise. These impacts on the natural ecosystems can be long term and pervasive. During 
operations the impacts are expected to be noise, air quality, storm water drainage, lack of 
maintenance, and possible change in land use patterns/planning, resulting in even more 
impacts (if land adjacent to road is changed from agricultural to commercial).  
 
To address these impacts the GoI and the bank agreed on a number of measures 
designed to comply with the AMDAL process in Indonesia and the World Bank? s own 
safeguards policies. These measures were:  
 
?
The safeguard screening category of the Project is 'S1' and the environmental 
screening category of the Project is 'A'.  
 
?
The triggered Bank Env. Safeguards Policies are,  
 
?
Environmental Assessment OP4.01  
 
?
Natural Habitats OP4.04  
 
?
Preparation of EA documents  
 
Therefore, as described below in Section 4, the MPW has prepared an overall 
Environmental and Social Assessment Management Plan (ESAMP), that will serve as the 
Project's umbrella Environmental Assessment.  The full list of Bank safeguards policies 
(10+1) and the environmental requirements of the GOI have all been incorporated into 
the screening process to ensure that if any one of them is triggered by a sub-project, the 
requirements of that policy are complied with if the project is to fund the sub-project, or 
it will be deleted from the approved list of sub-projects.  
 
Page  5
For WP-1, the required AMDALs, UKL/UPLs, and SOPs have already been prepared, 
reviewed and approved by the relevant bodies in Indonesia.  Environmental safeguard 
documents for most of the sub-projects under WP-2 and WP-3 sub projects have also 
been prepared.  These will be revised as needed and new environmental documents 
consistent with the ESAMP will be prepared for any new sub-projects (which might be 
added to the lists) during implementation of SRIP.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): The appraisal of the Project confirms that this safeguard 
policy is not triggered.  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03):  Five cemeteries in Cianjur, Ngawi, Tegal, Kerawang 
and Semarang have been identified in areas affected by sub-projects under WP-1.  Of 
these, two in Cianjur and Semarang have been relocated after extensive consultation with 
the local population.  It has been determined that the other three cemeteries can remain in 
their current location, and steps are being taken to secure them from any potential 
damage as a result of construction activities.Screening for cultural property issues will be 
carried out for all sub-projects under WP-2 and WP-3 as a part of the environmental 
screening process as detailed in the ESAMP.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12):  As the sub projects in SRIP are rolled out, land 
acquisition will occur on a varying scale for sub-projects which require widening of 
existing roads or where new roads are constructed on new right-of-way.  To manage and 
mitigate the risk to people and communities who will become affected by the land use 
and land acquisition needs of SRIP, GOI and the World Bank have agreed to a Land 
Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework.  It ensures that compensation is 
provided at market prices, that any entitlements to project affected persons are paid out 
before their land and other assets are taken into possession by the Project that they have 
been consulted in a participatory manner, and that implementation of land acquisition, 
compensation and resettlement, as well as their post- resettlement status is monitored.  
 
Similar to the management of environment impacts, GOI's ESMAP will serve as the 
Project's umbrella social management document setting out the strategic screening 
process that will ensure that all the Project's social issues are captured.  For individual 
sub projects, GoI has prepared four instruments: (i) Land Acquisition and Resettlement 
Policy Framework (LARAF) to give overall Project guidance for the preparation of the 
LARAPs; (ii) Land Acquisition and  Resettlement Action Plans (LARAPs) which for 
specific subprojects sets out the processes for and agreements on the compensation and 
resettlement assistance to be given to project affected people and communities affected 
by land acquisition; (iii) Abbreviated LARAPs for subprojects when fewer than 200 
persons are affected; and (iv) TRACER Studies as a due diligence investigative report to 
ensure that in cases where land acquisition and resettlement activities were conducted and 
concluded by local governments before SRIP was prepared, the Bank is fully informed of 
how that process was undertaken, and that post-corrective actions if any, is taken 
satisfactorily to the Bank.  
 
Page  6
Consultations:  The ESAMP contains detailed requirements for consultation regarding 
land acquisition and resettlement.  For each subproject, consultations with PAPs were 
carried out as part of the preparation of the LARAP.  These consultations comprised 
information to PAPs on subproject design, and their compensation entitlements and 
options.  Moreover, LGUs consult with PAPs on compensation since the finalization of 
compensation amounts is done through negotiation (musyawarah = deliberation) with 
PAPs.  
 
Grievance procedures will be available to all PAPs, and the executing agency and local 
authorities will be responsible for ensuring that PAPs are aware of the procedures and 
have full information concerning the planning and implementation of resettlement 
activities.  
 
Monitoring of implementation of the LARAP for each sub-project will be carried out by 
the local Monitoring Teams on a bi-monthly basis.  Project wide monitoring and 
reporting will be supervised by PMU and its CTC consultants, and the monthly 
monitoring reports will be sent to PPU/PMU and its consultants (CTC).  The Sub-
Directorate of Environmental Affairs (DGH) will be involved in this process.  PMU will 
in turn forward the monitoring reports to the Bank for review and comment.  The 
monitoring consultants and their terms of reference will be cleared by the Bank.  By the 
Midterm Review and by Project closure, an evaluation based on TOR approved by the 
Bank will be conducted by an independent consultant.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10):  No proposed sub-project location is in areas that would 
affect indigenous people (IP).  Most sub-project locations are in Java and none of them 
affect or pass through areas in which IPs live.  Other locations of proposed sub-projects 
are in urban areas of Sumatra (Palembang, Lampung, Jambi) in which no IPs have been 
identified.  For those sub-projects that have not yet been identified (especially under  
WP-2 and WP-3), a screening process will be carried out as a part of the EA process to 
determine whether there are any IPs in the areas to be affected by the sub-projects.  
However, at this point it is not anticipated that such populations will exist in the areas 
considered likely candidates for sub-projects.  
 
Disclosure has been carried out at the World Bank?s Infoshop on February 1, 2006, the 
Jakarta PIC, and the web site of MPW of the ESAMP with includes the LARF, three 
AMDALs, an example of one UKL/UPL, an example of one LARAP and one 
Abbreviated LARAP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
potential long term impact with both environmental and social dimensions is the 
unregulated build-up of housing and businesses along the newly constructed or improved 
road corridors which may happen in the absence of local land use planning and 
enforcement of such plans.  Management and mitigation of such impacts are beyond the 
scope of the proposed project.   
 
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Following identification of land acquisition impacts by specific sub-projects, design 
alternatives have been considered to minimize these impacts.  However, in some cases 
(e.g. intersections) a trade-off has to be made between a design which emphasizes road 
safety (and which may be relatively demanding in terms of land requirements), and a 
design which emphasizes minimizing of land acquisition impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To ensure the project's significant potential impacts are identified, analyzed and clearly 
understood so that they can be effectively avoided, minimized, and/or acceptably 
managed, the GOI has adopted an environmental management process that is adequately 
funded. As part of this process, GOI has adopted an overall Environmental and Social 
Assessment Management Plan (ESAMP), which will serve as the Project's umbrella 
Environmental and Social Assessment, setting out a strategic screening process that will 
ensure all Project associated adverse impacts are identified, effectively mitigated through 
the implementation of tangible measures for each sub-project, are monitored both at the 
sub-project level and cumulatively, and that the required and sustainable institutional 
framework for these measures is functioning and is monitored.  This process is funded 
through the Project.  
 
A
two-stage environmental screening process has been followed: (a) an initial screening 
to determine whether any environmental examination is required, and (b) a second stage 
screening to determine the extent of further environmental examination.  The screening 
process will result in categorizing sub-projects into category 'A', 'B', or 'C' depending on 
the nature, scope, and intensity of potential adverse impact of the sub project.  The 
screening procedure and its results are described in full in the ESAMP.  Category 'A' sub-
projects being the most severe, will require sub-project EIA's/AMDALS (Environmental 
Assessments), Category 'B' sub-projects will require Environmental Management Plans 
(UKL) and Monitoring Plans (UPL), and Category 'C' sub-projects will require only 
standard operation procedures (SOP).  
 
Effective implementation of the environmental aspects of the ESAMP will be the 
responsibility of the Directorate of Planning, DGH, through the relevant government 
agencies at the Provincial, City and District (Kabupaten) levels of Government.  The 
relevant agencies in Sumatra have received the necessary training under the Bank-
financed SRRP. The corresponding agencies in Java have received the same training 
financed by another project.  Training for Bapedaldas at the provincial and local levels in 
the project area in both Sumatra and Java will receive training on use and application of 
ESAMP in 2006 as part of training on use of the Project Management Manual.  Oversight 
of and guidance on ESAMP implementation will be provided by the Directorate of 
Planning, which is supported by a Core Team Consultant (CTC) and a Design and 
Supervision Consultants (DSC) and the Sub-Directorate of Environmental Affairs at the 
DGH.  The CTC team will include environmental specialists who are directly involved in 
screening sub-projects for potential impacts and monitoring implementation.   
Page  8
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental:  Two-stage public consultations process was carried out for the AMDAL 
sub-projects.  For the other sub-projects not requiring an AMDAL, a single stage public 
consultation was conducted.  The detailed dates and locations are described in the 
ESAMP.   
 
Social:  Key stakeholders are the PMU (in MPW) in charge of project management, 
LGUs responsible for planning and implementation of land acquisition, and the project 
affected people. For each subproject, consultations with PAPs were carried out as part of 
the preparation of the LARAP.  These consultations comprised information to PAPs on 
subproject design, and their compensation entitlements and options.  Moreover, LGUs 
consult with PAPs on compensation since the finalization of compensation amounts is 
done through negotiation (musyawarah = deliberation) with PAPs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/02/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/28/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/02/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/01/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  9
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jerry A. Lebo 
05/17/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
05/17/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Asger Christensen 
05/17/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Sulistiowati Nainggolan 
05/17/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
05/17/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
05/18/2006 
Comments:   
