Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2006 
Report No.:  AC2233
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P085375 
Project Name:  Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income Communities Project 
Task Team Leader:  Vicente B. Paqueo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (40%);Sanitation (30%);Health (30%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
138.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
69.40 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
38.70
108.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project, which is now re-named PAMSIMAS, will support the development of a 
sustainable nationwide program to improve water access, sanitation, and hygiene through 
the mainstreaming and scaling up of the WSSLIC (Water Supply and Sanitation for Low 
Income Communities) model. The project objectives are to:  
 
ï‚§ 
facilitate sustained expansion of people’s access to improved water supply and 
sanitation at a sufficiently rapid rate to make the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene - 
Millennium Development Goals achievable;  
 
ï‚§ 
promote widespread adoption of recommended hygiene practices to reduce 
transmission of waterborne diseases, promote healthier lives and protect the environment;  
 
ï‚§ 
establish a coherent institutional arrangement for the financing and 
implementation of water, sanitation and hygiene improvements involving Central 
Government, District Governments and the communities; and  
 
ï‚§ 
develop ways by which poor villages with proven capacity for community 
action(as evidenced by the success of their water, sanitation and hygiene project) can 
broaden that capacity and enable them to grow their village economy, leading to more 
water, sanitation and hygiene improvements in the long run.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project interventions that are necessary for attaining the objectives are grouped into 
the following components:  
 
Component 1: Community Empowerment and Local Institution Development  
 
This component will assist with the development of informed choice and collective 
action by participating communities in planning, managing and sustaining their water, 
sanitation and hygiene improvement programs.  
 
Component 2: Improving Sanitation and Hygiene Practices  
 
The Project will finance expenditures, such as workshops, incentive grants, promotional 
materials and technical advice to promote sustained and more rapid adoption of improved 
sanitation and hygiene practices.  This will include support for the development of market 
capacity to supply sanitation/hygiene services and capacity building for local government 
in using behavior changing communication.  
 
Component 3: Water Supply and Peri-Urban Sanitation Infrastructure  
 
This component will provide grants to finance community water improvement 
subprojects based on a menu of possible (environmentally friendly) technical options, 
with support from facilitators hired by the project. Communities will receive block grants 
and contribute a minimum of 20% of sub-project costs.  
 
Component 4: Social and Economic Development Grants  
 
Grants will be provided under this component at district and village level to provide 
incentives to up-scale and ensuring sustainability of projects provided under Component 
3, with a minimum co-financing requirement from participating districts and villages.  
 
Component 5: Project Management Support  
 
This component will fund consultants, office supplies, travel and other expenses 
incidental to the management, coordination, monitoring/evaluation, and oversight 
activities at various levels.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As mentioned, the PAMSIMAS Project builds on and seeks to upscale two previous 
phases of World Bank support for the water and sanitation sector. The WSLIC projects 
covered approximately 3,000 communities in more than 70 districts.  The PAMSIMAS 
Project will support a national program and immediately add coverage to 5,000 more 
villages. From the physical environmental perspective, therefore, the physical 
development components of the project are likely to be implemented across the length 
and breadth of Indonesia’s highly varied climatic, geological, agricultural and ecological 
zones. This will likely encompass zones where there is already significant pressure on 
water resources, as well as areas that are prone to natural disasters.  
 
Similarly the project will encompass Indonesia’s huge cultural diversity and will need to 
take into account the different needs and concerns of isolated vulnerable groups and 
Page  3
disadvantaged groups such as poor women, landless people and other minorities (See 
Section II. D. on Social Inclusion).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chitrawati Buchori (EASSD) 
Ms Farida Zaituni (EASEN) 
Ms Francisca Melia Setiawati (EASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not lead to land conversion, the destruction of environmentally sensitive 
areas or historically significant sites and/or other cultural resources.  Environmental risks 
are likely to be associated primarily with the community water supply component and, to 
a
lesser extent, the village development grants component.  The water supply component 
will provide grants for communities to plan, build and manage water supply systems 
based on a menu of possible technical options. Based on WSLIC I and 2 experiences, 
solid waste management is an issue which also should be handled properly. In some 
villages, most of the community still dump solid waste into the river and/or drainage, 
whose water is used as a water source. Through PAMSIMAS, advice will be provided in 
the form of community and technical facilitators, which in many areas will draw from 
KDP knowledge and information networks.  
 
Facilitators will be provided with training in ensuring that communities are aware of 
associated environmental costs and considerations (such as the potential for poor design 
to lead to contamination of drinking water supplies and the over-utilization of 
groundwater).  The list of technical options will be pre-screened to address significant 
issues.  It is important to do a selection and screening of the water source location, since 
many of the existing water sources are now located in areas of de-forestation. The basic 
approach will be to screen out environmentally damaging technologies in advance, rather 
than to expect local communities to manage and mitigate potentially complex 
environmental problems during the implementation of sub-projects.  The project also 
Page  4
includes a strong focus on sanitation and hygiene as a means of addressing residual 
impacts associated with provision of water supply.  
 
The district and village development grants component will not finance income 
generating enterprises, but rather focus on measures to support up-scaling and ensuring 
the sustainability of community water and sanitation projects.  As with most such 
initiatives, the use of a list of activities that will not be eligible for support on 
environmental grounds (negative list) is normally found to be the most efficient way of 
addressing environmental safeguard issues.  This component will be subjected to rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation, including an assessment of residual environmental and social 
impacts.  
 
In summary, the project will apply the following specific approaches in addressing the 
above mentioned risks:  
 
-
Environmental screening of technical options for community water supply based 
on previous experience from WSSLC 1 and 2.  The finalized list will not include options 
that are known to lead to significant residual environmental impacts or to place a 
substantial environmental management responsibility on local communities during the 
operational phase.  Specialist environmental advice will be required to support the 
Central PMU in developing the finalized list of technical options.  
 
-
Integration of an environmental module into the training for ‘technical’ 
facilitators, to address environmental sustainability issues associated with community 
based provision of water and sanitation, taking into account the variations in 
environmental conditions than exist from one region to another.  This training module 
will be developed and delivered by a suitable trainer drawn from appropriate national or 
regional training institutions.  
 
-
Use of a negative list of types of activities that will not be funded under the 
district and village development grant component on environmental grounds.  The 
project’s Central PMU will be responsible for ensuring that this list is applied effectively.  
 
-
Mid term environmental and social review to assess the scale and direction (+ve/-
ve) of emerging impacts with a specific focus on: uptake on the water supply component; 
performance of the village development grants; and the development and implementation 
of the Partnership Agreements.  
 
The project will also consider the need for integration of a clause on environmental 
sustainability into the proposed Partnership Agreements between Central and District 
Governments on improving water, sanitation and hygiene practices, which will set out the 
rights and obligations of respective partners.  The clause would place responsibility on 
participating District Governments to ensure that their Annual Action Plans for 
community based water supply and environmental sanitation are based on an assessment 
of environmental needs and constraints.  
 
Social inclusion  
 
The main social risk is related to the exclusion of vulnerable groups, such as women, 
landless and the poorest (including indigenous people if they are present), either on the 
selection of the villages/the target groups or on the community decision making process. 
Page  5
The project should ensure that vulnerable groups have the same chances of inclusion in 
all project cycles and in project benefits as others who are better off.  
 
WSLIC2 project experience shows that election of Community Working Team (TKMs) 
and Management Body of water users (BPs) have been conducted in less gender-sensitive 
way. CFT should be able to play important role in encouraging women to play a bigger 
role as women are primary users of water.  
 
A
system should be created to ensure that the project’s benefit will reach the vulnerable 
groups and poorest of the poor, such as cross subsidy system for water maintenance or 
water cost. Some experiences from WSLIC2 project show that richer households can 
afford to have additional pipes directly from the well to their house, but the poor can not 
do so. This will decrease the poor’s access to water, especially when the water level 
decreases during dry season and could create conflict in the community. CFT should help 
the community in developing a system that ensures the poorest of the poor to have equal 
access to water.  
 
In summary, the project will apply the following approaches to address the above 
mentioned risks:  
 
-
Inclusion of the vulnerable group concept (including how to build a pro-poor 
system) in project implementation, which will be operationalized and detailed in the 
project manuals (on the Term of Reference and manual for facilitators and community 
group decision making process/consultation meetings). District consultant, community 
facilitators and other project staff will be trained in application of the concept. Special 
opportunity or events should be created to ensure a fair community decision making 
process between the elite and the vulnerable population.  
 
-
Building-up gender-sensitive facilitation skills and gender balance in the project 
structure:  
 
-
Selection of project consultants needs to consider gender balance, including the 
adoption, if needed, of  gender affirmative action to create a gender sensitive project.  
 
-
CFTs play a critical role in building up awareness of gender equality within the 
community and in facilitating gender-sensitive processes. A basic gender training 
followed up by on the job training needs to be given to CFTs to build up their gender-
sensitive facilitation skills.  
 
-
Mid term social review to assess the scale and direction of emerging impact with 
a
specific focus on: vulnerable people participation in all project cycle and village team; 
proportion of poor people benefits from the project, and special treatment for poor people 
in regard to user fee and any other contribution. A social impact evaluation related to the 
key issues above need to be conducted at the end of the project.  
 
Land acquisition and resettlement  
 
No land acquisition and resettlement will be undertaken. As the project needs only a 
small piece of land for water supply infrastructure, a community is expected to use 
existing public spaces or voluntarily contribute land needed by the project in exchange 
for the community’s benefits from the project. CFT should ensure that the process will be 
conducted in a participatory manner to avoid elite domination of the infrastructure built.  
The project should issue a written statement on the willingness of the donor to donate 
land, which will have to be signed by the donor and acknowledged by head village.   
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the longer term, with the successful development and implementation of partnership 
agreements, the Project is likely to lead to a range of positive environmental impacts by 
improving access to clean water to poor communities and by providing greater awareness 
of related sanitation and hygiene practices.  Potential negative environmental impacts 
associated with the water supply component will be minimized via a pre-screening 
approach combined with mid-term review, at which point adjustments may be made to 
the list of technical options available.  
 
For longer term impacts, vulnerable people participation (including women’s 
involvement) in all project cycle will lead to community’s ownership of the project, 
including women’s involvement in daily maintenance and cleaning of water installation. 
This is imperative for sustainability reasons.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Project provides a menu of water supply options to local communities. These will be 
pre-screened to take into account environmental issues, and higher risk options will be 
screened out at this point.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The lead executing agency (Public Works) has a generally higher environmental 
management capacity than other line Ministries, as well as considerable experience with 
the World Bank environmental and social safeguards procedures. However, the 
Directorate Generals of Cipta Karya (DGCK) as the implementing body, still needs to be 
improved in terms of it. Therefore, the DGCK would require a program of orientation and 
training including district level officials on how to handling safeguards issues. The 
responsibility for implementation of required safeguards actions could therefore 
relatively easily be addressed.  
 
Based on WSLIC 1 and 2 experiences, the management and monitoring of the 
environmental issues, such as landslide, flood control, de-forestation, and solid waste can 
not be done by the community at the village level without support from higher 
institutional levels. The de-forestation issue, for example, has to be discussed at the 
district level. The PAMSIMAS project can be one of the facilitators for addressing this 
issue, and make this a trigger for local government involvement.  
 
The borrower will prepare a social and environmental annexed to the PAD, based on the 
key elements presented in section D1.  This annex will identify key risks and mitigation 
and monitoring measures, assess capacities to implement mitigation and monitoring, and 
identify additional expertise, training and capacity building needs.  The project staffing 
plan will reflect the need to oversee implementation of required mitigation, including 
necessary social and environmental expertise to support the Central and regional PMUs.   
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are poor local communities lacking access to secure water supply 
and with limited awareness of associated sanitation and hygiene practices.  District 
Governments are also important stakeholders, as recipients of added capacity to help to 
implement the Government’s policy on Community Based Water Supply and 
Environmental Sanitation.  The project approach highlights disclosure and increased 
awareness among low income communities. It will help to make district level planning 
and implementation more open and transparent in the water and sanitation sector and to 
strengthen the capacity of poor villages in participating in these processes. The project 
preparation process will also involve development of a social and environmental annex to 
the PAD which will be discussed at national and regional levels prior to finalization.  The 
PAD will be made available to the public through the Bank's Project Information Centers 
in Jakarta and Washington, and the environmental and social annex will be integrated 
into the project manuals.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/13/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/13/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
No 
Page  8
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vicente B. Paqueo 
04/05/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Farida Zaituni 
04/05/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Chitrawati Buchori 
04/05/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Francisca Melia Setiawati 
04/05/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
 
Comments:   
