Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2977 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/24/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P096921 
Project Name: National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas 
Task Team Leader: George Soraya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (27%);Health (27%);General education sector (27%);Other 
social services (13%);Sub-national government administration (6%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1,800.00
1,850.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to benefit the urban poor by improving services 
and infrastructure identified and delivered in a more effective and participatory manner through 
the scaling up of a sustainable national program for poverty reduction. The results monitoring 
framework and indicators will build on the revised indicators applied for the UPP 2 additional 
financing and will be finalized during project appraisal. Indicators will also be synergized with 
those of the KDP PNPM project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The PNPM is being designed as a consolidated poverty reduction program, but between now and 
2009 the government will continue to maintain separate urban and rural windows for 
implementation managed by the Ministry of Public Works (UPP) and the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (KDP). It is important to note that beyond 2009, the government may create a special 
agency to oversee all poverty programs, but this is still under discussion. In the meantime, GOI 
has developed a framework for close collaboration and harmonization of UPP and KDP projects 
Page  2
to foster a greater degree of cross fertilization. Total financing needs, packaging, and the most 
appropriate lending instrument are still under discussion. It is expected that both projects would 
launch in early 2008 and be implemented through 2011.  
 
The UPP is being leveraged as part of the PNPM because it is one of the largest urban poverty 
reduction projects in the world, with an established record of community engagement, 
participation, and service delivery. More than 6,400 of the poorest urban Indonesian wards, or 
kelurahans, have participated in and benefited from the UPP program. The majority of funds 
have supported small-scale infrastructure construction and maintenance and revolving fund 
schemes. Technical quality of infrastructure of the roads, bridges and water and sanitation 
schemes constructed under UPP has been assessed by the task team during supervision missions 
and by the government and found to be satisfactory in over 85 percent of sub-projects. GOI also 
estimates that infrastructure financed through UPP using a participatory approach produced 
savings of more than 35 percent of the total cost of using contractors. The model has also been 
successful in leveraging support from NGOs and social organizations, which use UPP as a 
vehicle for channeling financial support to poor urban communities. The total cost of the PNPM 
in urban areas is expected to be US$600 million per year. This cost will be shared by various 
donors, domestic financing (central and local), and the Bank. The Bank financing is expected to 
be US$200 million for 3 years, from 2008-2011. GOI will initially finance 50% of the program 
and scale up to full financing by 2012.  
 
The main components will include:  
 
(a) Community Planning and Capacity Building (US$xxx million): This component would 
require about 7 percent of the project funds. It would fund the cost of facilitators to carry out 
social intermediation activities, training, workshops, meetings and focus group discussions, and 
production of socialization materials and publications. Outputs under this component include 
community development plans (CDP), training and socialization of communities about the 
PNPM, and the formation of community boards of trustees (BKMs).  
 
(b) Kelurahan Grants (US$xxx million): This component would comprise about 75 percent of 
the loan/credit. Sub-projects included in the CDPs are supported by block grants for kelurahans. 
These sub-projects cover an open menu of poverty alleviation activities with a short negative list. 
Typical activities for this component fall into three categories: infrastructure, revolving funds, 
and social assistance.  
 
o
Specific infrastructure investments are pre-identified by communities and consist of 
bridges, roads, public toilets, drainage, health facility repair, etc. Most of these sub-projects 
focus on the improvement or repair of existing infrastructure.  
 
o
Revolving funds for community groups are designed to target the poor who do not have 
access to other lending sources. A joint KDP/UPP study on the effectiveness and sustainability 
of revolving funds is under preparation and will be completed by May 2007. The results of this 
study will feed into the design of the project.  
 
o
Social assistance is provided through small grants to the poorest or most vulnerable 
individuals to pay for scholarships, health care, etc.  
 
Page  3
(c) Local Government Capacity Building (US$xxx million): This component would use about 5 
percent of project funds. It would support the training and socialization of local government staff 
on the PNPM and leverage support from local governments to share costs of sub-projects. The 
PNPM will support devolving responsibility to local governments and enhancing their capacities 
established by UPP proceeds uninterrupted as the transition occurs to the PNPM. The project 
will also require that local governments provide counterpart funds for administrative work at the 
kota, kecamatan, and kelurahan levels.  
 
(d) Implementation and Technical Assistance (US$xxx million): This component would require 
about 10 percent of the loan/credit. For the additional financing, the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) has hired consultants and facilitators to assist in project implementation. This 
arrangement would be evaluated and expanded to deal with the scaling up of the PNPM. 
Technical assistance would be provided through national management consultants (NMC) at the 
central level, and oversight consultant (OC) teams at the provincial level, with offices in the 
participating districts.  
 
(e)  Monitoring and evaluation (US$xxx million): This component would require about 3 
percent of the loan/credit, and would cover the costs of qualitative and quantitative monitoring. 
A
management information system (MIS), project website, and complaints handling mechanism 
would also be established. These elements would build on existing M&E framework being put in 
place for the UPP 2 additional financing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The additional financing provided through UPP 2 to support the launch of the PNPM in 2007 
will cover implementation of the program in about 7,300 kelurahans in all 33 provinces in 
Indonesia. Including areas covered by the additional financing and the ongoing UPP 3 project, 
the proposed project would scale up to about 12,000 kelurahans by 2009. In existing UPP areas, 
funds will be used to strengthen community organizations and carry out more sophisticated 
poverty alleviation interventions tied to achievement of the MDGs. These communities will be 
ready to begin implementing block grants in 2008, while newly added communities will initially 
require socialization and training on the PNPM, and will be ready to receive the block grants in 
2009. Table 1 above shows the roll out of the PNPM in urban areas by 2010. This level of 
scaling up will require enhanced oversight and management, the recruitment of facilitators and 
consultants, and intensive Bank supervision. These issues will be carefully considered during 
project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower is familiar with and has the capacity to implement the environmental guidelines, 
land acquisition and resettlement frameworks as well as IVP framework, as it has managed the 
implementation of UPPs over the last 7 years. An environmental specialist and a social expert 
will be recruited as part of the National Consultant Team who will assist the PMU of the 
Executing Agency. The environmental specialist and the social expert will provide necessary 
trainings on environmental guidelines, land acquisition and resettlement, as well as IVP policy 
frameworks and cultural property identification to the urban local governments, regional 
management consultant teams who will have to ensure that the project will follow the guidelines.  
Page  4
The Project Operation Manual of PNPM includes the operationalization of the three safeguard 
frameworks.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Vivianti Rambe (EASRE) 
Ms Sulistiowati Nainggolan (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
-
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project will identify sites having archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or 
unique natural values as defined under the OPN and determine if project activities will have 
adverse affects on them. Subprojects adversely affecting the cultural property will not be eligible 
for financing under the project.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
based on the UPP-2 PNPM additional financing and will be synchronized with KDP?s 
framework   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/22/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
September 2007   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr George Soraya 
05/09/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
 
Comments:   
