Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                          APPRAISAL STAGE

                               I. Basic Information
                               Date prepared/updated: 05/29/2007                                                 Repopr6io.-
                               1. Basic Project Data
                               Countr     idonesia                         Project ID: P104482
                               Project Name: Pontianak Landfill Gas Flaring Project
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Task Team Leader: James Orehmie Monday
                               Estimated Appraisal Date: May 23', 2007     Estimated Board Date: NA
                               Managing Unit: EASRE                        Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
                               Sector: Environment
                               Theme: Climate Change Mitigation, Municipal Solid Waste Management
                               IBRD Amount (IJS$m.):         0.00
                               IDA Amount    (US $m.):       0.00
                               GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
                               PCF Amount (US$m.):        TBD
                               Other financing amounts by source:
                                       BORROWER/RECIPIENT
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                               SimPlified Processing                        SimPle                 Repeater []
                               Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)         Yes []         No EX]

                               2. Project Objectives
                               The project objective is to reduce Landfill Gas (LFG) emissions from municipal solid
                               waste disposed of at the City of Pontianak's landfill, TPA Batu Layang through a carbon
                               finance transaction. The key indicator for this objective will be the annual delivery of
                               ERs. In addition to the global benefits of GHG reductions through a LFG collection and
                               flaring system, the agreement between PT Gikoko Kogyo Indonesia (Gikoko), and the
                               City Government will provide funds from the ER revenues to improve landfill
                               management and waste collection, and increase social benefits for the surrounding
                               communities.
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               3. Project Description
                               The project includes the installation of an LFG collection and enclosed LFG flaring
                               system to destroy methane gas that is generated at the landfill. In addition, the project
                               will utilize some of the collected LFG for the generation of electricity required to operate
                               the facility.

                               This CDM project will be implemented under a Build Own & Operate (BOO)
                               commercial agreement between Gikoko and the City Government that will cover the LFG
                               collection and flaring system as well as budgetary requirements for landfill management
                               and waste collection improvements.
The LFG collection and flaring facilities will include the following components: (i)
collection system consisting of horizontal and vertical wells and collection pipes will be
installed in the areas filled with waste; the additional areas will be expanded and filled
over time; (ii) LFG pumping equipment will include a pipeline and blowers; (iii) LFG
treatment and flare system which will remove moisture and combust the LFG; (iv)
monitoring and control system; and, (v) 120kW generator for on-site electricity needs.'

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Pontianak City is the capital of West Kalimantan province with 107.82 square kilometers
of land area. The Pontianak landfill, TPA Batu Layang, is located 15 km from the city
center on a 26.6 hectare parcel of land owned by the City Government. The landfill is
estimated to have received approximately 400,000 tons of municipal solid waste by the
end of 2006. The landfill receives waste from the city -- mainly organic wastes from
residential areas. It also receives waste from commercial, markets, offices, public
facilities and industrial areas. Disposal of hazardous waste is not allowed in the landfill.

In 1994-95, 5.4 hectares of land was acquired for phase 1, followed by an acquisition of
4.1 and 3.3 hectares for phase 2 and 3, respectively. The landfill started its operation in
1996. Within the current 12.8 hectares of land, 11 hectares have been used for waste
disposal and the remaining area is earmarked as a buffer zone. The next land acquisition
is planned adjacent to the existing site, which will increase the land area from 12.8
hectares to 26.6 hectares.

The landfill is surrounded by crop, fruit orchards and agricultural lands, Some areas are
also covered by bushes and paku-pakuan. The are two villages near the landfill, namely
Batulayang Village and Siantan Hilir Village have a population of 556 and 52 residents
respectively. The Sahang River provides surface water to the Musa Ditch on the east of
the landfill and Maduxa Ditch on the west of the landfill.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Sulistiowati Nainggolan (EASSO)
   Mr Hiroshi Ono (EASRE)
   Ms Vivianti Rambe (EASRE)




 A percentage of the LFG captured will be used to produce the electricity from the 120kW generator that
will supply the site's electricity requirements, but no emission reductions will be claimed from the
displacement of electricity from the grid.
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                               Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                          X
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPJBP 4.11)                                                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                        X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The environmental benefits from the destruction of methane will result from: (a)
improved management of leachate, capturing projected levels of methane and capping of
closed cells; and (b) the use of part of the ER revenues being ploughed back into the
City's waste collection operation which will in turn lead to increase in the city's waste
collection rate.

Notwithstanding, there are significant environmental concerns at the existing landfill. For
example, at the existing landfill site where the LFG collection and flaring system is
installed, the collection of leachate will be captured by ditches and pits around waste cells.
There are no collection pipes at the bottom of the waste layer, or sufficient leachate
treatment facilities. The drainage system is not managed well and is often blocked by
waste, which leads to the leachate overflowing into nearby land during the rainy season.
The quality of surface and ground water near the landfill does not meet the applicable
water quality standards. Test results for water quality often indicates high organic
contents and strong acidity due to natural humus as the site is located on compiled peat
soil, and it is unclear to which extent the leachate contributes to the organic and other
contents of the water.

In addition to these existing problems, the installation of LFG collection and flaring
facilities may also cause adverse environmental consequences such as air pollution unless
it is properly designed and implemented. Also, the planned landfill expansion may cause
environmental impacts such as noise, dust, odor and water pollution both in the
construction and operation phases.

The City of Pontianak has acquired land for TPA Batulayang from 1994 to 2006 and
plans to acquire an additional 2.08 ha within this year. 2 The project does not anticipate

2 Refer to the Presidential Decree No 36 of 2005 and 65 of 2006 compensation refers to the market price.
any resettlement or relocation of affected people. The existing peat land has no building
or inhabitants. The people living around the TPA are ethnic Dayak and are migrants
from other districts and working in informal sector. Theses Dayak people who are living
near the landfill site are not indigenous peoples as described in OP4.12 as they are: (i)
migrants from other towns and villages, not the original inhabitants of the area, (ii) not
dependent on the natural resources, and (iii) working in the informal sector. Therefore,
no indigenous peoples are effected.

There are two large waste picker communities near the landfill site, whereby the
Batulayang Village and Siantan Hilir have about 556 residents (more than 20%) and 52
residents (of which 80%) work as waste pickers, respectively. Those who live close to
the landfill site are affected by noise and vibration from heavy machinery operation. The
resident children collect recyclables from disposed waste without wearing any protective
devices from the loading areas before the waste is moved by an excavator to a cell.
 Given these, environmental pollution, health and safety conditions, and from surface and
possible ground water contamination due to leachate, there remains major health hazards
 for the waste pickers.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

This project is expected to improve management of the landfill including appropriate
leachate management and waste picker controls as these measures are a pre-requisite for
generating the projected levels of methane. These improvements are driven by a strong
economic incentive to achieve more ERs by means of generating and collecting more
methane.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

The alternatives include: (i) continuation of current landfill operations and management
practices and passive landfill gas venting (without project scenario - Alternative 1); (ii)
LFG capture and flaring (Alternative 2); (iii) LFG capture and power generation or off-
site gas supply (Alternative 3); and (iv) LFG capture and flaring as well as composting of
organic fraction of waste streams (Alternative 4).

The feasibility study showed that Alternatives 3 and 4 are not economically feasible.

While Alternative 1 option is the least costly, environmental problems associated with the
existing landfill -- such as poorly controlled leachate, unstable slopes and generation of
disease vectors -- will remain since current low revenue sources would not allow the City
Government to make additional investments for addressing such problems. Therefore,
Alternative 2 was selected where the improvement of landfill management and other
waste management system can be undertaken by using the carbon revenues with minimal
associated investment risks. Within Alternative 2, the application of the LFG collection
and flaring system, and the expanded landfill site meeting sanitary landfill requirements
is also considered. However, this option was rejected because of a lost opportunity to
improve poorly managed existing landfill site where environmental conditions are most
sernous.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

To ensure compliance with the Safeguards Policy, Environment Assessment (EA) was
conducted for the LFG collection and flaring system and an Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) is established. It is expected that the adverse environmental impacts such as
air pollution due to the installation and operation of LFG collection and flaring facilities
are not significant, and can be well managed by the planmed mitigation measures.
Gikoko, in cooperation with the owner and operator of the landfill, which is the City
Government, is responsible for the implementation of the EMP.

Although Gikoko has not been involved in any World Bank projects, it has 40 years of
experience in environmental engineering and operation business in Indonesia. Gikoko is
familiar with the Indonesian EA requirements and has a sound capacity to meet these
requirements.     Recently, Gikoko has established a CDM team including three
environmental staff to fully engage in CDM business. It also hires international
consultants with strong expertise in landfill management and CDM projects. Gikoko,
with full support of the City Government, is now equipped with the capacity to plan and
implement adequate mitigation measures for the project.

A Due Diligence assessment on the existing landfill performance and on the draft
ELA/EMP for the landfill expansion was conducted. The City Government, with financial
support from the National Public Works Department, has and is implementing a
comprehensive plan to improve drainage and leachate management of the landfill, as well
as, water quality monitoring and public health and sanitary services. The expanded
landfill site will be equipped with leachate collection pipelines and treatment facilities
such as facultative pond, sludge drying bed, sedimentation and maturation ponds.
Although environmental impacts such as noise, dust, odor and water pollution are
expected both during the construction and operation phases of the expanded landfill,
these potential impacts could be well managed by implementation of the measures in the
EMP. The Provincial Government is now reviewing the draft EIA for the landfill
expansion and its approval is expected soon. The commencement of the use of expanded
site is subject to the final approval of the EIA report.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

 Consultation with local communities (including waste pickers), government officials and
journalists has been undertaken several times; including two rounds of stakeholder
 meetings in December 2006 and January 2007. More than 80 people attended these
meetings. A local community interview was also conducted in March 2007. The
majority of the participants had, in principle, no objection to the implementation of this
project and strongly supported the improved waste management activities associated with
the project. They, however, raised concerns on negative impacts in waste transportation
and leachate encroachment to their lands, and expected that the project would give an
opportunity to mitigate such problems. The environmental and social report was
disclosed locally as well as at InfoShop in May 2006.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/04/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/29/2007
  Date of submission   to InfoShop                            05/04/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      NA
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     N/A
  Date of "in-country"   disclosure                               N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:N/A



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
 review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
 credit/loan/ ERPA?
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              N/A
 framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
 Manager review the plan?
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
 Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a           Yes
 form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
 groups and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities        Yes
 been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
 policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project       Yes
 cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the               Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

                                                    Namne                              Date
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                   Mr James Orehnie Monday      y/--           J    5/29/2007
Environmental Specialist:              Hiroshi           -          /-               5/28/2007

                                    Ms Sulistiowati Nainggolan                       5128/2007
Social Development Specialist

Additional Environmental and/or     $s. Vivianti Rambe                               5/28/2007
Social Development Specialist(s):
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Not applicable
  Comments:                                      r                4u L
                                                                  s
Sector Manager:                     MtsRahl Raturi
  C-~omments:
