Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I ­ Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 04, 2006
A. Basic Project Data
COUNTRY: Indonesia                                   PROJECT ID: P098308
PROJECT: Partnerships for Conservation Management of TTL: Tony Whitten
the Aketajawe-Lolobata National Park, North Maluku
Province(GEF)
GEF CEO Endorsement:                                 GEF AMOUNT ($m): 0.999954
MANAGING UNIT: EASEN                                 SECTOR:
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: GEF MSP                         STATUS: Lending




                                                                             1

1.A.2 Project Objectives:
The proposed project's central development objective is "The enabling framework for
collaborative management of protected areas in Indonesia is strengthened through promotion and
replication of the Aketajawe-Lolobata project approach" and the global biodiversity goal that will
be achieved during the 5 years of the project is "Globally significant biodiversity of Aketajawe
Lolobata NP is conserved through an effective conservation management regime which has the
active support of local stakeholders".

In particular, the project proposes to: (a) establish an adequate basis of biological and social
information for the management of the National Park; (b) develop an effective management
regime for ALNP including facilitating bi-lateral agreements between the National Park and
neighboring communities and industries, rationalizing and re-marking the boundaries of the
National Park, establishing a multistakeholder forum to provide oversight, and working with
District Government to integrate spatial planning and National Park management; (c) ensure that
the National Park management and other stakeholders have adequate capacity (resources, skills,
information) to play an effective role; (d) a monitoring system supports effective lesson learning
and evaluation; (e) information and lessons from the project shared with other relevant
institutions Indonesia; (f) ensure high levels of awareness and support amongst the public and
decision makers in the three affected Districts and the main towns in North Maluku.

1.A.3 Project Description

To achieve the above objectives, the project is broken into six components (A-F), pus a project
management component (G):
Component A, Defining the scope for management of the National Park, will be implemented
in the first year of the project and will generate information and analysis needed to plan, priorities
and execute subsequent activities as well as baselines for monitoring. Satellite image analysis and
ground visits to both communities and concessions will give an updated and detailed picture of
the status of the Parks resources and the seriousness of current threats. Targeted studies will
address the use of natural resources from the park by the Forest Tobelo ethnic group, and the
potential impact of the Park on this group, and a biodiversity survey team will establish a baseline
of relative abundance of key species, as well as an assessment of levels of trapping and trade in
wildlife. The studies and surveys will be undertaken by experienced consultants, assisted by
teams recruited from local communities or universities as appropriate. National Park management
team staff will be involved throughout, both as formal representatives of the Park, and so that
they learn from and can later follow-up on these initial surveys. At the beginning of the second
year of the project the results of all the surveys will be brought together into an operational plan,
which will form the basis for the working relationship between project and Park for the remainder
of the project.

Component B, Establishing a collaborative Management Regime, will set-up the institutional
arrangements needed to successfully manage the Park including influencing land use practices
around it. Based on the surveys (component A) the project will facilitate bi-(or tri-) lateral
agreements between Park and Concession Holder, or Park and community/resource user group,
where appropriate with the involvement of local Government departments as a third party. For the
private companies these agreements will commit them to respect the parks boundaries, protect
their own concession from damage, and control access across their concession into the Park for
illegal activities. The agreements represent an explicit public commitment to implement activities
which are mostly already the legal responsibility of the company, but which have been ignored or
contradicted in some cases. The agreement process therefore focuses on public commitment and
transparency in implementation, monitored by the NP and the project and reported to the multi-


                                                                                                     2

stakeholder committee and relevant Government Departments. For the community agreements
the process will be participatory and based on consensus and negotiation, following a model
pioneered by BirdLife Indonesia around National Parks in Sumba Island. The main stages of the
agreement process are: introduction and explanation of conservation objectives, participatory
resource mapping and problem identification, process of discussion within the community to
define their own position and aspirations in respect of resource issues, negotiation with
Government/NP, signing of the final agreement, and promotion.

The location and condition (marked or unmarked, disappeared) of the boundary of the National
Park is expected to be an issue for many communities and concessionaires. The project and NP
will work with the Forest Boundaries Agency to re-demarcate and where necessary rationalize the
boundary. The technical and legal aspects of this work are funded by GoI budgets as part of the
project cofinancing, whilst the project will play a role as facilitator and monitor to maximize the
positive outcomes for biodiversity and minimizing conflict. Participation by project staff will
ensure that where community land is involved the owners and users are fully aware of their
rights, involved in the process, and that their views are adequately represented in the District
Boundary Commission meetings which will make the final decision on the boundary. This
`Participatory Boundary demarcation' uses an approach that BirdLife Indonesia has successfully
used to resolve conflicts and build consensus in Sumba.

Subsequently, the project and NP management will work to address the highest priority local
management issues, involving resource user groups in planning, implementing and monitoring
initiatives to make resource use more sustainable. Examples of potential initiatives are planting
timber tree species to replace timber sourced from inside the park, intensifying rattan production
on forest margins, addressing damage caused by artisanal gold mining, or finding alternatives to
capture and trade in endangered species from the Park. Beneficiaries of these initiatives may be
resource users in communities around the Park, Forest Tobelo, or migrant artisanal miners and
loggers. The project will support planning and seed funding for these initiatives, and if they are
successful small grants support will be leveraged from various government and other sources to
expand the impact.

Finally, the project will work with local Government in the Districts around the National Park to
reduce conflicts between spatial planning and land use outside the Park, and the Park's
conservation objectives. This work will involve forming a multistakeholder forum as a medium in
which to bring together Government, Park, communities and private sector interests to share
information and experience, and to generate commitment to promoting integrate spatial planning
and sustainable land use. The forum will be endorsed by the Governor and Forestry Minister, and
will be given the duty of monitoring the collaborative agreements (above) and reporting to the
relevant authorities on them. In parallel, the project will provide training and opportunities for
study visits connected to spatial planning for relevant decision makers and technical staff of the
District Government.

Component C, Building Capacity for Protected Areas Management, aims to ensure
sustainability so that by the end of the project the National Park management and other
stakeholders have the human and financial resources they require to continue to play a role in the
institutional arrangements (component B) established to support management of the Park. Whilst
the project will provide training and some urgent and limited equipment directly, the main impact
of this component will be achieved by working to leverage support from GoI (central, provincial
and District) and from the private sector. In the case of the latter, Weda Bay Minerals have
already made a substantial commitment to support Park management, and other companies will
be encouraged to follow suit. University students, local survey team members, community


                                                                                                   3

members will all be trained in relevant skills for their roles under this component.

Component D, Monitoring and Evaluation to support Adaptive Park management, will enable
the progress and impact of the work outlined for component B and C to be measured, using
indicators and baselines established under component A. The agreements between National Park
and Concession holders, between National Park and communities, and the management initiatives
piloted by the project, will be monitored closely and the results reported to the NP, project
management, and the multi-stakeholder forum. Satellite image analysis will be repeated to allow
monitoring of land use changes and forest condition inside the Park and in the surrounding
Districts, as an input to spatial planners as well as park managers. In recognition of the suspected
close association between the livelihoods of a small number of Forest Tobelo people and forest
resources in central Halmahera, and of their special vulnerability because of their marginalized
position in society, the project will specifically monitor for positive or negative impacts of the
project, national park, and other land use changes on their livelihoods. Finally, the project will
undertake routine monitoring of key wildlife trade issues, and repeat the baseline survey of wild
biodiversity (Component A) in the final year.

Component E, Replication of the Project model to other sites, will work `horizontally' to share
experience and information with others involved in managed Parks, and `vertically' to ensure that
the lessons from the project reach policy makers in the central Forestry Ministry in Jakarta. The
project will identify protected areas in Indonesia which have similar management context as a
priority for sharing lessons, and will facilitate communications and study visits between sites.
Policy relevant lessons will be written up and fed into the central Government policy process,
which BirdLife Indonesia already participates in, in order to develop technical guidelines. Finally,
the project will work with the Government Forestry training schools and the Conservation
Training and Resource Centre to incorporate lessons from the project into training materials. An
event will be run to promote the project's approach and lessons learned to the Indonesian Mining
Association. Updates and new information from the project site and partner sites will be available
to practitioners and policy makers through the BirdLife Indonesia website, INCL listserver,
library and public response system.

Component F, Raising awareness and public support, will contribute to the commitment of local
stakeholders to the project, and thus its sustainability, by creating public support for and
`ownership' of the Park and Halmahera's endemic wildlife. Based on an initial survey, the project
will use mass media social marketing approaches which have proven successful in, for example,
Sangihe-Talaud, as well as more focused approaches to specific target groups (for example
University students of a relevant discipline, religious leaders). These more focused approaches
will emphasize building capacity in terms of knowledge and communications skills, enabling the
recipients to become advocates for the National Park within their own social groups.

1.A.4 Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and
social characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any
protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive
areas.)

The project is centred on the Aketajawe-Lolobata National Park on Halmahera Island in North
Maluku, Indonesia; the world's most biologically diverse country. Within Indonesia, this
province has an immense wealth of biodiversity, much of which is of global significance. Maluku
is part of Wallacea, the land lying between the Sunda and Sahul continental shelves; a biological
transition zone which derives its flora and fauna both from Asia and Australia. North Maluku has
26 endemic species of birds (of which four are endemic Genera), eleven endemic mammals, nine


                                                                                                     4

endemic amphibians and reptiles, and more than 100 endemic species of land-snail. Over 70% of
these endemics are forest dependent. In addition, the region is recognized as a Biodiversity
Hotspot (Conservation International) and a Global 200 Ecoregion (WWF).

The most extensive forest cover in the province is on the largest island, Halmahera, and the
largest and most intact forest blocks on this island are the Aketajawe and Lolobata Forests in
Central Halmahera ­ declared as a National Park in October 2004 to protect 167,300 ha of forest
in two blocks. Aketajawe and Lolobata are two of 227 Important Bird Areas in Indonesia, and
host at least 24 of the region's 26 endemic bird species. In addition, Halmahera Island has 8
globally threatened bird species (two of which are endangered, and six vulnerable). The
Aketajawe Lolobata National Park contains elements of all forest types on the island except
mangrove and beach forest, including important remaining fragments of lowland evergreen
forests; the type most impacted by development and habitat modification. However, the lowland
forests outside the national park, in the neighbouring logging concessions, are also of great
importance for conservation.

No permanent settlements are located inside the national park. The National Park and the state
forest land around it lies within the jurisdiction of three Districts sub-divided into six sub-
districts, and the administrative areas of 41 villages and 6 transmigration settlements (the estimate
is not precise because the boundaries of most villages have never been mapped or marked on the
ground) with a total human population of 63,324 people (2004 Government Statistics Agency
figures). Settlements and community farmland, plantations and natural resource management
activities are on the coast, 5-10 km away from the National Park, which is on inland hills. The
only exceptions are 3 local villages (comprising 9 sub-villages) and 3 transmigration settlements
which are close to the boundary of the National Park. Ethnically, the inhabitants of the traditional
villages are from Halmahera and neighbouring islands in North Maluku and North Sulawesi, as
well as small numbers of people referred to as Forest Tobelo (also known as tobelo dalam or
tugutil; the latter name is insulting) who once led a semi-nomadic livelihood but have now settled
in villages. The transmigration settlements are dominated by people from Java and Lombok.

In addition to the resident village communities, there is a small population of Forest Tobelo who
still maintain a semi-nomadic lifestyle in the forests on central Halmahera including the area of
the national park. These people generally avoid contact with outsiders, and logging and mining
company staff report encountering their temporary camps and cooking fires but rarely the people
themselves. Biological and social field workers in the area have made more contact, and report
that this group has no overall social structure, but is comprised of family based groups who
cultivate, hunt and gather forest products, moving frequently between sites.

Further details of the social context in which the National Park exists are included in the
Preliminary Social Assessment.

B. Check Environmental Classification A [ ], B [X], C [ ], FI [ ], TBD [ ]
Comments:
The project intends to result in positive cumulative impacts by developing and testing a
collaborative framework to manage protected areas in Indonesia, and protecting key biodiversity
areas and ecosystem services in North Maluku. However, some changes in resource use by the
local community are expected to be required during the demarcation and establishment of the
reserve, especially where resource use is unsustainable or illegal. There are also indigenous
populations living within and around the reserve. Therefore, the category has been classed as B
due to these potential social issues.



                                                                                                   5

C. Applicability of Safeguard Policies
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirements
Click on Policy reference number for full policy
                                                                      Yes       No       TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                              [X]       [ ]      [ ]
This umbrella policy is triggered for category B projects ­ however, no assessment is required
beyond that required for OP 4.
Forests (OP/GP 4.36)                                                  [X]       [ ]      [ ]
The project aims to bring about changes in the management and implement effective protection of
natural forests, and therefore the Forests policy applies. Project activities focus on conservation
and more sustainable management of forests - no further action is required under this policy.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         [ ]       [X]      [ ]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           [ ]       [X]      [ ]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                             [ ]       [X]      [ ]
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.12)                                    [X]       [ ]      [ ]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.10)                                          [X]       [ ]      [ ]
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                         [ ]       [X]      [ ]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                           [ ]       [X]      [ ]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)                   [ ]       [X]      [ ]
Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
The proposed project will not create a new protected area nor will it change the legal status of
land in the project area. It will not physically displace any people or restrict access to assets
owned by local populations. However through capacity building, institution strengthening, and
resource mobilization, the project will change the way natural resources are managed in the area,
and will therefore impact on of some members of the local population, especially those whose use
of resources is unsustainable and has a significant impact on biodiversity and ecological
functions. As a result it is necessary to consider the project in the light of the Banks Operational
Policy OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement, paragraph 3(b) of which refers to "the involuntary
restriction of access to legally designated parks and protected areas resulting in adverse impacts
on the livelihoods of the displaced persons", and a Process Framework has been drafted in
response to this policy.

A subset of the local population qualifies as an indigenous people (ref Op 4.10 para 4 (a), (d));
although there is no legal recognition of indigenous groups in Indonesia Law. Therefore Op. 4.10
needs to be applied to this project. Furthermore, the creation of the national park requires the
development of zonation and management plans. This process has the potential to have an impact
to the livelihoods of indigenous people who still lead a semi-nomadic lifestyle. The project
objectives and process will develop a multistakeholder consultative approach to National Park
management. This includes special attention to the needs of indigenous semi nomadic groups.
Nevertheless, with reference to Op 4.10 (para 21) an Indigenous People's Plan has been drafted.
2. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Describe any potential cumulative or long term impacts.

The benefits from the project for local communities are collaborative management, resulting in
more sustainable resource use, protection of key biodiversity areas and ecosystem services.


*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the
parties' claims on the disputed areas


                                                                                                         6

3. In light of 1 and 2, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

NA

4. Describe arrangement for the grant recipient to address safeguard issues

To address the above safeguard issues, an Involuntary Resettlement Process Framework and
Indigenous People's Plan have been developed to ensure that project activities fulfill the
objectives of Op 4.12 and Op 4.10, by:

- avoiding any unnecessary involuntary resettlement
- ensuring adequate participation and consultation of the affected population in the overall project
- ensuring that the project benefits to indigenous peoples are culturally sensitive and are seen as
being both appropriate and acceptable to the communities who are identified as key stakeholders
in the management of forests
- ensuring that restrictions on access to resources, and mitigation measures put in place as a result,
are determined with the participation of the affected parties
- monitoring the impact of the project activities, including the implementation of this process
framework, and transparent dissemination of the results of monitoring to stakeholders.

A preliminary social assessment has been undertaken of the communities in the project area, with
special emphasis on the indigenous population. During the first year of the project an independent
and experienced consultant will be commissioned to undertake consultation and problem
identification with the settled and semi-nomadic Forest Tobelo communities. This study will
include an assessment of Forest Tobelo in Aketajawe section, until now entirely unknown, and
mapping of areas of the National Park of importance for Forest Tobelo livelihoods. The
consultant will develop guidelines for the most appropriate methods of consultation and
consensus building with regards to the National Park, given the lack of leadership structure in
Forest Tobelo communities. The consultant will be expected to develop insight into the
perceptions and needs of the Forest Tobelo which will then allow him/her to represent these
needs in discussion on national park management policies, zonation, and interventions in local
Government land use planning.

Another outcome of the first year study will be capacity and a system for monitoring the impact
of the project and the National Park on the Forest Tobelo. This will include identification of key
resources and livelihood issues which can be monitored independently by the project, and a
protocol for routine meetings and consultation with Forest Tobelo groups which will allow the
project, and ultimately the National Park, to gather information and measure reactions to its
programs.


BirdLife International Indonesia Programme ­ is a country program of BirdLife International, a
global partnership of national conservation organizations, specialist groups and individuals,
represented in over 100 countries. The mission is to conserve all bird species and their habitat,
and to work for the wise management of the world's biodiversity and the goal of sustainable
development. The Indonesia Program was established in 1992 as a collaborative conservation
program with the Directorate General of Forest Protection and Nature Conservation (PKA), of the
Ministry of Forestry. The BirdLife Indonesia Program also works closely with the Indonesian
Institute of Science (LIPI) and maintains strong links and collaboration with NGOs and clubs
throughout the country.



                                                                                                   7

This project will build on the experiences of BirdLife Indonesia and local project partners in
Sangihe-Talaud (another World Bank/GEF MSP), Sumba Island and Tanimbar. They have staff
who are competent, aware of the importance of safeguards, and able to deal with the requirements
laid out in the safeguard documents.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project has been developed with the participation of the major stakeholder groups identified
as being relevant, and the process of stakeholder consultation to date can be summarised in two
parts:

o Consultation about conservation of forests in central Halmahera and the proposal for the
    National Park. The declaration of Aketajawe-Lolobata National Park in October 2004 comes
    after an interrupted process of research and consultation spanning nine years. The creation of
    the park was based on the written support of the District Heads of the three Districts involved,
    and the Governor of the province. Extensive consultation with local NGOs, private sector
    stakeholders, local communities and NGOs working on community development issues in the
    region was also undertaken.
o Consultation on aspirations and commitment of stakeholders to conservation management in
    connection with the objectives of this proposal, after the Park was declared. The project itself
    was developed in response to requests from the local governments and NGOs that they be
    included in the establishment of national park management, and is based on discussions and
    planning sessions with the regional (Ambon-based) Natural Resource Conservation
    Department Office, as well as with neighbouring private sector interests, government
    departments, and community representatives.
o Consultation during project preparation and disclosure of safeguards documents. Some
    consultations were undertaken during a mission to Halmahera during Jan 29th-Feb 5th 2006
    (see back to office report). Further consultation will be undertaken during the process of
    disclosure for the safeguards documents (see Involuntary Resettlement Process Framework
    and Indigenous People's Plan for details).

The occupants of the 3 villages, 3 transmigration settlements, and the semi-nomadic Forest
Tobelo group are considered primary stakeholders in the project and the national park. It is the
residents of the villages, who live outside the boundary but in some cases take forest resources or
cultivate land within it, who will be most affected by the project's activities, since it will focus on
agreeing the boundary, stabilizing land use, and limited commercial and unsustainable
exploitation of resources. The Forest Tobelo group will feel little if any impact from these
activities because their low population and semi-nomadic, subsistence lifestyle is believed to have
very little impact on the forest. They are also far more difficult to contact, monitor or control than
sedentary villages, and it is expected that they will not be treated as a threat to the park, and will
be allowed to continue their traditional livelihoods where this is what they want to do.

Decisions affecting community access to and use of forest resources will be made only following
the full participation and support of the affected communities.The relationship between villages
and the park will be negotiated through Village Conservation Agreements. Using participatory
rural appraisal approaches, the project will enable the community to analyze and express their
perceptions and priorities. Initial agreement at village level will be followed up by facilitation of
three-way negotiation between community, national park management, and local government. In
addition these communities will then be expected to choose a representative who will participate
in the multi-stakeholder forum (which promotes the coordination and integration of planning
between local and central Government, the private sector, and local communities) to discuss


                                                                                                      8

broader land use planning and policy issues. The project will also include the
strengthening/creation of representative village institutions. These institutions may have different
form and structure in different villages, but will perform the same basic functions: representing
the community in discussions on boundary and management issues, representing the community
in boundary marking in the field, reporting back to the community on the process.

The project will make a specific effort to ensure that the interests of the semi-nomadic groups are
represented in the land use planning process. As they are not known to have any system of land
ownership, the location of the borders of the National Park may be of less relevance than the
location of use zones, which must accommodate traditional hunting, farming and gathering areas.
The project will undertake a socio-economic study and consultation to identify and map the
distribution and patterns of resource use by these people, and to understand social structures and
norms. Where these groups are found to be associated with a particular village, the agreement
process outlined above may be adequate to represent these needs, as long as there are safeguards
to ensure that the special interests of this group are accommodated. However where they are not
linked to a village, specific studies and consultation will be carried out (and have been budgeted)
which will result in a specific, separate, set of recommendations for the accommodation of semi-
nomadic livelihoods into the planned zonation of the Park.

Information dissemination will, as needed, be in the local languages and using visual, oral and
other appropriate means of communications in communities with limited literacy and/or
Indonesian language skill.

E. Safeguards Classification (select one). Category is determined by the highest impact in any
policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual
safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and
institutional risks in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and
are technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven
development or similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach
to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                         N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                      N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors                                           N/A
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                         DRAFT 04/03/2006
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     April/May 2006
Date of submission to InfoShop                      04/03/2006
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                         DRAFT 04/03/2006
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     April/May 2006
Date of submission to InfoShop                      04/03/2006




                                                                                                   9

Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                      N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                  N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                   N/A
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                      N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                  N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                   N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                                Tony Whitten            Date
Project Safeguards Specialist:                   Svend Jensby            Date

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator                  Glenn Morgan            Date

Sector Manager                                   Magda Lovei             Date




                                                                                            10

