Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2501 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/01/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P101905 
Project Name: Agricultural Exports Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader: Shobha Shetty 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (65%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (30%);Agro-industry (5%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Rural policies and institutions 
(P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
66.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
17.00 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
5.00
22.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objective of the project is to increase the access of Indonesian 
smallholders to export markets for selected agricultural commodities centered on the use of a 
public private partnership approach to trade development. This would be achieved by improving 
smallholder and producer/trader access to technical and market information and finance, 
improving the enforcement of quality standards, streamlining export procedures and improving 
access to selected export markets.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Ministry of Trade (MoT)is the Implementing Agency. MoT will work closely with the key 
technical directorates in the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). The project interventions that are 
necessary for attaining the objectives are grouped into the following components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional and Regulatory Frameworks ($3.7M)  
 
Page  2
This component will address institutional and regulatory reform for export development by 
improving the enforcement of agreed norms and standards related to quality control, engaging in 
trade facilitation and promotion ( e.g. through improved harmonization agreements), facilitating 
public/private sector collaboration in addressing trade constraints and piloting the institutional 
infrastructure for warehouse receipting. This component will be implemented by Directorate 
General, Foreign Trade, Ministry of Trade.  
 
Component 2: Support to Selected Commodities ($40 M)  
 
This component will help farmers and other stakeholders in commodity value chains to increase 
their income and livelihoods through strengthening their capacity to access information on 
improved technology and agribusiness management practices and to develop partnerships. 
Measures will primarily include agricultural extension and research, farmer empowerment  
 
(farmer group formation, training ) institutional reforms and technical assistance. This will be 
carried out for cocoa and Arabica coffee. This component will be implemented by the relevant 
agricultural services (dinas) in the district and province levels, the provincial research institutes, 
under the guidance of the technical directorates (agricultural processing and marketing; estate 
crops) in MoA.  
 
Component 3: Improved Access to Finance ($2 M)  
 
The IFC's Program for Support to SMEs in Eastern Indonesia (PENSA) has piloted some 
models for improving access to finance in selected commodities (e.g., maize-poultry). In 
addition, the IFC's Promoting Enterprise Access to Credit (PEAC) program has facilitated $11 
million in loans to over 150 SMEs in Indonesia but this model has not yet been focused on 
agribusiness/farmers. AECP would be an opportunity to scale up its A2F pilots. However, the 
models that will be scaled up need to be robust. Lessons learned from the mid-term review of 
PENSA indicate that IFC will need to work more closely with banks rather than intermediaries 
as it is currently doing. In order to ensure that the models that will be scaled up under the project 
are viable, the access to finance component will initially be limited to technical assistance under 
existing donor funds focused on linking farmers to banks. While the mission has had favorable 
discussions with Rabo Bank, Danamon, and BRI among others, the magnitude of the financing 
needs and the nature of the problem in the project areas need further analysis. The successful 
implementation of working regulations for the new warehouse receipts law under Component 2 
may also then offer some opportunities for the piloting of warehouse receipt financing with 
interested commercial banks under this component. IFC?s investment arm will subsequently 
work with the team to develop guarantee instruments (with appropriate risk-sharing 
arrangements) with local banks on a commercial basis. The A2F component will be thus, scaled 
down from the proposed $10 million (at identification stage) to $2 million (IFC donor technical 
assistance only) which will focus on developing robust models for scaling up under the project. 
No lines of credit are recommended under World Bank financing.  
 
Component 4: Project Management ($4.3 M)  
 
Project Management support will be provided to ensure appropriate collection, monitoring, 
evaluation and consolidation of data and information for reporting and management purposes. 
Page  3
The central PMU will also be responsible inter alia, for coordinating the supervision missions, 
mid-term review, overall M&E, and the preparation of the Implementation Completion Report. 
The central PMU will be located in the Directorate-General, Foreign Trade.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will work with smallholders producing cocoa and arabica coffee and a small 
horticulture component.  Coffee and cocoa share some common areas of production (Sulawesi, 
Flores, Sumatra, Papua), the fruit crops are produced mainly in West, Central and East Java, Bali 
and South Sumatra. The exact locations and number of districts will be confirmed during project 
preparation but about 8-10 provinces and about 40-50 districts are expected to participate.  
 
From a physical environmental perspective, the project will cover a range of agro-ecological 
production zones, including areas of differing natural resource related environmental stress.  The 
principal zones include: upland rain-fed mixed cropping; smallholder tree crops; and agro-
forestry. Within these zones, a wide variety of farming systems have evolved, many of which are 
facing problems relating to monoculture, decline in soil fertility and ground water quality as well 
as increasing incidence of pests resulting from poor farming practices. In downstream 
processing, environmental awareness has been improved by donor funded projects, however, 
standards of liquid and solid waste management, warehouse and processing hygiene and 
transport efficiency for retention of product quality still require vigilance.  
 
Some of the project areas may have isolated vulnerable groups and all of the areas will have 
vulnerable disadvantaged groups such as poor women, landless and minority ethnic farmers. 
These include farmers that work as share-croppers or do tumpang sari farming in production 
forests or plantations. Although isolated vulnerable groups are unlikely to be found in West, 
Central, East Java and in South and North Sumatra, they could be found in other areas covered 
under the project.  Both categories of vulnerable groups are likely to be under-represented in 
farmer group activities and farmers? associations, while at the same time being 
disproportionately impacted by the environmental issues described above.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Environmental management capacities within the key implementing partners (Ministry of 
Agriculture, Ministry of Trade) and the other partner agencies - National Center for Agricultural 
Extension, Kecamatan Extension Centers, Provincial Agricultural Research Institutes - are 
generally low.  In the case of the Ministry of Agriculture, while sufficient human resource 
capacity exists, the necessary institutional structures to bring this experience to bear are lacking. 
Furthermore provincial and district level environmental authorities (Bapedaldas) have limited 
capacity in environmental management of agricultural development projects. The project 
proposes to address these weaknesses via a combination of institutional strengthening measures 
in environmental management for project implementing agencies, combined with additional 
capacity built into the project?s own oversight and project management functions. More recent 
evaluations of the performance of IPM indicate that the uptake by farmers has been weak and 
this is largely considered to result from poor and/or inconsistent extension service provision 
which would be addressed under the public private partnership approach to extension of 
component 2 and also through investments in longer term research on clonal development for 
Page  4
insect resistance in coffee and cocoa. In addition, the project will work closely, inter alia, with 
IPPHTI, the national network of IPM farmers to expand its outreach..  
 
The borrower has been successful in addressing social safeguards aspects in several previous 
projects including the DAFEP (1999-2005), which implemented farmer managed activities for 
smallholders including women and disadvantaged groups and the Bengkulu Regional 
Development Project (1998-2005) which provided a sustainable model for development of 
village level savings and loans groups with long term links to commercial credit providers. 
Reviewing the DAFEP project, the Borrower has been relatively successful in encouraging 
grass-roots participation and the involvement of poor women farmers. It is less clear how far it 
has been able to address the other vulnerable disadvantaged groups.  Consequently the training 
manuals for the extension and farmer empowerment activities of component 2 will  put more 
emphasis on encouraging the involvement of landless farmers (which in many cases are also 
minority isolated groups and the poorest farmer) such as farmers engaged in tumpang sari 
farming in production forest area.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
Mr Isono Sadoko (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is Category C recognizing that it is unlikely to lead to significant and widespread 
negative environmental impacts, given a primarily ?development software? approach involving 
institutional and human resource development, upgrading of technology, research capabilities 
and information systems. The project will not be financing any major physical investments but 
mostly capacity building capacity building measures, farmer empowerment services and possibly 
small-scale agricultural processing operations/services through local private institutions. At this 
stage no line of credit through financial intermediaries is envisaged.  The support for processing 
and marketing is likely to be small scale in nature since the project will not subsidize the private 
sector, but improve its access to finance and to technical information for efficiency 
improvement. As a result, it is unlikely to lead to significant direct negative environmental 
impacts and in fact, has the potential to lead to net environmental benefits by helping to 
introduce more sustainable and efficient farming, marketing, transport and processing  practices 
than currently exist.  
 
The project activities are not expected to lead to land conversion, the destruction of 
environmentally sensitive areas or historically significant sites and/or other cultural resources. 
The project will result in farmers achieving a greater level of control over farming techniques, 
including the minimum application of agricultural inputs compared to cultural techniques such as 
pruning, grafting, varietal change, improved storage and transport. The project will not finance 
any inputs whatsoever. Training and awareness raising programs will place the need for 
agricultural development within the context of existing environmental constraints and 
capabilities, with a specific focus on upland, rain-fed, mixed arable zones which face wide 
ranging environmental constraints. The project will assist the local institutions to develop their 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
environmental training curriculum for training of extension agents and also this project will help 
develop the content of the environmental extension services.  
 
The project will apply the following approaches to minimizing environmental risks and 
maximizing environmental benefits:  
 
?
ensuring that extension agents are sufficiently well trained to address the environmental 
implications of the introduction of new cropping systems and farming technologies (for example 
by ensuring that information conveyed to farmers on the use of new pesticides to reduce losses 
from pests is accompanied by information and training on safe handling of chemicals, timing and 
dosage advice to optimize effectiveness);  
 
?
ensuring that guidelines for accessing grants for farmer and trader managed activities at 
village and higher levels are revised to be (i) more equitable; (ii) gender-sensitive; and (iii) 
environmentally sustainable (use of negative environmental list and promoting the use of simple 
environmentally friendly technologies);  
 
?
The project will help to revive interest and capacities in the application of Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) in Indonesia. The experience of IPM in Indonesia has had some success, 
since its introduction in the mid 1980s followed by the national Bank-supported IPM Training 
Project (1993-1999) which helped institutionalize the IPM concept and practices among farmers. 
AECP will help to strengthen and expand the capacity of IPPHTI, the national network of IPM 
farmers (formed under the previous Bank project), and provide a basis for specific and targeted 
interventions in IPM for the cocoa production sector.  However, the approach taken recognizes 
that IPM is not a panacea, providing effective protection against pests and diseases under certain 
conditions. The responsible use of chemicals (minimum spray techniques) is equally viable 
provided that this is carried on the basis of adequate research and within the context of national 
policies and guidelines, including those of the World Bank .  The project will undertake a 
capacity assessment of the national and sub-national regulatory and institutional frameworks to 
manage these issues, and then provide the necessary support through the project to address these 
issues, focusing mainly on technical assistance and farmer empowerment (i.e extension services). 
The project will therefore not prepare a stand alone IPM Plan.  
 
?
The main social risks are that the vulnerable and disadvantaged groups such as poor 
women, landless and minority ethnic farmers who will be relatively excluded in the farmers 
groups decision making processes and their interest in Farmers Association may not be 
sufficiently well represented.  Specific approaches to addressing these risks will include (i) 
development of appropriate guidelines (adapted from the recently-closed Decentralized 
Agricultural and Forestry Extension Project (DAFEP)  and the upcoming (2007-2011) Farmer 
Empowerment through Agricultural Technology and Information (FEATI) projects for 
integration of social concerns (including gender) into the extension activities of Component 2 , 
and (ii) the introduction of appropriate selection criteria that would help to identify and reward 
farmer organizations that are more inclusive in decision making processes, and are keen to 
develop their capacities in this area.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
NA   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/02/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Integrated Social and Environmental Assessment (including Environmental Management 
Plan) ? March ? April 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shobha Shetty 
09/18/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
