Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2404 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/09/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P093047 
Project Name: Electricity Access for Rural Transformation 
Task Team Leader: Migara Jayawardena 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: January 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (50%);Renewable energy (50%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
B.1. The objective of the proposed project is to improve the lives of people in selected regions by 
providing them with modern energy services in a sustainable manner.  The project will focus on 
scaling-up access of "un-served" communities (households, businesses, and public services) to 
electricity/energy services mostly in rural areas through: (a) improved policies and institutional 
mechanisms that will facilitate the implementation of novel business models, and (b) investments 
to provide the energy services in a least-cost and affordable manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
C.1. The Project concept is based on the segmentation of the communities which do not have 
access to electricity in the selected areas into the following three tiers:  
 
Tier 1:  Includes communities that are presently in areas served by PLN and/or regional 
electricity utility grids but are not presently connected due to institutional barriers or lack of 
affordability.  
 
Page  2
Tier 2: Includes villages that are far from the PLN/regional electricity grid, but densely 
populated enough to justify greater access through development of isolated grids.  
 
Tier 3: Includes very remote and sparsely populated villages that justify decentralized 
household/cluster level solutions, such as individual or shared photovoltaic systems and/or micro 
hydropower, to increase access.  
 
C.2. In all cases, the intention is to develop comprehensive and sustainable business models.  
These would be customized to a given region and implemented through a loan (and possible 
grant support) that will finance: (a) the least-cost infrastructure/equipment to meet the 
communities' electricity needs and to connect households to the system; and (b) the required 
technical assistance to build capacity of local utilities and/or companies to manage the businesses 
developed under the project and operate and maintain the systems to ensure adequate quality of 
service.  It must be noted that providing power to the first tiers of "un-served" communities will 
require a slightly enhanced model from the three models presented in attachment 2.  The 
approach discussed with local authorities and PLN in one of the regions calls for "ring-fencing" 
all non-connected communities in PLN areas into separate businesses.   These customers would 
be managed by an existing or newly created local company that would be legally awarded such a 
franchise that is acceptable to central and local authorities. These local companies would then be 
able to charge a higher price than PLN ad/or pass through a transparent subsidy obtained from 
local government.  In practice, it is likely that these customers would be managed by PLN under 
contractual arrangements with the local company.  These arrangements would be defined during 
project preparation.  
 
C.3. The project would be developed in four regions  that have formally requested World Bank 
assistance.  The sub-national governments in these areas have expressed their commitment to 
develop regional electrification solutions in a sustainable manner by developing institutional 
mechanisms that address key barriers (see attachment 2 for summary of barriers and possible 
electrification options).  They have also indicated their willingness to either directly borrow or 
facilitate financing from the World Bank in order to finance the proposed expansion .  The exact 
structure of the electrification schemes and the specific implementation agency(ies) for each 
region will be determined during project preparation.  
 
Project Components  
 
C.4. The proposed project will consist of investments in infrastructure for expanding 
electricity/energy services and a technical assistance component to address organizational and 
policy barriers. A PHRD grant has been obtained on behalf of the clients , which will be 
mobilized to develop, in each region, the detailed scope of the investment, identify the 
institutional structure and establish the required business model to increase access.  
 
C.4.1 Component 1 - Expansion of Electricity Infrastructure: This component would include the 
expansion of electricity infrastructure in the selected regions based on the least-cost supply 
options.  It may include financing the development of: (a) mini grids (including commercial, 
Page  3
public services and households connections), either isolated with local generation or connected 
to PLN?s grid for bulk purchases of power and/or (b) household equipment in remote and/or 
sparsely populated areas; etc.  
 
C.4.2 Component 2 - Technical Assistance:  Technical assistance and policy oriented activities, 
at both the national and decentralized levels, are essential to address the barriers to expanding 
access to electricity/energy services and developing improved policies, appropriate institutional 
structures, and simplified government procedures.  The institutional and policy oriented activities 
at the central level have already been initiated with trust fund grant support.  These activities will 
be supported on an on-going basis, incorporating lessons learned throughout project preparation 
and implementation. The aim is to create a more conducive environment for replicating the most 
successful business models to other regions.  Work on pricing and subsidization policies at the 
decentralized level will be carried out using part of the PHRD grant.  Attachment 4 shows how 
funding through loan (eventually blended with IDA or bilateral grant) would be provided to 
focus on:  
 
Policy Framework at Decentralized Level: The focus will be to improve policies aimed at 
reducing costs by catalyzing greater levels of small-scale power producers, especially where 
renewable energy is concerned.   Greater simplification of procedures such as licensing and the 
standardization of power purchase agreements will be considered as well in order to improve the 
investment climate for rural electrification.  
 
Organization, Governance and Capacity Building of Decentralized Companies:  The existing or 
to be created companies will need assistance to develop adequate organizations and management 
and governance systems to operate their businesses and respond to their customer needs.  
Elements of social oversight and governance arrangements for autonomous decentralized 
agencies, such as local government enterprises, will be developed further during project 
preparation, incorporating experience from similar World Bank projects such as KDP and UPP.   
Intensive training will also be provided to build the required technical skills to operate and 
maintain their assets and managerial skills to respond to the needs of their customers.  
 
The amount required for the technical assistance will be determined during project preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Indonesia: Four proposed locations: South Tapanuli District, North Sumatra; Muba District, 
South Sumatra; Southern West Java, West Java; North Sulawesi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's capacity for implementing World Bank safeguard policies will be assessed in 
detail during project preparation, and appropriate institutional arrangements as well as a program 
of institutional strengthening will be developed during project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASTE) 
Mr Asger Christensen (EAPCO) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will finance technical solutions for power generation that could include mini-
hydro, small-scale gas power plants, and geothermal, on/off grid distribution systems which may 
cause localized impacts. Careful siting, construction, and operation practices will be necessary 
for mitigating these impacts. During project preparation, the project components will be 
identified, and each of these components will need to be screened, and specific EIAs would need 
to be developed as necessary. The EIAs will need to specifically address any safeguards policies 
that may be triggered by each project sub-components clearly identifying the issue and 
incorporating mitigation measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
In the event that the project ends up financing interventions in areas were the natural habitats 
would be harmed as a result, then the Natural Habitats would be triggered.  Therefore, natural 
habitats will be included in screening when developing required EIAs to comply with bank 
policy if triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Cultural Property will be included in screening criteria, and the EIA would be required to 
comply with Bank policy if triggered. Environmental specifications for construction will include 
chance finding procedures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Applicability of the policy will be determined through a scoping regarding the presence, 
location, identity, and number of ethnic minority groups.  If the policy is found to be triggered, 
the key issue to establish would be to ensure there is equitable access to project benefits for 
identified groups, that information and consultation is adapted to local cultural context, and 
project staff are appropriately trained the conduct such consultations.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The policy on Involuntary Resettlement would be triggered since land will be required either 
for generation installations or for transmission.  The technical solutions for power generation are 
likely to include localized hydro, small-scale gas power plants, and geothermal, which would all 
require access to land, although it is expected to be on a fairly limited scale (and actual land 
acquisition together with possible resettlement/displacement would be very limited). Moreover, 
one can expect that in some cases (e.g. in Tier 3 villages) access to land could involve voluntary 
donations of private or community land.  Since the project comprises multiple subprojects, and 
since the pace of project preparation and decision making may vary both between and within the 
four selected project regions, the requirement for land for all subprojects would not be know by 
appraisal.The resettlement instruments will therefore be:  
 
1.Resettlement Policy Framework  
 
2.Resettlement Action Plan (or Plans) for specific subprojects.  Since the impacts of 
individual subprojects are limited, only be Abbreviated Resettlement Plans would be required.  
What needs to be considered during preparation is whether the staggered pace of project 
preparation and the dispersed location of subprojects would require one individual Resettlement 
Plan for each subproject, or whether the impacts for a number of subprojects can be aggregated 
into one plan.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Applicability of policy will be determined if hydropower is determined as a least cost options 
for generating power and leads to the safeguard to be triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/01/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
PHRD funded environmental and social assessment is expected to be completed by March 
31, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Migara Jayawardena 
06/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/03/2007 
Comments:  You may like to check the IP Policy as TBD, as the write-up says that presence of IP and 
applicability of IP Policy will be determined during preparation. Overall, it is a well written PCN stage 
ISDS. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
05/09/2007 
Comments:  As Acting EASTE Sector Manager, I hereby clear this Concept Stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
