                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: 36725


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/09/2006

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Indonesia                              Project ID: P085375
Project Name: Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income Communities Project
Task Team Leader: Vicente B. Paqueo
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2006        Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006
Managing Unit: EASHD                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: Water supply (34%);Sanitation (33%);Other social services (17%);Sub-national
government administration (9%);Central government administration (7%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other communicable diseases
(P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Other human development (S);Other social
development (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             137.50
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               101.10
        LOCAL COMMUNITIES                                                 36.50
                                                                         137.60



B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project, which is now re-named PAMSIMAS, will support the development of a sustainable
nationwide program to improve water access, sanitation, and hygiene through the mainstreaming
and scaling up of the WSSLIC (Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income Communities)
model. The project objectives are to:
 ï,§    facilitate sustained expansion of people's access to improved water supply and sanitation
at a sufficiently rapid rate to make the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene - Millennium Development
Goals achievable;
 ï,§    promote widespread adoption of recommended hygiene practices to reduce transmission
of waterborne diseases, promote healthier lives and protect the environment;
 ï,§    establish a coherent institutional arrangement for the financing and implementation of
water, sanitation and hygiene improvements involving Central Government, District
Governments and the communities; and

 ï,§    develop ways by which poor villages with proven capacity for community action(as
evidenced by the success of their water, sanitation and hygiene project) can broaden that capacity
and enable them to grow their village economy, leading to more water, sanitation and hygiene
improvements in the long run.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project interventions that are necessary for attaining the objectives are grouped into the
following components:

 Component 1: Community Water Supply Infrastructure
 This component will provide grants to finance community water improvement subprojects
based on a menu of possible (environmentally friendly) technical options, with support from
facilitators hired by the project. Communities will receive block grants and contribute a
minimum of 20% of sub-project costs.

 Component 2: Improving Sanitation and Hygiene Practices
 The Project will finance expenditures, such as workshops, incentive grants, promotional
materials and technical advice to promote sustained and more rapid adoption of improved
sanitation and hygiene practices. This will include support for the development of market
capacity to supply sanitation/hygiene services and capacity building for local government in
using behavior changing communication.

 Component 3: Development of Institutional, Financial and Manpower Support
 This component will finance the fees and incidental expenses of the proposed community
facilitators, assist districts to lead on achieving relevant MDG targets (including local
development planning and budgeting), and provide technical assistance and grants to develop
alternative ways of ensuring post construction support for the maintenance of water supply
systems.

 Component 4: Pilot Expanded Village Development Grants
 Grants will be provided under this component to encourage local economic growth with a focus
on self help groups for poor households, with a minimum co-financing requirement from
participating villages.

 Component 5: Project Management Support
 This component will fund consultants, office supplies, travel and other expenses incidental to
the management, coordination, monitoring/evaluation, and oversight activities at various levels.

D. Project location (if known)
As mentioned, the PAMSIMAS Project builds on and seeks to upscale two previous phases of
World Bank support for the water and sanitation sector. The WSLIC projects covered
approximately 3,000 communities in more than 70 districts. The PAMSIMAS Project will
support a national program and immediately add coverage to 5,000 more villages. From the
physical environmental perspective, therefore, the physical development components of the
project are likely to be implemented across the length and breadth of Indonesia's highly varied
climatic, geological, agricultural and ecological zones. This will likely encompass zones where

there is already significant pressure on water resources, as well as areas that are prone to natural
disasters.

 Similarly the project will encompass Indonesia's huge cultural diversity and will need to take
into account the different needs and concerns of isolated vulnerable groups and disadvantaged
groups such as poor women, landless people and other minorities (See Section II. D. on Social
Inclusion).

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Executing Agency has past experience working on Bank similar projects, so has some
familiarity with
 safeguards policies. To ensure further understanding of the Bank.s latest policies, Desa
facilitators and other project
 staff will be trained in the understanding and application of the guidelines and assist in the
preparation of sub-project
 proposals. TKMs and the Sub-project Selection Committee (for the local government grant)
will be trained in how
 to apply the safeguards in their selection process. Communities will be in charge of deciding all
implementation
 arrangements, and follow-up on guidelines and approved proposals will be monitored by Desa
facilitators and
 Management Consultants. On the environment, an experienced environmental consultant will
be required to
 summarize progress, monitor and measure the impact of the project on the environment.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Ms Farida Zaituni (EASEN)
    Ms Chitrawati Buchori (EASSD)
    Ms Francisca Melia Setiawati (EASES)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    The project will not lead to land conversion, the destruction of environmentally sensitive
areas or historically significant sites and/or other cultural resources. Environmental risks are
likely to be associated primarily with the community water supply component and, to a lesser
extent, the village development grants component.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
    The main social risk is related to the exclusion of vulnerable groups, such as women, landless
and the poorest (including indigenous people if they are present), either on the selection of the
villages/the target groups or on the community decision making process. The project should
ensure that vulnerable groups have the same chances of inclusion in all project cycles and in

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                            Yes               No              TBD
project benefits as others who are better off.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X



Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: 03/29/2006

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: 04/07/2006

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
    TBD

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Mr Vicente B. Paqueo                                            03/09/2006
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Mr Glenn S. Morgan
    Comments:
  Sector Manager:                                 Ms Fadia M. Saadah
    Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


