Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2093 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/12/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P082673 
Project Name: National Agency for Drug and Food Control Project 
Task Team Leader: Puti Marzoeki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 30, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 17, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
44.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
390.60 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
390.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To improve the safety and quality of food and pharmaceuticals by strengthening the food and 
pharmaceuticals quality assurance management system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be implemented through the central NADFC and, based on the main challenges 
faced by the Agency, will have four components as follows:  
 
(a) 
Strengthening the food and pharmaceuticals control systems: the objective of this 
component is to ensure the standard level of safety and quality is achieved.   In response to the 
rapidly increasing regulatory burden, on-going changes in production processes, and the 
continuing need to protect the public from substandard and contaminated products, some other 
national regulatory agencies have recently moved to risk-based approaches (risk assessment, risk 
management and risk communication) to food and pharmaceutical regulation. This has allowed 
the agencies to more effectively allocate their limited regulatory resources (for example, by 
prioritizing the overall balance between inspections of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) 
and/or Good Distribution Practices and laboratory testing, and selecting the 
Page  2
manufacturing/processing sites to be selected for inspection) while keeping pace with advances 
in manufacturing and processing techniques.  
 
The NADFC has already moved to investigate these new approaches: in pharmaceuticals a 
recent consultancy described a quality system for GMP inspection; for food, recent collaboration 
with AusAID has described an approach to improved food safety using risk analysis principles. 
The next steps, for both food and pharmaceuticals, are to build on what has already been done. 
Through the project, the NADFC will:  
 
-
Extend the risk analysis to cover the whole market, formal and informal  
 
-
Rationalize control activities based on priorities set using the risk analysis approach with 
the goal of improved cost-effectiveness while maintaining agreed levels of public safety.  
 
Realizing the benefits of this new approach will also require steps to  
 
-
Integrate control activities for drugs and food within NADFC, across ministries and with 
other levels of government. Although the Agency has authority to inspect and test commodities 
at all levels of the food and drug system and to implement a range of remedies (e.g. recall of 
contaminated or substandard products), the authority for some remedies lies with other ministries 
and levels of government (e.g. with Agriculture for abattoirs; local government for restaurants) 
rather than the NADFC. The NADFC has made initial efforts to strengthen collaboration with 
provincial and district governments; what is needed now is a concerted effort to further develop 
and expand this approach (e.g. through sharing information, coordination workshops, training). 
This could most effectively occur through pilots in a small number of provinces with the aim of 
strengthened collaboration between districts, provinces and the center to improve food and 
pharmaceuticals safety at the district and household levels, which can be evaluated and then 
scaled up to include other provinces.  
 
-
Implement the revised strategy on a much wider scale.  
 
(b) 
Strengthening laboratory analysis: the objective of this component is to strengthen, the 
contribution of laboratory analysis in the overall strategy of food and pharmaceuticals control. 
Laboratory analyses are an essential and integral part of food and pharmaceutical control 
activities. The task now is to determine the actual role of laboratory services in fulfilling the 
objectives of the agency under a risk-based approach, to develop a 10-year Master Plan for 
laboratories, and to purchase new equipment, train staff and, if indicated, build or renovate 
existing facilities in service of the revised strategy.  
 
(c) 
Involve the consumer in food and pharmaceuticals control. The objective of this 
component is consumer education to improve knowledge about, and the demand for, safer food 
and pharmaceuticals. This will involve the design and conduct of assessments of the role of 
consumer behavior in food and pharmaceuticals safety (including the responses to drug risk 
alerts); based on these assessments, conduct and evaluate pilot interventions to improve 
consumer involvement; and, based on results of the pilots, develop communication strategies, 
expand implementation and evaluate interventions to increase involvement of the consumer in 
food and pharmaceuticals safety.  
 
(d) 
Institutional development. The objective of this component is to strengthen key 
institutional functions of the NADFC, including collaboration with other ministries and levels of 
government.  These will involve strengthening the NADFC so it can better support the revised 
strategy by providing an improved information system, staff strengthening, planning and 
evaluation of control activities, institutional support for improved integration of control activities 
with other arms of government (including pilots in two provinces); and assessment of likely 
Page  3
trends in food and pharmaceutical products and food borne diseases (including zoonoses such as 
avian influenza) in the next 10 years and their implications for the strategy of food and 
pharmaceuticals control.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National/urban   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Environment has promulgated regulations relating to activities for which 
Environment Management Plans are required, and the NADFC is required to have in place an 
Environment Management Plan.  The NADFC is in the process of preparing guidelines for the 
disposal of waste which is expected to fit the circumstances of all of its subsidiaries.  The 
guidelines will be reviewed to ascertain whether they would fulfill identified safeguard 
requirements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Farida Zaituni (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
The team will stand to be guided on the relevant, if any, documentation which may be 
required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/05/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be determined.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Puti Marzoeki 
01/18/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
06/12/2006 
Comments:  I suggest that EA be triggered sine the team will be reviewing EMPs 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
