Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2007 
Report No.:  AC2879
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P097104 
Project Name:  BERMUTU-Better Education through Reformed Management and 
Universal Teacher Upgrading 
Task Team Leader:  Mae Chu Chang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
26.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
61.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
60.50 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 52.00
112.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective is to contribute to the improvement of the overall quality and 
performance of teachers through enhancing teachers' knowledge of subject matter and 
pedagogical skills in the classroom.  
 
In terms of higher level objectives, the project will contribute to improving teacher 
competency and performance to promote student learning and thus contribute to the 
development of quality human resources, ultimately leading to a growth in productivity 
and the improvement of Indonesia?s competitiveness in the global economy.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of four components:  
 
Component 1: Reforming University-Based Teacher Education.  The quality of teachers 
entering the profession will be upgraded through development of an accreditation process 
to ensure that the curricula of teacher training institutions, and associated teaching 
methods for delivering curricula, are revised in line with international best practice. 
Page  2
Distance learning modules will be developed in order to assist teachers to upgrade to 
meet certification requirements without leaving their post.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Structures for Teacher Improvement at the Local Level. 
The quality of the teachers already in and entering the profession will be improved 
through the implementation of teacher classroom performance assessment and the 
professional development elements of the upgrading and certification process.  
 
Component 3: Reforming teacher accountability and incentives systems for performance 
appraisal and career advancement. The objective of this component is to develop an 
integrated framework designed to sustain and continually enhance the quality and 
accountability of teachers, post-certification.  
 
Component 4: Improving Program Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation. This 
component will support the monitoring of project components 1 through 3, development 
of an improved teacher database and a range of research and evaluation studies to 
document the effects of the project on teaching behavior and student achievement.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in 14 selected provinces: Papua, Sulawesi Tengah, Gorontalo, 
Sulawesi Selatan, Jambi, Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam, Sumatera Barat, Kalimantan 
Tengah, Jawa Tengah, Jawa Barat, Jawa Timur, Nusa Tenggara Barat, Nusa Tenggara 
Timur, Maluku, and in 80 districts where there is a varying degree of presence of 
indigenous people who are defined as isolated and vulnerable people (IVP) in the 
Indonesian context.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sulistiowati Nainggolan (EASSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment. The project is rated category C, no construction is envisaged and no 
environmental impact plan is required.  
 
Indigenous People. The project will be implemented in 14 provinces, where there are 
varying degrees of presence of IVPs. While the targeted primary beneficiaries are 
teachers in these provinces, the project would have an indirect but positive impact on the 
IVP through improved quality of teaching and learning in schools serving the local 
communities with IVP presence. The survey and assessment undertaken during project 
preparation have identified specific education issues in access and quality faced by 
remote areas where most of the IVP live.  
 
The project design has thus taken into account of these issues through targeted support 
to narrow the gaps in resources and capacity. These considerations are reflected in the 
design of the distance learning grants (component 1) and grants for teachers, principals 
and supervisors of clusters (component 2).  In addition to the above, a framework for 
treatment of IVP has been developed which entails the following:  
 
*
Develop screening procedures and criteria for selection of teacher working groups as 
grantees: The screening procedures and criteria will be integrated into the grant manual. 
The manuals should incorporate feedback of teacher working groups and other key 
stakeholders to ensure that needs are addressed, including those of IVP. The allocation of 
grants to working groups for both IVP and non-IVP areas would be based on the criteria 
specified in the manual.  
 
*
Develop teacher working group modules for strengthening professional development 
that are adaptable and adoptable to local needs: The design of the modules should be 
flexible to adapt to the needs and content that are relevant to the local cultural and 
educational context. For example: for classroom action research, teachers are able to pick 
a
topic, design it according to their classroom situation, implement and revise based on 
results in their classroom. The modules will be developed by technical assistance 
provided through the project. Reviewing development of the modules will involve local 
teachers, working group coordinators, stakeholders and NGO groups who are familiar 
with education issues and service delivery in areas where IVP live. The modules will be 
developed by technical assistance provided through the project.  
 
*
Develop distance learning course modules: The modules will provide equal 
opportunity and access to upgrading by teachers in remote areas, who often do not have 
easy access to regular university programs. The modules would allow teachers to upgrade 
their skills without leaving their post. The modules will be developed by selected 
universities (UT and LPTK).  
 
Page  4
*
Develop a support system specifically for teachers in the remote areas: The working 
groups in remote areas will require a unique support structure that includes targeted 
technical assistance, facilitation and material support.  
 
*
Provide additional resources for remote teacher working groups: In order to meet the 
unique needs of teachers in remote areas, the project will provide working groups in 
remote areas with a larger grant to cover higher operating costs. In addition, the activities 
are modified to best suit the remote teacher context.  
 
*
Put in place a monitoring and evaluation system and grievance procedure: Four 
instruments will be used to monitor and evaluate the social impact of BERMUTU: (a) the 
teacher census will provide statistics on factors such as teachers serving IVP areas, 
gender distribution and percentage of teachers who have earned various education 
credentials; (b) grant progress and completion reports will document the process and 
progress that groups establish for addressing the identified issues as well as their 
outcomes; (c) the proposed project impact evaluation scheduled to be carried out at mid-
term and upon project completion would include an assessment of the direct and or 
indirect impact of the project on the IVP population as envisaged, and; (d) A grievance 
and complaint handling system will be put in place to address concerns arising from both 
the Government-led certification process and BERMUTU implementation, including 
issues related to proper treatment of IVP.  The system will be web-based for public 
disclosure of the complaints as well as the actions taken to address the complaints.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project envisages positive long term impact on improved quality of education as a result 
of improved teacher quality in all project locations including the areas with IVP.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The framework was developed by the borrower and will be integrated into the project 
manuals to address issues related to IVP.  The PCU will be responsible for 
implementation of the framework, including the preparation of the manuals with 
technical assistance to ensure compliance with the framework. Consultants will be 
employed to carry out the social impact assessment as part of the overall project impact 
evaluation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the project are teachers, principals and their supervisors.  
 
Page  5
The manuals were developed through a consultation process with key stakeholders such 
as teachers and principals. The framework will be made available to the public through 
the Bank's Project Information Center in Jakarta and Washington. The manuals will be 
made available to education offices in participating provinces and districts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  6
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mae Chu Chang 
04/18/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Sulistiowati Nainggolan 
04/18/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
04/22/2007 
Comments:   
