                                                                                                   41066


                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPTSTAGE
                                                                                        Report No.:


 Date ISDS PreparedNpdated: 08/06/07

  I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic ProjectData
I Country: Indonesia                          I ProjectID: PI04022
 Project Name: Makassar Landfill Methane Collection and Flaring Project
 Task Team Leader: James OrehmieMonday
 Estimated Appraisal Date: November            EstimatedBoard Date: NIA
  19th.2007
I ManagingUnit:     EASRE                     1 Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
  Sector: Environment
 Theme: Climate ChangeMitigation,Municipal Solid Waste Management
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):
 IDA Amount (US$m.):
  GEF Amount (US$m.):
  PCF Amount (US$m.):
  Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER
         Financing Gap


  B. Project Objectives [from section2 of PCN]

  The project developmentobjectiveis to reduce methane emissionsfrom solid waste disposed in
  the City of Makassar's landfill, Tempat Pembuangan Sampah Akhir (TPA) Tamangapa, through
  a carbon finance transaction. The key indicatorfor this objective will be the annual delivery of
  ERs. Another objective is to generate an income stream from the ERs that can be used to finance
  improvementsin overall solid waste management, includingimproved collection services.

  C. Project Description [fromsection 3 of PCN]

 This CDM project consists of two distinct project activities:

        Component A: the construction and operation of landfill gas collection and flaring
        equipmentthat will result in ERs; and

        ComponentB: a carbon financetransaction that will facilitatethe purchase of the ERs.

  ComponentA:

 The project will support the development and implementation of a landfill gas collection and
  flaring facility at TPA Tamangapa landfill. The construction of the landfill gas extraction and

flaring facility will include the following components: (i) a collection system consisting of
horizontal and vertical wells and collection pipes that will be installed in the area containing
waste and expanded over time as additional areas are filled; (ii) landfill gas pumping equipment
including a pipeline and blowers; (iii) landfill gas treatment and flare system which will remove
moisture and combust the gas; and (iv) a monitoring and control system.

Since 1993 it is estimated that approximately 1 million tonnes of organic waste has been
deposited in the landfill. Based upon the forecast population growth and improvements in
collection services in the City of Makassar it is expected that an additional 2 million tonnes of
organic waste will be collected and disposed in the landfill during the 10-year period 2007 to
2016.

ComponentB
The World Bank-managed NCDMF will finance the purchase of ER credits resulting from the
flaring of the gas. The purchase will be a performance-basedcontract under which payments are
triggered by successful verification of the reduction of methane emissions by an independent,
accredited international entity (Designated Operational Entity under the rules of the Kyoto
Protocol). The quantity of ERs to be contracted, the length of time over which the purchase will
be made, and the price paid will be agreed between the World Bank and the project sponsor.

D. Projectlocation (if known)

The project site will be located approximately 15km from the city centre of Makassar. This
landfill was established in 1993 and is expected to continue to provide the only municipal solid
waste disposal location for the city until at least 2016.

The City of Makassar is located on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi and like many other cities
in Indonesia, suffers from an inability to cope with waste generation and disposal. Municipal
solid waste generation is estimated at around 880 tonnesfday (0.70 kglca ita/day or 3,800
                                                                                   P
m3/day @ 0.23 tonne/m3)l of which only 344 tonnes/day2or 39% (1,500 m /day) is collected
and disposed in the landfill. This low level of collection service has major detrimental effects on
the environment and health of the city.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

The City of Makassar plans to engage an external investor to sharein the investment and risk of
the landfill gas flaring project, as well as the ERs. The external investor will take responsibility
for the financial investment, as well as the technical management and implementation of the
flaring project either with its own resources or through a subcontractor. The City of Makassar
will continue to own and operate the landfill. The exact details of the contract including
distribution of the ER revenues that result from the flaring project will be addressed after
selection of the external investor. The task team will examine the existing technical capacity and


'JICA (1996)
2
 2006 Weighbridge Data, Dinas Keindahan, Kota Makassar

gapslconstraints of the external investor and, based on the examination,review and advise on
capacity building and training plans for the operation of the landfill gas capture system.

F. Environmental and Social SafeguardsSpecialists
Hiroshi Ono                     -        Senior EnvironmentalEngineer (EASRE)
Sulistiowati Nainggolan         -        Social Development Specialist (EASIS)

11. SAFEGUARDPOLICIES THATMIGHT APPLY
SafeguardPolicies Triggered                                          Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                 X
The project will have significant local positive environmental outcomes through the
implementation of an improved management of the landfill, which is a pre-requisite for the
generation of adequate levels of methane. Because increased revenue will be generated
proportionally to the amount of methane captured and flared, this will serve as a strong economic
incentive forTimprovedmanagement of the landfill. However, this policy should be triggered
because the construction and operation of the landfill gas extraction and flaring facility would
cause some environmental impacts such as air pollution and noise. In addition, environmental
concerns originated from the landfill site rembin, such as management of the leachate and other
drainage issues affecting land, ground and sqrface water contamination, and public health and
safety issues.

The project boundary for safeguards compliance involves the landfill gas extraction and flaring
facility such as (i) a collection system consisting of horizontal and vertical wells and collection
pipes; (ii) landfill gas pumping equipment including a pipeline and blowers; (iii) landfill gas
treatment and flare system; and (iv) a monitoring and control system.

Notwithstanding, the task team plans to develop an environmentaldue diligence assessment
report addressingthe environmental impacts not only of the landfill gas extraction and flaring
facility but also the existing landfill itself. The TOR for the environment due diligence
assessment work have been prepared and discussed with the project sponsor and the consulting
firm performing the assignment.

The task team received the first draft report on August 3,2007, and found that there were
significant gaps between the agreed TOR and the contents of the draft. With the guidanceof the
Safeguards Meeting, the team will address the deficiencies of the draft, for instance, description
of environmental risks and mitigation measures for the existing landfill, and EMP for the landfill
gas extraction and flaring facility, before appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP4.04)                                                      x
There are no protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical natural
habitats as defined under the policy in the project area.
Forests (OP/BP4.36)                                                               x
The project will not impact the health and quality of forests.

Pest Management (OP4.09)                                                          X
The project will neither procure pesticides nor will result in an increased use of pesticides.

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                            Yes               No             TBD
CulturalProperty (OPN 11.03)                                                                               x
There are no physical cultural resources in the project area.
IndigenousPeoples (OP/BP4.10)                                                                                               x
The community near the landfill consists of two groups, namely, the employees working for the
landfill operation, and scavengers. The estimated population of the scavengersis about 300.
The majority of the scavengers (95%)are Makassar ethnic, and the rest are other ethnic groups
such as Bugis and Java. The ongoing social due diligencepractice will confirm before appraisal
whether IP's as defined by the policy were or are present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12)                                               I                I      x        I

The city confirmed that expansion of the landfill site is not required for the development of this
project. The current land size available to the city and currently being used is adequate for the
life of this project. Therefore, the project boundary is the current landfill site. The city however,
will continue to acquire any surrounding land as it becomes available and as its owners are
identified and confirmed, so as to meet the long term waste management planning needs of the
city. This would be confirmed as part of the Bank's due diligenceprocess.
Safetyof Dams (OPLBP4.37)                                                                                  x
The project will not finance construction of any dams nor does it depend on the performanceof
an existing dam.
Projectson International Waterways (OPLBP7.50)                                                             x

Projectsin Disputed Areas (OP/BP7.60)                                                                      x


EnvironmentalCategory: [ ] A [ x] B [XI C [ ] F'I [ ] TBD (to be determined)


111. SAFEGUARDPREPARATIONPLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: NIA

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: mid-October 2007                                               ,

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-relatedstudies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing3should be specifiedin the PAD-stage ISDS.

         The environmental and social due diligencereport is planned to be completed by mid-
         October, 2007.



3 Reminder:The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-relateddocumentsbe disclosedbefore appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessibleto potentially affected
persons.

IV. APPROVALS



 Approvedby:
 Regional SafeguardsCoordinator:
   Comments:
 SectorManager:                  Rahul Raturi
   Comments:

