Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3090 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P105590 
Project Name: GPOBA W3 - Expanding Piped Water Supply to Surabaya's Urban Poor 
Task Team Leader: William D. Kingdom 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit: GPOBA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.00 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
0.15 
 
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid 
2.57
3.72 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the OBA scheme is to extend piped water connections to low-income 
households. The primary benefits will be significant time and cost savings for households 
otherwise reliant on alternative supplies, as well as health benefits associated with an 
improvement in water quantity and quality of service. Improved service is defined as three 
months of working connections subject to verification by an independent auditor.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project targets approximately 15,000 households from the population of poor people in 
Surabaya residing in high pressure water zones and without an existing utility connection. 
Beneficiaries will be targeted through a mix of geographic and individual targeting using 
existing official city poverty lists and criteria already used by the PDAM as proxy variables for 
poverty (e.g. street width and plot size).  
 
The project output is the delivery of 3 months’ verified water service to be confirmed by the 
project auditor. In line with the existing tariff structure, each household will be billed for a 
minimum consumption of 10 cubic meters per month, regardless of actual consumption. The 
precise definition of a working connection will be confirmed during detailed project preparation 
Page  2
but is likely to include presence of a working meter and both consistent meter reading by the 
water utility (the “PDAM”) and consistent billing by the private contractor over a three month 
period.  
 
Three kinds of connections are proposed as a means to achieving the delivery of water service 
for the urban poor:  
 
(a) The utility may connect the urban poor by means of an “in-fill” connection to an existing 
tertiary network. Normally, the utility would charge a customer a connection fee which ranges in 
price from Rp.600,000 ($66) to Rp.2,350,000 ($260) depending on the size of the house plot and 
the width of the street in front of the house. Most poor households fall in the lower categories of 
this range. Adjusting for current prices, the actual average cost of materials and labor for 
connecting a poor household to an existing main is Rp.880,000 ($98). Preliminary estimates 
suggest that $100 will be the unit cost per in-fill connection. Households will be expected to pay 
approximately $20 or 20% of total in-fill costs.  
 
(b) The utility may connect the urban poor by expanding the distribution network to un-served 
areas. Although unit costs will be refined during detailed project preparation, preliminary 
estimates based on market prices for materials and labor suggest that tertiary network expansion 
costs in the region of $25 per meter of 6 inch pipe. This was confirmed by a review of recent 
expansion planning by the utility which showed the cost to range from $18 to $52 per meter. 
Assuming $25 per meter as the unit cost and 10 meters per connection, the expansion cost alone 
is $250. Including the connection from the street network to the household, the unit cost for an 
expansion connection will be approximately $350 per household. Households will not bear more 
than the connection charges associated with in-fill connections.  
 
(c) The project proposes to trial the innovative use of bulk meters or “master meters” to serve 
low-income communities. This approach will target particularly poor, dense, or informal areas 
where streets do not allow for utility construction standards or where lack of legal paperwork 
prevents the utility from supplying water at all. The PDAM will supply a community with a 
master meter at the entrance of the area linked to the utility’s distribution network. Inside the 
community, an NGO or a community-based organization (CBO) will organize the community, 
install pipes and meters (possibly provided by the PDAM as part of the OBA scheme), and 
establish internal billing and collection mechanisms such that the monthly utility bill is covered. 
Preliminary estimates based on similar systems in East Java suggest that such systems cost 
approximately $120-$150 per household connection, including household meters, community 
materials, the bulk meter, and utility labor and connection fees. Although this approach has never 
been tried before in Surabaya, the approach has been piloted in other towns in East Java with 
success and the utility is receptive to the idea as a way to target informal areas and the extremely 
poor.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in Surabaya, the capital of East Java in Indonesia. Connections will benefit 
eligible households living in poor neighborhoods and informal settlements scattered across the 
city. No indigenous people live in the project area.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The water utility (PDAM) of Surabaya will be responsible for the construction and 
implementation of the project. PDAM Surabaya has worked with the World Bank before. It has 
Page  3
implemented Bank-funded projects and signed sub-loan agreements with the Ministry of Finance 
(MoF). Based on this experience, PDAM Surabaya is familiar with both the Government of 
Indonesia’s and the World Bank’s requirements, including safeguards.  
 
In response to dissemination of information about GPOBA from the World Bank and ESP 
(USAID’s Environmental Services Program which provides technical assistance and support to 
both the PDAM and the World Bank on the ground), the PDAM established an “OBA team” in 
July 2006 which was formally ratified by the Managing Director in January 2007. This active 
working group meets once a week and includes 15 members from the various departments of the 
utility, including the Planning Department (in charge of new customers) and the Customer 
Service and Consumption Department (in charge of meter reading and outsourcing bill 
collection). The OBA team will also be responsible for ensuring environmental and social 
safeguards are met during project implementation.  
 
In addition, an OBA Auditor will be hired to review the program roll-out, agree on unit costs 
for expansion connections, confirm the recipient is low-income, verify that at least three months 
billing and any other scheme requirements are fulfilled, and inspect the quality of construction, 
including the implementation of safeguards aspects on the ground. The OBA Auditor will ensure 
environmental and social management aspects of the project are taken into consideration, 
especially during pre-construction stages. For example, the Auditor will ensure that clauses in 
contracts and agreements with contractors are met.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Vivianti Rambe (EASIS) 
Ms Francisca Melia Setiawati (EASIS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project triggers the World Bank’s Environmental Assessment Policy (OP4.01) due to 
potential safety, construction, and traffic related adverse impacts. These impacts are short-term, 
minor, largely reversible, and can be mitigated through easily implemented measures. Practical 
and simple environmental guidelines will be developed for the project through requirements for 
the construction contractors and associated standard operating procedures. These guidelines will 
be incorporated into the construction contracts and the project implementation manuals for the 
Scheme Manager and the PDAM. In addition, monitoring and reporting will be undertaken as 
part of the program by the OBA Technical Auditor.  
 
Examples of contract clauses for construction contracts include:  
 
•
Waste Management—Contractor shall keep the work site and other areas in a neat and 
clean condition, free from accumulated rubbish.  
 
•
Materials—No use of asbestos or other hazardous material.  
 
•
Restoration of Damages—Expansion of tertiary distribution network and bulk supply 
through master meters will restore any damages to the original status of the affected assets.  
 
•
Minimization of Disruption—To minimize the inconvenience associated with 
construction of buried pipes, the following requirements will be invoked: (a) Construction 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
activities will be limited to the hours of 07.00 am to 07.00 pm except when extenuating 
circumstances require work performed beyond these hours; (b) All roadway lanes will be made 
passable at the end of each day by backfilling or steel sheeting the trench.  
 
In addition, the Implementation Manual for the PDAM will specify that in-fill connections 
to the network will only be undertaken when a household has specifically requested the service, 
and indicated their willingness to bear any minor construction impacts associated with 
connection to the tertiary street-level network.  
 
The OBA Auditor will be responsible for (1) making sure such clauses are included in 
construction contracts, (2) monitoring the implementation of these clauses/guidelines on the 
ground, and (3) incorporating any environmental and social aspects into their regular reporting 
back to the Scheme Manager. Clear principles for what constitutes “damage,” “restoration of 
damages,” and other terms will be spelled out at appraisal stage.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
U
-
Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/31/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
B.  Draft Version in August 2007 for submission with the Commitment Paper; Final Version 
in October 2007 during final appraisal.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: Not 
applicable.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William D. Kingdom 
07/10/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
07/12/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Patricia Veevers-Carter 
07/12/2007 
Comments:  None. 
