Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2778 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/28/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P105002 
Project Name: ID National Program for Community Empowerment 
Task Team Leader: Scott E. Guggenheim 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASIS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (25%);Water supply (20%);Irrigation 
and drainage (20%);Roads and highways (20%);Primary education (15%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Social safety nets (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
115.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
116.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1,476.00
1,476.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Providing economically productive infrastructure for poor communities in Indonesia   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is identical to the existing Kecamatan Development Project. Block grants are 
allocated to subdistricts, to be disbursed against village development plans. There is a maximum 
project size of $35,000/village, although most villages are smaller than this. 60% of investments 
go for farm-to-market road construction and rehabilitation; small-scale irrigation, clean water, 
and school/health facilities make up the remainder of the normal uses of the grants.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This project will cover all subdistricts in Indonesia (appox. 70,000 rural villages).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  2
In general borrower capacity is low, but in this case impacts are also very low. As discussed in 
the ISDS, a comprehesive review of environmental impacts from KDP carried out in 2005 found 
very few impacts (and many benefits). A general conclusion by the review and also by consultan 
specialists familiar with WB safeguard policies is that all impacts can be handled successfully by 
existing operating procedures provided that these are consistently applied and supervised.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Asger Christensen (SASDS) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This project is a scale-up of the existing Kecamatan Development Program, a nationwide 
CDD program. There is a very slight increase in the block grant size -- from a maximum of 
approx. $120,000/subdistrict (20-40 villages) to approx. $160,000 but since the block grant 
amount hasn't changed since 1998, this is an actuality less than when the project started. There is 
a
maximum subproject size of $35,000. Environmental impacts from the KDP have been well-
studied and the project is routinely supervised by an environmental specialist. In 2005 the project 
conducted an environmental and social impact review that selected one subdistrict in each of 191 
districts (there are 440 districts in Indonesia), which makes for a very large and diverse sample. 
This review is available in IRIS. It found no cumulative impacts, no systemic adverse impacts, 
and no social problems either for resettlement or indigenous people. However, there were cases 
of poor site managagement, incomplete disclosure of environmental management plans, and 
intrusions by villagers into protected areas or using materials such as corals (although it is 
disputed whether they were live corals). Recommendations highlighted the need to strengthen 
the oversight system. Manuals were adjusted, additional training modules provided to 
supervising engineers, and reporting formats highlighted mandatory reporting of all social and 
environmental impacts. These measures appear to have improved overall quality but preparation 
and appraisal will include the appropriate specialists to update the review.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
As noted above, there are occasional casesof forest-dwelling communities rehabilitating 
tertiary roads, and fishing communities living on or near small islands made of coral. However, 
most of these were located in Indonesia's large deforested forest estate, and did not cause any 
sort of additional deforestation.  
 
Under KDP3, the Canadian government has provided a $15 million grant to improve the 
project's ability to deliver better community-led natural resource management; GOI has also 
proposed a linked GEF project to do the same thing in fragle areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Same as above.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Pesticides are on the project's negative list.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
KDP is a highly popular program with indigenous communities. This has been 
comprehensively reviewed in the field by qualified specialists.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No cases of involuntary resettlement were found in the 191 district survey. Because the 
project cannot take advantage of the state's power of eminent domain, land for road widening or 
the like almost always can only be acquired through voluntary surrender. In such cases, KDP's 
operational manuals required signed, voluntary consent. This is supervised by the oversight 
consultats and by the Bank. Field reviews have found cases of people grumbling because their 
land increased in value after KDP infrastructure was built and they did not capture the future 
value in their village agreements, but in no cases reiewed over the past 5 years did the project 
team find cases of forible displacement or displacement-linked destitution. Preparation will 
aggregate all known cases of land acquisition to carry out a spot-check review during appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
March through June. This review will be an MIS-based summary of environmental issues 
raised, and a pre-appraisal field review of guidelines.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Scott E. Guggenheim 
02/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cyprian F. Fisiy 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
