                                                                                                                                                                                                          43440


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 12/05/2006                                      Report No.: AC1985
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Indonesia                             Project ID: P083742
                                                                                                            Project Name: Farmers Empowerment through Agricultural Technology and Information
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Shobha Shetty
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2006       Estimated Board Date: January 25, 2007
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: EASRD                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                          Authorized
                                                                                                                                                           Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Agricultural extension and research (70%);General agriculture, fishing and
                                                                                                            forestry sector (30%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Analysis of economic growth (P);Other
                                                                                                            public sector governance (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S)

                                              Public                                                        IBRD Amount (US$m.):            70.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):             30.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                  30.00
                                                    Authorized                                                      Financing Gap                                                        0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                        30.00
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                          Simple []              Repeater []
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)           Yes [ ]       No [X]

                                                                        Public                              2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The overall development objective of the project is to develop a demand-driven, market
                                                                                                            oriented agricultural services system, based on partnerships between farmer groups,
                                                                                                            public agencies and private sector enterprises at all levels.The outcome of increased
                                                                                                            accountability and effectiveness of public service provision in support of diversified
                                                                                                            farmer incomes would be achieved through:

                                                                              Authorized                     -      Emphasis on improved governance of the process for award of grants for
                                                                                                            activities by farmer groups to ensure that the process of prioritization at village, district
                                                                                                            and provincial levels is controlled by farmers whilst the extension and research services
                                                                                                            provide necessary support services to farmers organizations management skills,
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            information access and research) and ensure good governance in environmental and
                                                                                                            social safeguards.
                                                                                                  Public

                                                                                                             -      Emphasis on making larger partnerships work in practice through: district and
                                                                                                            provincial level funds to scale up successful farmer-managed activities (FMAs), and
                                                                                                            implement supporting district and provincial planning and technical support .

 The project is intended to contribute to the attainment of the WB Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS) objectives of: (i) improving the climate for high quality investment by,
among other ways, creating income opportunities for poorer households and farmers; and
(ii) making service delivery responsive to the needs of the poor. The Project supports the
GoI?s National Medium-Term Development Plan (Rencana Pembangunan Jangka
Menengah Nasional, RPJMN) economic agenda related to agricultural development that
includes, among others: (i) agricultural revitalization; (ii) poverty alleviation; (iii) rural
development; and (iv) improvement of natural resources and environment management.

3. Project Description
The Ministry of Agriculture is the Implementing Agency. The project interventions that
are necessary for attaining the objectives are grouped into the following components:
 Component 1. Strengthening Farmer-driven Extension ($42.3 M)
 The main objective of the component is to empower farmers to drive the agricultural
extension agenda and improve their capacity to: (i) adopt new technology to better
respond to market demand, (ii) develop agribusiness management skills and (iii) engage
in public private partnerships at village, district and provincial level. This would be
achieved through: (ii) strengthening farmer capacity to become organized and
accountable at all levels and improve the capacity of existing farmer organizations; (ii)
facilitate productive public private partnerships with multiple service providers through
among others, FMA grants, and (iii) developing public and private extension capacity to
facilitate farmers? access to technology, markets and knowledge. The component would
also serve to strengthen management and organizational capacity of producer
organizations engaged in partnership with research, extension and agro-business
enterprises. Activities include organizational support, monitoring and training of
producer organizations? leaders and members, at village, district and national/regional
levels. The component would also train personnel from extension, research and private
sector to help them work with producer groups and their leaders.

 Component2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building ($32.5 M)
 The institutional objective of this component is within the context of decentralization
and rationalization of extension service staffing, to develop a demand-driven sustainable
extension system, with public and private extension providers (including farmers)
cooperating with farmer groups and private enterprise for mutual benefit. Before this
stage is reached, however, and in recognition of the fact that public sector extension
services will form the basis of the system outside the high value crop areas and in areas
of geographic isolation and /or climatic extremes, the component seeks to address
deficiencies in training, infrastructure, equipment and minimum operational funding of
Kabupaten (district) and Kecamatan (sub district) public extension services. It will also
strengthen agribusiness training centers and agricultural in-service institutes to make
them more responsive to the market and farmers? needs. This component will focus on
human resource development (training of extension workers/MOA staff); improvement
of extension facilities and services (including infrastructure where required) and
strengthening Agribusiness Training Centers (ATC) and Agricultural In-Service Institutes
(AISI).

 Component 3. Enhancing Technology Assessment and Dissemination ($9.7M)
 The objectives of this component will be to both introduce farmer and market demand-
driven technologies and to improve the capacity of the Assessment Institutes of
Agricultural Technology (AIATs) to function more effectively. FEATI will formulate an
innovative program to both upgrade AIATs (human resource development, facilities and
mobility improvement) and improve research quality and relevance through improving
linkages to the private sector, universities, and NGOs as well as with its traditional
extension and farmer partners. This component will also support the coordination of
AIAT/BPTPs to make it more responsive to provincial needs by strengthening the newly-
mandated Bogor-based Central Assessment and Development Institute for Agricultural
Technologies (Balai Besar Pengkajian dan Pengembangan Teknologi Pertanian ? B2PTP)
which now has oversight for the AIATs to develop their annual work programs and
enabling alignment with national and provincial policies. It will also include the costs of
the management support for the sub-Project Management Unit (PMU) that is to be set up
in the B2PTP.

 Component 4. Provision of Knowledge and Information Services ($3.9 M)
 This component aims to address the problem of absence and/or inaccessibility to
knowledge on agricultural technologies and the lack of linkages among service providers
themselves and between service providers and the user community (farmers, traders, and
entrepreneurs). In the development of basic applications, FEATI will be building up and
strengthening work that the MOA is already engaged in and that is supportive of basic
Ministry functions and mandate including, inter alia, a web-based Advice Online
application (e-Petani), for individualized technical and market assistance which will also
allow users to post their queries using SMS on their mobile phones and GPRS devices;
commodity price and market information whereby farmers can get up to date information
on local prices and markets; and linking up agribusiness service users and providers
through an application that enables users to post offers to sell or buy agricultural inputs,
products and other services. This component will be managed out of MOA?s Center for
Agricultural Data and Information (CADI) and will include project management support
for the sub-PMU that is to be set up in CADI. It will also support several project
activities in the form of training as well as by enabling the posting of project information
online, including details on the process of award and implementation of the FMA grants,
e-procurement, and the implementation of the project?s M&E system.
 Component 5. Extension Policy and Project Management Support ($24.6M)

 This component will, inter alia, provide the necessary policy support for the proposed
new extension law to prepare required legislation to provide clear guidelines for
implementing decentralized agricultural extension systems through multiple service
providers, under the Agricultural Extension Law expected to be approved by the
Parliament in late-2006. It will also provide management and implementation support
(including vehicles, equipment) to the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) to be
established at AAHRD as well as the District Project Implementation Units (DPIU) and
Provincial Project Management Units (PPMU). This component will also provide
training of fiduciary staff at all levels for the CPMU and the sub-PMUs and will support

carrying out of the baseline, satisfaction, and impact evaluation surveys and the
supervision of the environmental management plan and the anti-corruption action plan.
Training programs will be conducted for key personnel at all management levels on
aspects involving administration, management, monitoring and evaluation, ICT and
project reporting in order to provide them with additional knowledge and upgrade their
skills in the effective performance of their respective duties and responsibilities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
From a physical environmental perspective, the project will cover a range of agro-
ecological production zones, including areas of differing natural resource related
environmental stress. The principal zones include: lowland irrigated rice; lowland non-
irrigated rice; upland rain-fed mixed cropping; smallholder tree crops; and agro-forestry.
Within these zones, a wide variety of farming systems have evolved, many of which are
facing problems relating to decline in soil fertility and ground water quality as well as
increasing incidence of pests resulting from poor farming practices. Shortages in water
supply and erosion and landslides associated with inappropriate watershed management
practices are also common.

 Some of the project areas may have isolated vulnerable groups and all of the areas will
have vulnerable disadvantaged groups such as poor women, landless and minority ethnic
farmers. These include farmers that work as share-croppers or do tumpang sari farming in
production forests or plantations. Although isolated vulnerable groups are unlikely to be
found in West, Central, East Java and in West Sumatra, they could be found in other
areas covered under the project. Both categories of vulnerable groups are likely to be
under-represented in farmers'group activities and farmers'associations, while at the same
time being disproportionately impacted by the environmental issues described above.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Isono Sadoko (EASRD)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Safeguards policies under the project will be addressed in the following manner:
 The project will not lead to land conversion, involuntary resettlement, destruction of
environmentally sensitive areas or historically significant sites and/or other cultural
resources. Although the primary focus is on intensification, this is set within the context
of improved agricultural extension services, access to information and support of various
kinds that will result in farmers achieving a greater level of control over farming
techniques, including the minimum application of agricultural inputs. Project preparation
has also been based on a review (based on environmental questions integrated into PRA
techniques) of existing environmental constraints and pressures faced by poor farmers.
The results of this analysis have been used to shape the research and development
component of the project, ensuring that it reflects specific needs of farmers faced with
adapting to environmental shocks and stresses. The project will apply the following
approaches to minimizing environmental risks and maximizing environmental benefits:
 -      ensuring that demand driven research and development takes into account
environmental criteria such as the ecological situation for which it is intended, and the
skills and knowledge base of farmers to adapt to environmental shocks and stresses;
 -      ensuring that extension agents are sufficiently well trained to address the
environmental implications of the introduction of new cropping systems and farming
technologies (for example by ensuring that information conveyed to farmers on the use of
new pesticides to reduce losses from pests is accompanied by information and training on
safe handling of chemicals, timing and dosage advice to optimize effectiveness);
 -     ensuring that guidelines for accessing grants for farmer managed activities at
village and district level are revised to be (i) more equitable; (ii) gender-sensitive; and
(iii) environmentally sustainable (use of negative environmental list and promoting the
use of simple environmentally friendly technologies and appropriate pest management
procedures);
 -      strengthening environmental management capacity in agricultural extension
colleges and training centers, particularly in terms of strengthening curricula and capacity
of lecturers;
 -      expanding the capacity and outreach of IPPHTI, the national network of IPM
farmers;
 -      ensuring that knowledge and information services are comprehensive in
illustrating the opportunities that exist to improve farming systems based on
environmentally sustainable approaches within the 5 main farming systems
 The main social risks are that the vulnerable and disadvantaged groups such as poor
women, landless and minority ethnic farmers who will be relatively excluded in the
farmers groups decision making processes and their interest in Farmers Association may
not be sufficiently well represented. Specific approaches to addressing these risks will
include (i) development of appropriate guidelines (adapted from the DAFEP project) for
integration of social concerns (including gender) into the farmer driven extension
component, and (ii) the introduction of appropriate selection criteria that would help to

identify and reward farmer organizations that are more inclusive in decision making
processes, and are keen to develop their capacities in this area.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Most of the environmental impacts of the project are indirect and long-term in nature, as
described in preceding sections. The FEATI project itself will have few direct negative
impacts. In the longer term it is likely to induce a range of positive environmental
impacts by increasing the efficiency and relevance of research and extension systems,
and potentially negative impacts associated with agricultural intensification.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) is the implementing agency but has limited to address
environmental issues associated with agricultural development and intensification, even
though its regulations contain environmental safeguards and operate in close coordination
with the Ministry of Environment's environmental management regulations and
procedures. Capacity for environmental management and monitoring at province and
district/sub district is also weak. However, since the mid 1980s the MoA has been
supporting Integrated Pest Management (IPM) principles which have been widely applied
in Indonesia. The reform and strengthening of extension systems is a principal
component of FEATI, which will build on lessons learned from previous phases in the
implementation of IPM. In addition, under the support to Farmer Organizations
component, the project will work closely, inter alia, with IPPHTI, the national network of
IPM farmers to expand its outreach. Environmental support to the PMU will be provided
in order to address the capacity gap at the MoA as well as a program of training for
province, district and sub-district officials.

 Since this project is in a sense, a follow-on and scaling-up of DAFEP, the experience of
DAFEP could be used as a proxy of the willingness and the capacity of the Borrower to
address the social safeguard issues. Reviewing the DAFEP project, the Borrower has
been relatively successful in encouraging grass-roots participation and the involvement of
poor women farmers. It is less clear how far it has been able to address the other
vulnerable disadvantaged groups. Consequently the field manual for the Farmer
Managed Activities (FMAs) will put more emphasis on encouraging the involvement of
landless farmers (which in many cases are also minority isolated groups and the poorest
farmer) such as farmers engaged in tumpang sari farming in production forest area. The
guidelines for the farmer-managed activities (FMAs) will build on the lessons learned
under DAFEP to incorporate equity considerations. Through the introduction of by-laws
in the functioning of the Village Extension Management Units (UPKG), the UPKG
leaders are expected to become more accountable to the farmers who elected them. The
component will ensure that UPKG is inclusive and not serving a few large or influential

farmers. The Agency for Agricultural and Human Resource Development (AAHRD) in
the MoA which will be responsible for the implementation of this component has agreed
to incorporate these proposed changes. The proposed pilot district-level FMAs will have
implementation guidelines which will specifically include an environment-related
negative list.

 The borrower has prepared a social and environmental management plan based on the
key elements presented in section D1. The plan sets out the existing regulatory context
for environment and social issues, identifies key risks and mitigation and monitoring
measures, assesses capacities to implement mitigation and monitoring, and identifies
additional expertise, training and capacity building needs. In order to oversee
implementation of the plan, community development/gender advisers will be recruited at
the national and provincial PMU levels. Additional environmental expertise will also be
required to oversee measures to integrate environmentally sustainable approaches into
several project components. The environmental adviser(s) will develop an overall
monitoring program to track progress made with the different elements of EMP, and be
responsible for sensitizing the PIUs (national, provincial and district) in the area of pest
management.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the ultimate project beneficiaries, that is to say individual
farmers and their households with a focus on the poorest. The principal tool used in
identifying stakeholders and in raising awareness of environmental and social issues has
been Participatory Rapid Appraisal (PRA), tailored to take specific account of the
environmental dimension to farming systems. A sample of 16 villages were selected
located in West Java, Central Java, Banten, North Sulawesi, North Sumatra and East
Kalimantan. The results of these assessments and discussions were supplemented by
district and province level discussions in order to disseminate the main findings and
identify additional issues. The PRAs formed the basis of the development of a draft social
and environmental management plan. The EMP was then presented at an MoA national
level workshop on February 3, 2006. The final EMP was disclosed locally on the MOA
website on March 3, 2006. The national, provincial and district PMUs will be trained on
safeguards particularly in the area of pesticides management and will carry out similar
training for key stakeholders at the sub-district level. The environmental and social
management plan was made available to the public through the Bank's Project
Information Centers in Jakarta and Washington on February 23, 2006 and will also be
published in the project manuals.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01/27/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  03/03/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02/23/2006

  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Pest Management Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                     N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Comments:
 The focus of the project is to re-orient the existing institutions and capacities for
research and extension more explicitly in favor of the needs of poor farmers. The support
that is being provided is primarily ?software? related including institutional development
and human resource related, as well upgrading of technology, research and information
systems and networks. As a result, it is unlikely to lead to significant direct negative
environmental impacts and in fact, has the potential to lead to net environmental benefits
by helping to introduce more sustainable and efficient farming practices than currently
exist. However there are also potential residual effects to be addressed, resulting from
the project inducing agricultural intensification in the longer term, with the possibility
that this results in soil depletion, increased ground water pollution and the introduction of
invasive species. The environmental safeguards approach takes this into account,
particularly in relation to the potential that exists for improving environmental
management capacity in agricultural extension (including strengthening of training
curricula), farmer organization strengthening, and public-private partnership components
of the project.



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                   No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)               No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the               Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                          Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                         No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's            Yes

  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                              Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                  Ms Shobha Shetty                             10/17/2006
Environmental Specialist:          Mr Josef Lloyd Leitmann                      10/19/2006
Social Development Specialist      Mr Scott E. Guggenheim                       10/19/2006
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Glenn S. Morgan                           02/16/2006
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Mr Rahul Raturi                              10/20/2006
 Comments:

