Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/10/2006 
Report No.:  AC1417
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iran, Islamic Republic of 
Project ID:  P086465 
Project Name:  Road Safety Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Charles Crochet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 7, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 18, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (60%);Health (20%);General public administration sector 
(20%) 
Theme:  Social risk mitigation (P);Other public sector governance (P);Other social 
development (P);Other rule of law (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
24.90
24.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective is to substantially reduce road accidents, 
deaths and injuries in high-risk pilot inter-urban road corridors in six provinces (Gilan, 
Quazvin, Tehran, Qom, Esfahan, and Khorassan) and in specific pilot urban areas in five 
cities (Rasht, Tehran, Esfahan, Shiraz and Mashhad), through a coordinated and 
integrated package of cost-effective, multi-sectoral, road safety interventions designed on 
the basis of international best practice, and strengthen institutional capability for 
implementation of the Government strategy in the transport sector.  
 
The key performance indicators are:  
 
-
Reduction of the rates of accident, fatality, and injury in the pilot corridors and urban 
areas;  
 
-
Improved road user behavior measured by the observance of speed limits and the use 
of seat belts and motorcycle helmets in the pilot corridors and urban areas;  
 
-
Establishment of sound strategies and programs to improve efficiency in key areas of 
the transport sector.  
 
Page  2
The proje
ct would contribute to the achievement of one of the country’s major policy 
goals for the transport sector, road safety improvement, as set in the Fourth FYDP. The 
project is also fully consistent with the draft country assistance strategy (CAS) now being 
finalized with the Government.  It would contribute to the CAS second objective 
(“Sharing the fruits of growth while addressing the needs of the poor and disadvantaged”) 
by reducing a major source of health costs and protecting vulnerable families from falling 
into poverty. It would also contribute to the CAS fourth objective (“Building efficient, 
accountable, and transparent public-sector governance”) by greatly strengthening the 
capability of public institutions to address an issue of national concern in a coordinated 
way and with full participation of the population.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists mainly of a comprehensive program of activities for improving road 
safety in the pilot corridors and urban areas as well as developing regulations and 
institutional capabilities at the national level whenever possible in the short term. These 
activities have been designed on the basis of the experience of successful countries and 
the assessment of issues in road safety management in Iran presented in Part A.1 above. 
The project has seven components. The first six are intended to result in safer road users, 
safer vehicles, safer roads, better road safety monitoring and evaluation systems, 
improved post crash rescue and emergency services and stronger institutional capacity, as 
described below. The seventh component, which is not related to road safety, but was 
requested by the Ministry of Roads and Transportation (MRT), is for assisting the 
Government in implementing key elements of its transport strategy.  
 
Component 1: Safer Road Users (US$16.2 million) This component is aimed mainly at 
improving road user behavior in the pilot corridors and urban areas. It will consist of 
technical assistance and training as well as the provision of equipment. The main outputs 
will be better work methods and programs for traffic police deterrence of high risk road 
user behavior, public information campaigns coordinated with police enforcement 
activities, better road safety education programs, improved regulations and procedures for 
driver training and testing and for management of commercial driver health, manual and 
guidelines covering all the above subject matters, trained staff in related government 
agencies, and better educated children in the project pilot areas.  
 
Component 2: Safer Vehicles (US$0.60 million). This component is aimed at improving 
the road worthiness of both private cars and commercial vehicles. It will consist of 
technical assistance and training. The main outputs will be new technical standards and 
procedures for testing of vehicles, new regulations for loading of commercial vehicles 
and transport of hazardous materials, recommendations for the establishment of a central 
vehicle registration database, action plans for implementation, and trained police officers, 
government agencies’ staff, and commercial vehicles operators.  
 
Component 3: Safer Roads (US$70.8 million). This component is aimed at the provision 
of safe rural and urban road infrastructure in the pilot corridors and urban areas. It will 
consist of technical assistance and training, provision and installation of new road safety 
engineering equipment (e.g. signs, markings, crash barriers), and low cost civil works 
Page  3
designed on the basis of best world wide practices. The main outputs will be technical 
manuals and guidelines for safe audits and accident blackspot analysis, trained technical 
staff in the Road Maintenance and Transportation Organization (RMTO) and the pilot 
cities, and the entire length (about 1,000 km) of the pilot corridors as well as about 175 
km of main arteries in the pilot urban areas made free of major safety hazards.  
 
Component 4: Road Safety Monitoring and Evaluation Systems (US$5.9 million). This 
component is aimed at establishing an adequate system for monitoring and evaluation of 
road safety activities in the pilot corridors and urban areas, and at setting up a national 
road crash data and analysis system that provides reliable information to all concerned 
agencies nationwide. It is expected that the M&E methodologies developed under the 
project will later on be implemented nationwide. This component will consist of technical 
assistance and training as well as the provision of equipment including new software and 
hardware. The main outputs will be better methods and procedures, adequate data 
recording, processing, analysis and reporting systems, trained staff in concerned agencies, 
and continuous feedback to be used for the fine tuning or adjustment of project activities.  
 
Component 5: Improving Post Crash Rescue and Relief Services and Emergency 
Medical Services (US$2.5 million). This component is aimed at improving the 
performance of rescue and relief services and emergency medical services in the pilot 
corridors and urban areas.  It will consist of technical assistance and training as well as 
the provision of equipment. The main outputs will be guidelines and manuals for 
improved services, action plans for implementation, trained staff, and increased 
capability for rescue operations on the site of accidents.  
 
Component 6: Institutional Development and Support (US$2.7 million). This 
component is aimed at improving and supporting the national institutional framework for 
road safety activities. It will consist of technical assistance and training as well as the 
provision of equipment. The main outputs will be improved road safety legislation 
(including especially the penalty system), guidelines for improved road safety funding 
allocation processes, delivery of annual consultation and information programs on the 
NRSAP in pilot corridors and cities, implementation of an action plan for the 
strengthening of the capacity of the Road Safety and Traffic Department (RSTD) of 
RMTO, trained staff in road safety strategic management at the national level and 
provincial and city levels in the pilot areas, and an updated National Road Safety Action 
Plan for the period after the project. This component will also involve support to the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) through the provision of technical assistance and 
training, office equipment, and the funding of incremental operating costs.  
 
Component 7: Transport Technical Assistance (US$5.8 million). This component is 
aimed at improving efficiency of operations and capacity in the transport sector through 
transfer of international best practices.  It will consist of technical assistance and training.  
The main outputs will be diagnostics and specific recommendations for improving the 
organization, management, regulations, and financial policies related to road 
management, railway transport, port operations, and logistics and transit transport, action 
plans for implementation, and trained staff.   
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Of the project components, only the components that include civil works will involve 
potential negative social and/or environmental impacts. The civil works proposed under 
the project are blackspot improvements located in the above defined pilot inter-urban 
corridors and pilot urban areas and typically include small engineering works such as 
installation of guard rails, signs and rumble strips, construction of traffic islands and 
segregated traffic lines, minor road widening and improvements to accommodate 
pedestrian paths, site distances and curvature.  
 
Social impacts: the expected adverse social impacts will include small-scale land 
acquisition/resettlement necessary for the construction of pedestrian facilities, minor road 
widening or realignment to improve sight distances, curvature, and channellisation of 
traffic, and installation of roundabouts. Potentially affected persons are those residing 
along the demonstration corridors where re-alignment or blackspot improvements are 
necessary. In addition, intersection improvements may be required, which are typically in 
urban and urbanizing areas. For the first batch of civil works, the locations and general 
design have been identified by a consultant and a field visit took place during the pre-
appraisal mission to assess the scale of the potential resettlement issues. It was confirmed 
that resettlement issues were going to be very limited. For the second and third batch of 
civil works, black spots to be treated have yet to be identified, but it is expected that 
impacts will be similar to those of the first batch. Finally, the absence of indigenous 
people living or transiting along the demonstration corridors in the pilot provinces and 
cities has been confirmed by an environmental impact assessment expert during the pre-
appraisal mission.  
 
Direct environmental impacts: these will be confined to existing roadways and 
immediate adjacent areas where civil works will be undertaken. The selection of the first 
batch of civil works has been made with regard to minimizing potential environmental 
impacts, which was confirmed by the team's field visits during the pre-appraisal mission. 
For the second and third batch of civil works, black spots to be treated have yet to be 
identified, but it is expected that impacts will be similar to those of the first batch. In 
addition, the team consulted with an environmental assessment expert during the pre-
appraisal mission, who confirmed that there were no undisturbed habitats, special-status 
wildlife species registered and/or no cultural relics in the project areas or its 
surroundings. Finally, as all road works will be on existing right of way, except in very 
minor cases, no long-term impact to area soils and hydrological characteristics are 
expected.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSRE) 
Mr John Bryant Collier (MNSRE) 
Ms Sophie Marie-Odile Jablonski (MNSIF) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)  
 
The requirements of the safeguard policy on environmental assessment apply to the 
project. Environmental Management guidelines have been prepared in response to that 
policy. While preparing this document, it was found that the scale and magnitude of the 
potential environmental impacts are very low, with most of the impacts site-specific, and 
none irreversible. The overall environmental impact of the project will be positive, as 
traffic flows and road safety improve  
 
Involuntary Resettlements (OP 4.12)  
 
Depending on the design and scale of engineering work associated with the blackspots 
improvements, minor land acquisition and resettlement may take place, and hence this 
may trigger the safeguard policy on involuntary resettlements. A Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) has been prepared in response to that policy. The RPF will ensure that 
all displaced persons are compensated for their losses at replacement cost and provided 
with other assistance and rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve, or at least 
maintain, their pre-project living standards and income earning capacity. Every effort will 
be made to avoid land acquisition impacts, or, where it is not possible, to minimize 
displacement and adverse impacts of projects by examining all available design options. 
Finally, the project is expected to generate social benefits to a large number of people. 
These include mainly (i) people who use the pilot corridors and will benefit from a safer 
road environment and a reduced risk of accidents, and (ii) pedestrians and people who 
work or live within proximity of the black spots or within the pilot urban areas, who will 
have a lesser risk of being a road accident victim.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long-term environmental impact due to anticipated future activity in the 
project area, are foreseen.  
 
As road injury and deaths generally have an impact on the particularly economically 
active elements of the community, the Project is expected to have positive impacts on 
poverty reduction through the decrease in injuries to those elements. In addition, the 
social and economic consequences of rehabilitation and health care, which are often only 
partly considered, cause health and economic losses, and hinder escape from poverty. As 
such, the Project is expected to address both health-related factors that push people into 
poverty or make escape from it difficult, along with a reduction of health and economic 
losses resulting from the accident trauma itself.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The design of the first batch of blackspot improvements was prepared with regard to 
minimizing potential environmental and social impacts, which was confirmed by the 
team's field visits during the pre-appraisal mission. For the second and third batches of 
civil works, black spots to be treated have yet to be identified, but EMP guidelines, to be 
followed by the consultants in charge of the detailed design of the civil works, should 
ensure a similar minimization of potential environmental and social impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The only safeguard policies which are triggered in this project deal with Environmental 
Assessment and Resettlement, as explained previously.  
 
To address the Environmental Assessment safeguard requirements:  
 
-
the Borrower has prepared, endorsed and disclosed Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) guidelines that will ensure proper consideration of potential environmental and 
social impacts at all stages of sub-project design for each batch of civil works, and by all 
concerned parties;  
 
-
due to the limited environmental capacities within the Road Maintenance and 
Transport Organization (RMTO), which is the project implementation agency, the PMU 
has recruited a (half-time) environmental safeguard consultant, who will organize and 
oversee environmental management work under the project, and provide overall technical 
support to the PMU on environmental matters.  
 
To address the Resettlement safeguard requirements of the World Bank:  
 
-
the Borrower has prepared, endorsed and disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) that will ensure proper consideration of potential resettlement and land acquisition 
Page  7
impacts at all stages of sub-project design for each batch of civil works, and by all 
concerned parties;  
 
-
due to the limited resettlement/land acquisition capacities within RMTO, the PMU has 
recruited a (part-time) resettlement/land acquisition safeguard consultant, who will 
organize and oversee resettlement / land acquisition management work under the project, 
and provide overall technical support to the PMU on resettlement/land acquisition 
matters.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Road users of the corridors and pilot urban areas, and people living or working in close 
proximity are the key stakeholders directly affected by the project.  
 
-
The EMP guidelines include the requirement that comprehensive public consultation 
be carried out at each stage of sub-projects' development with potentially affected groups 
and local NGOs about the sub-project's environmental and social aspects, and that their 
views be taken into account.  
 
-
The RPF clearly requires that potentially affected people participate throughout the 
various stages of planning and implementation of the Inventories and Resettlement Plans, 
including at the blackspot improvement design stage. For this purpose, the RPF requires 
that all potentially affected persons are informed of the provisions of the RPF earlier in 
the process, as well as of their entitlements and rehabilitation choices, by various 
meetings at the local provincial and/or city levels.  
 
-
In addition to the consultation process, the RPF and each Resettlement Plan will be 
made available locally (for each sub-project) in Farsi before the start of the expropriation 
activities. Similarly, the EMP guidelines and the EMP prepared for each sub-project shall 
be available locally in Farsi before the start of the works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/13/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/13/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2006 
 
Page  8
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Charles Crochet 
02/10/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Knut Opsal 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Sophie Marie-Odile Jablonski 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
02/10/2006 
Comments:   
