Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3260 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P107698 
Project Name: Strengthening Emergency Health Response in Northern Iraq 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Jacques Frere 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Other human development (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Iraq Reconstruction Trust Fund 
7.40
7.40 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective would be to contribute to the establishment of the capacity of 
government services involved in emergency response to provide a rapid, coordinated and 
effective response to health emergencies, including those resulting from acts of violence, 
accidents, or natural disasters.  
 
The project would achieve its objective through:  
 
(i) 
re-organization of emergency medical systems: planning and preparedness, coordination, 
assignment of responsibilities to dedicated staff, and establishment of a chain of command;  
 
(ii) 
creation of a reliable communication system between decision makers, providers of care 
(hospitals), ambulance services, and other government agencies;  
 
(iii) 
training and retraining of doctors, paramedics, emergency medical technicians and 
ambulance drivers in life saving interventions, stabilization techniques, and safe handling of 
patients;  
 
(iv) 
upgrading of ambulance services (quantity, quality and management); and  
 
(v) 
construction/rehabilitation and equipping of two Blood Banks, and equipping of a third 
Blood Bank.  
Page  2
The outputs for each component, e.g., number of centers constructed or rehabilitated, number of 
ambulances procured, will be easy to define.  The true impact of the project in terms of improved 
capacity to respond to emergencies will have to be field-tested and therefore will be more 
difficult to assess.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will comprise four components, to be implemented over a period of up to 24 months.  
Components 1, 3 and 4 will be executed by KRG MOH, with assistance from UNOPS, while 
Component 2 will be executed by the Bank.  The project will be grant financed under the Iraq 
Trust Fund, operating under OP 8.00, Emergency Recovery Assistance.  The four components 
are described below:  
 
Component 1: Emergency Command/Coordination Centers (Estimated cost:  US$ 3.2 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen emergency coordination and response in the 
three Northern Governorates of Erbil, Sulaymaniya and Dohuk.  A functional emergency 
medical system requires well-planned and quality pre-hospital management, as well as a 
standardized response to emergencies. In order to carry out rapid situation assessments, and to 
organize the provision of timely and adequate responses provincial command/coordination_ 
centers must be established. These centers would be adequately staffed with trained personnel, 
and they must be able to rely on effective and robust communication systems connecting 
ambulances, health facilities, and other government agencies.   The project will support the 
construction of three emergency response centers on the three sites selected by the KRG MOH. 
These centers will receive equipment, including IT, telecommunications and HF/VHF 
communications equipment.  Financing will also be provided for the procurement of 20 
ambulances that will be under the control of the three directorates and for which the local 
capacity for maintenance is already in place.  Capacity building training of the staff for these 
centers and for the ambulances is covered under Component 2 below.  Equipment-related 
training linked to equipment procurement will be provided by the suppliers.  
 
Component 2.  Capacity Building and Training in Emergency Procedures (Estimated cost 
US$0.5 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to build capacity in medical and paramedical staff providing 
pre-hospital emergency services. The project will finance technical assistance for the 
development of new procedures for health staff, and requisite training and retraining of doctors, 
paramedics, and emergency medical technicians in these centers and the other existing 
emergency health centers in Kurdistan.  Also included will be training of ambulance drivers.  
The training will focus on new emergency services systems and protocols for pre-hospital care, 
including safe evacuation and referral of patents in a timely manner, with improved response 
time and referral practices.  The training will focus on life saving interventions, stabilization 
techniques, and safe handling of patients.  
 
Component 3:  Blood Banks (Estimated cost: US$3 million)  
 
Page  3
The objective of this component is to upgrade the capacity of existing blood transfusion 
services to provide a timely supply of safe blood and blood products banks to respond to the 
needs resulting from an emergency.  The component will support improvements in the quality of 
collection, screening, testing, processing, storage, and distribution of blood and blood products.  
The project will, more specifically, provide funding for civil works rehabilitation, equipping of 
the blood banks and training/re-training of the staff. One new blood bank will be constructed and 
equipped in Erbil and one existing blood bank will be renovated and equipped in Sulaymaniya.  
A
third existing blood bank in Dohuk will receive equipment only and the air conditioning 
system will be rehabilitated.  Related staff development training will be covered under 
Component 2 above.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (Estimated cost: US$0.5 million)  
 
The objective of this component is provide a central point in the MOH to coordinate project 
activities and communicate with the Bank, UNOPS and other relevant agencies or bodies 
involved in the Project.  This component will support the establishment of a Project Coordination 
Unit (PCU) within the KRG MOH in Erbil, with focal points in Sulaymaniya and Dohuk, and 
provision of technical assistance for a Procurement Advisor to facilitate the procurement under 
the project; a Project Advisory Committee (PAC) comprising key resource persons (within the 
MOH) to provide guidance on technical, medical and training aspects of the Project.  In addition, 
the MOH will contract UNOPS to implement specific investments of the program (civil works 
and goods).  This component will also cover the operating costs of the PCU, provision of office 
furniture and equipment, and financing of the annual external audit of the project.  Salary costs 
of the PMT, with the exception of consultants, will be covered by the KRG MOH recurrent 
budget. Technical assistance and training of KRG-MOH staff necessary for the coordination of 
all project activities will be covered under Component 2 above.  
 
This will be the first Bank-financed project to be implemented by the KRG MOH which has no 
experience to date with Bank policies and procedures.  This represents a significant risk to 
achieving the project outcomes, and therefore it has been agreed that the implementation model 
will include the following approaches to ensure sufficient operational support:  
 
-
Civil works, goods and operating costs would be financed through a grant between the Bank 
and KRG MOH.  The ministry would then contract with UNOPS to manage the procurement of 
civil works, goods and operating costs.  
 
-
Technical assistance and training activities would be financed through a companion grant to 
be executed by the World Bank to facilitate selection of the most qualified technical experts to 
guide the capacity building aspects of emergency services.  
 
Total project cost is estimated at US$7.2 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project activities will be centered on three cities in the Governorate of Kurdistan: Erbil, 
Sulaymaniya, and Dohuk.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  4
The Project is rated category 'B'.  Impacts would be those associated mainly with (i) construction 
of the three Emergency Response Centers and the construction/rehabilitation of the three blood 
banks (e.g., safety, dust, noise, waste material, and vehicular traffic); (ii) provision of sanitary 
services, water supply and waste management; and (iii) operation and maintenance of the 
emergency response centers and the blood banks. Because of the emergency conditions, the 
requirement to carry out a limited Environmental Analysis as part of project preparation will be 
waived.  However, for sub-projects with possible moderate or minor adverse environmental 
impacts, a limited Environmental Analysis will be done during project design for World Bank 
approval prior to execution of such works. The Environmental and Social Screening and 
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) would be disclosed in the country and in the Infoshop in 
November 2007.Based on the ESSAF, the following standards will be applied during 
implementation: (i) inclusion of standard environmental codes of practice (ECOP) in the bid 
documents for rehabilitation and extension works; (ii) use of Safeguard Procedures for Inclusion 
in the Technical Specifications of Contracts; (iii) use of the Checklist of likely Environmental 
and Social Impacts of Subproject; (iv) review and oversight of any major reconstruction works 
by specialists; (v) implementation of environmentally and socially sound options for civil works; 
and (vi) provision for adequate budget and satisfactory institutional arrangements to monitor 
effective implementation and adequately operate and maintain sanitary facilities after project 
completion. Capacity building on Safeguards and on the implementation of the ESSAF will be 
undertaken during the preparation process.  
 
There will be construction of three new emergency response centers and one blood bank, and 
renovation of two additional blood banks.  The new construction sites are on government owned 
land without squatters, and renovation sites are on existing plots of land owned by the KRG 
MOH and without squatters. Therefore, World Bank Operational Policy (OP 4.12) would not be 
triggered since there should not be any involuntary relocation of populations or expropriation of 
privately owned land.  However, the ESSAF, specifically elaborated for due diligence of 
emergency projects in Iraq, should be used to ensure that this is indeed the case and should there 
be any need for expropriation of privately owned land or/and involuntary relocation of 
population, the same guidelines will be followed.  
 
The KRG MOH/PMT would employ a safeguard specialist who would be trained on World 
Bank safeguard policy and procedures for monitoring compliance with World Bank policy 
during project implementation and for reporting. Quarterly and annual implementation progress 
reports should include a section for reporting compliance with World Bank safeguard policy.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSHD) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is rated category "B". Because of the emergency conditions, the requirement to 
carry out a limited Environmental Analysis as part of project preparation will be waived.  
However, for sub
-
projects with possible moderate or minor adverse environmental impacts, a 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
limited Environmental Analysis will be done during project design for World Bank approval 
prior to execution of such works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
November 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Jacques Frere 
11/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
11/12/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Akiko Maeda 
11/07/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
