Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC1868
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iraq 
Project ID:  P087734 
Project Name:  IQ-EMERGENCY ELECTRICITY 
Task Team Leader:  Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeu 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2007 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (100%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
124.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
6.00
26.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the project are to: (i) alleviate the current power supply shortfall by 
restoring the base load generation capacity of the Hartha Power Station Units 2 and 3 to 
400 MW; and (ii) lay the groundwork for improved power system planning and fuel 
supply by providing the tools and other support necessary to enhance in-house capability 
to prepare, implement and operate current and future projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
All units of the Hartha Power Station are designed to use natural gas as the primary fuel 
firing the boilers, but they can also use heavy fuel oil (HFO) as well as crude oil, if 
natural gas is not available.  MoE prefers the use of natural gas over HFO or crude, for 
both economic and environmental reasons.  Natural gas is not currently available, 
because of problems with the collection, processing and compression capacity, but the 
Ministry of Oil is working on restoring HFO supply to the Hartha power plant. Hartha 
Units 1 and 4 are currently being operated on crude oil. Under the current fuel supply 
plan Hartha will be operated on HFO until such time as gas supply becomes available.  
The timing of this latter option remains uncertain.  The total cost of the proposed project 
is estimated at US$150 million.  It consists of the following components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1:  Rehabilitation of Hartha Power Station Units 2 and 3 (US$144 million)  
 
Component 1.1:  Hartha power plant (800 MW) is located at the Shatt Al-Arab river, 
about 33km from Basra and 25km from the Iranian border, and was commissioned in 
1979.  Units 1 and 4 have been running most of the time since then, but Units 2 and 3 
have been mostly out of operation since the first Gulf War.  Rehabilitation of Units 2 and 
3
was initiated with assistance under the OFFP and equipment for an estimated US$120 
million has been delivered to the site.  The proposed project will consist of completing 
supply of materials, rehabilitation and commissioning of units 2 and 3 of the Hartha 
power plant to restore to as close as possible their original capacity of 400MW and 
ensure an additional operational life of 20 years.  The tender document will take account 
of the equipment and materials already supplied under the OFFP.  The main components 
comprise the boilers, condensers, turbines, governors, generators, transformers and 
control equipment.  The bidders will be encouraged to form joint ventures with local 
contractors, which would reduce the project cost and create local employment.  Most 
equipment will be replaced rather than repaired.  
 
Component 1.2:  Support in bid evaluation, construction supervision and further support 
to MOE up to the end of the defects liability period.  
 
Component 1.3:  Implementation of the agreed recommendations of the Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  
 
Component 1.4:  Incremental operational cost of the PMT such as travel and per-diem 
but excluding salaries of Iraqi PMT staff.  
 
Component 2:  Support Services (US$6 million)  
 
Component 2.1:  Consultancy support and training to Iraqi MoE staff in the preparation 
of least cost reconstruction and expansion plans, feasibility studies and advisory services 
for future projects including projects related to securing fuel supply and reducing gas 
flaring.  Priority will be given to assisting MoE with completing a feasibility study and 
related consulting services for the Mansuria Project (development of a gas field and the 
construction of a 2x123MW simple cycle plant with a possible expansion to a combined 
cycle project) and other possible oil and gas field developments, in close cooperation 
with the Ministry of Oil. Support for least cost planning will complement the 
development of planning tools already provided or to be provided through alternative 
financing.  Such tools would include software and measuring instruments for all stages of 
power system planning.  
 
Component 2.2:  Regional and overseas training for staff in the technical areas of 
operations, maintenance, planning, environment and general project management; as well 
as in financial, legal and general management aspects of power utilities.  
 
Component 2.3:  Independent audits for the project.  
 
Page  3
Component 2.4:  Office equipment for the PMT in Baghdad and at Hartha, such 
ascomputers, office equipment and operational costs such as travel and per-diem but 
excluding salaries of Iraqi PMT staff.  
 
Component 2.5:  Miscellaneous short term consulting services that may be required for 
the Hartha project, such as an independent review of project implementation, as well as 
other advisory services for the power sector that may be required by the MoE.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Hartha Power Station (800 MW) is located at the Shatt Al-Arab river, about 33km from 
Basra and 25km from the Iranian border.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A
rapid risk assessment was carried out as part of project preparation where the emission 
dispersion from the Hartha power plant was evaluated. For this purpose, atmospheric 
dispersion modeling was used to define potential air quality impacts associated with the 
two currently operational units (units 1 and 4 at a nominal capacity of 400 MW - now 
being operated largely with crude oil) as well as the impacts that may arise upon the 
rehabilitation of two additional units (units 2 and 3, reaching a combined capacity of 800 
MW for all units operating together). Emissions were simulated for a complete 
meteorological year considering various scenarios (before/after rehabilitation, type of fuel 
used ? crude oil, HFO, and natural gas emission control measures) to assess potential 
near-field exposure and health impacts at short/near distances or within plant vicinity (up 
to 1.5 km) and at far field or long distances reaching the Kuwaiti and Iranian borders. The 
dispersion modeling was conducted using primary constituents of concern that are linked 
to power generation, namely, SO2 and particulate matter (PM).  
Page  4
The contribution of the plant to SO2 levels can be significant at nearby distances 
representing a potential high risk that need to be alleviated in the evaluation of 
alternatives during the implementation of the ESIA. This contribution added to the 
background levels, may exceed World Bank guidelines of daily concentrations of 125 
micrograms/m3. The contribution risk of SO2 becomes less significant at receptors along 
the Iraqi-Iranian and Iraqi-Kuwaiti borders (far field simulations).  
 
Similarly, the contribution risk of the plant to PM levels is likely to be less significant 
than SO2, at both the near and the far fields, because of the desert nature of the region 
which is generally associated with high background PM levels in comparison to the 
plant?s contribution and exceeding on their own World Bank guidelines of daily 
concentrations of 70 micrograms/m3. The ESIA will evaluate the suitability of the World 
Bank guidelines to the region given its desert nature that is characterized with elevated 
background concentrations.  The findings of the report have been disclosed both locally 
and in Infoshop.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be carried 
out as a follow up to the rapid risk assessment during project implementation as 
stipulated by the revised Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment 
Framework of April 2006, and in view of the emergency nature of this project.  Due to 
the high risk arising from the significant contribution of the plant to SO2 levels at nearby 
distances, measures to alleviate this risk will be examined during the preparation of the 
ESIA.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Due to the high risk arising from the significant contribution of the plant to SO2, PM, 
NOx and other pollutant levels at nearby distances, alternatives will be evaluated to 
alleviate this risk during the preparation of the ESIA.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
consulting firm, Fitchner, has been contracted using Japan PHRD funding to initiate 
the preparation of the ESIA.  A focal point for the environmental and social safeguards at 
the MOE has been identified to follow up on the preparation and implementation of the 
ESIA.  The borrower will work with the consulting firm and will provide all necessary 
technical documents, data, information, maps, etc as well as air dispersion calculation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
consultation and communications program including public consultation will take 
place as part of the ESIA.  Relevant stakeholders and the public will be informed of the 
project in order to obtain their views, objections and recommendations.  Newspapers, 
Page  5
local radio stations and posters will be used to announce the locations of the proceedings 
of the consultations to ensure diverse stakeholder and public participation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/01/0001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/01/0001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/01/0001 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/01/0001  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Due to the emergency nature of the operation, the ESIA will be prepared and disclosed 
during implementation.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
01/09/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef 
01/09/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
01/09/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
01/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
01/09/2007 
Comments:   
