Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2371
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iraq 
Project ID:  P099295 
Project Name:  Emergency Social Protection Project 
Task Team Leader:  David J. Steel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 17, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 2, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Compulsory pension and unemployment insurance (50%);Other social services 
(50%) 
Theme:  Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (P);Social safety nets (P);Social risk 
mitigation (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
8.00
8.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to strengthen the policy, management and 
administrative capacity in MOLSA and MOF to develop, manage and monitor pension 
and Social Safety Net (SSN) reforms.  
 
Specifically, the project aims to achieve the following outcomes:  
 
-
Establishment of a basic information system within MOLSA to record and process 
information on safety nets as a foundation for policy design;  
 
-
Development of an updated and digitized database on beneficiaries, contributors and 
employers of the pension system;  
 
-
Consolidation and expansion of the information base for direct cash-transfers managed 
by MOLSA to allow for development of targeting strategies;  
 
-
Building of technical capacity within MOLSA and MOF for policy analysis and design 
in the area of pensions and safety nets;  
 
-
Design and implementation of a monitoring and evaluation system for the reformed 
SSN program.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will support two areas of social protection - safety nets and 
pensions - and will comprise three components.  
 
Component 1: Safety Nets (estimated total cost US$6.36 million). This component will 
have two subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent A: Information Systems Development. This subcomponent of the project 
will support:(i) supply and installation of IT systems and equipment to assist in scaling up 
the SSN Program; (ii) establishing a basic information infrastructure within MOLSA, 
including the development of an integrated database of safety net applicants and 
beneficiaries; and (iii) developing a monitoring and evaluation system for the program 
based on a central management information system (MIS).  
 
Subcomponent B: Institutional Capacity Building for Safety Nets Policy Development. 
This subcomponent will focus on three areas of safety nets policy: (i) capacity building in 
data analysis and program monitoring; (ii) development of sustainable safety net program 
designs that can replace generalized subsidies; and (iii) targeting and eligibility options. 
Activities would include technical assistance and training for MOLSA staff inside Iraq as 
well as in other countries within and beyond the region to acquire needed skills.  
 
Component 2: Pensions (estimated total cost US$ 0.81 million).  
 
This component will finance the preparation of baseline information and IT support for 
record-keeping and policy analysis. It will include: (i) conducting a representative survey 
of beneficiaries and contributors to the SPS; (ii) providing IT technologies to support 
digitization of pension records, record-keeping, and pension policy analysis; (iii) training 
on data entry, database management (record-keeping), and data analysis for pension 
policy making. As a complement to this component, the Bank will finance Institutional 
Capacity Building for Pension Policy Development. This would fund the preparation of a 
short term policy note assessing options for the MOF on how to address the negative 
fiscal effects of the recently approved Pension Law #27 together with a policy workshop 
for the PRSC, and technical support to underpin their drafting of a revised pension law. 
Over the medium term it will provide technical assistance and training to improve the 
capacity of MOLSA and MOF staff in the following areas of pension policy: (i) 
evaluation of system design (including assessment of financial sustainability and fiscal 
implications); (ii) pension system management and administration; and (iii) pension 
reform design for public mandatory systems, including the preparation of a draft strategy 
for pension reform and the assessment of fiscal and welfare implications of the reform. 
Activities would include consultant studies and training for selected staff from MOLSA 
and MOF in pension design and financial modeling.  
 
Component 3: Project Management (estimated total cost US$0.83 million).  
 
This component is to finance goods, technical assistance, training and operating 
expenditures necessary to manage project activities and ensure compliance with the grant 
fiduciary requirements.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Throughout Iraq.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  4
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David J. Steel 
06/13/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr David J. Steel 
06/13/2006 
Comments:  The project has been transferred to the TTL on January 24, 2006. 
