Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2102 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/02/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P099295 
Project Name: Emergency Social Protection Project 
Task Team Leader: David J. Steel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Compulsory pension and unemployment insurance (50%);Other social services 
(50%) 
Theme: Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (P);Social safety nets (P);Social risk 
mitigation (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
6.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to strengthen the policy, management and 
administrative capacity in the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA)to develop, 
manage, and monitor pension and social safety net reforms. Specifically, the project aims to 
achieve the following outcomes: (a) Establishment of a basic information system within MOLSA 
to record and process information on safety nets as a foundation for policy design; (b) An 
updated and digitized database on beneficiaries, contributors and employers of the pension 
system; (c) Consolidation and expansion of the information base for direct cash-transfers 
managed by MOLSA to allow for development of targeting strategies; (d) Building of technical 
capacity within MOLSA and MOF for policy analysis and design in the area of pensions and 
safety nets; (e) Design and implementation of a monitoring and evaluation system for the 
reformed Family Allowance safety net program; (f) Development of a public awareness 
campaign for safety nets and pension reform; and (g) Development of a draft pension reform 
strategy.  
 
Page  2
Due to financing and implementation constraints, the project would provide support only to 
those activities that are most feasible to carry out and that would yield the best results in the 
current country context, as determined during project preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will support two areas of social protection 
–
safety nets and pensions – and 
will comprise three components.  
 
Component 1 will finance capacity building for MOLSA's safety net programs, including the 
development of information systems and institutional capacity building for safety nets policy 
development.  
 
Component 2 will finance capacity building for MOLSA's pension program 
operations,including the carrying out of surveys, development of information systems and 
institutional capacity building for pension policy development.  
 
Under Components 1 and 2, the grant will finance technical assistance, surveys, training, IT 
equipment, software, office equipment and supplies.  
 
Component 3 will finance project management support, including the provision of furniture, 
equipment, technical assistance and training necessary for the management of the project, as well 
as operating costs of the Project Management Team.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined during preparation mission.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/20/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David J. Steel 
01/30/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
01/31/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr David J. Steel 
01/30/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
