Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2464
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iraq 
Project ID:  P099059 
Project Name:  Dokan and Derbandikhan Emergency Hydro Power Project 
Task Team Leader:  Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 21, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 17, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to (i) help alleviate the current power supply 
shortfall in the Kurdish region through urgent repair works, (ii) strengthen the capacity of 
local operational staff and (iii) prepare for the subsequent rehabilitation of the Dokan and 
Derbandikhan hydropower plants.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Repairs for Dokan (US$9.20 million)  
 
1.1 Replacement of the excitation systems: The work will involve installation of 
equipment supplied under the UN OFFP, testing and commissioning of the excitation 
systems, and providing training for operation and maintenance staff of the power plant.  
 
1.2 Spare parts for four compressors: The work will involve providing spare parts and 
training for operation and maintenance staff.   
 
1.3 Repair of GIS for Unit No. 1 : This will involve the repair of the GIS for Unit No. 1 
and the provision of training for operation and maintenance staff.  
 
Page  2
1.4 Completion of installation of the synchronous condenser : The work will involve 
installing the equipment supplied under the UN OFFP, and testing and commissioning 
the synchronous condenser system, as well as providing training for operation and 
maintenance staff.  
 
1.5 Replacement of control systems: : This will involve the design, supply, installation 
and commissioning of a new control system, as well as training for operation and 
maintenance staff.  
 
1.6 Dam safety emergency work : This will involve the re-establishment of an adequate 
instrumentation/monitoring system based on an instrument-criticality analysis.  
 
Component 2: Repairs for Derbandikhan (US$18.6 million)  
 
2.1 Replacement of the excitation systems : The work will involve installing the 
equipment supplied under the UN OFFP, testing and commissioning the excitation 
systems, and providing training for operation and maintenance staff of the power plant.  
 
2.2 Derbandikhan Switchyard : This will consist of replacement of the switchgears, 
metering, control and protection equipment, and the provision of required spare parts.  
 
2.3 Replacement of control systems : This will involve the design, supply, installation 
and commissioning of a new control system, as well as training for operation and 
maintenance staff.  
 
2.4 Dam Safety emergency work :   The work will consist of needed emergency work 
for dam safety preceded by the necessary design work carried out by a consultant.  
 
Component 3:  Assessment of Rehabilitation Needs, Environmental Assessment and 
Dam Safety, Engineering and Other Support (US$ 12. 2 million)  
 
3.1  Engineering services :  This will include: (i) the provision of pre-contract award 
services for the emergency repairs; (ii) supervision of supply, installation and 
commissioning of the emergency activities; (iii) review and update of previous 
assessments of rehabilitation needs carried out for the Dokan and Derbandikhan 
hydropower plants (including the cavitation problem for Derbandikhan), in order to 
extend their operational lives by at least 20 years; (iv) carry out hydrographic surveys to 
assess the current capacities of the two reservoirs; and (v) prepare designs and bid 
documents for the rehabilitation.  
 
3.2 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment : This will include full Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessments for the future rehabilitation of the Dokan and 
Derbandikhan Hydropower Stations and dams, including the preparation of Emergency 
Preparedness Plans.  
 
Page  3
3.3 Other urgent remedial works The work would involve other urgent repairs at the 
power stations identified during the assessment of rehabilitation needs.  
 
3.4 Support to the project management team:  Operating and travel cost of the PMT, 
excluding salaries, but including office equipment and fiduciary requirements such as 
audits and consultancy related to the Environmental Management Plan.  
 
3.5 Supervision of urgent repairs:  The work will involve consultancy services to 
support the PMT in supervising the urgent repair work.  
 
3.6 Capacity building :  The work will comprise consultancy services for training and 
capacity building, including in environmental assessment and environmental monitoring, 
financial management and procurement.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Dokan Dam is located on the Lesser Zab River, approximately 220 km upstream 
from its confluence with the Tigris River.  The site is located adjacent to the town of 
Dokan.  As for the Derbandikhan Dam, it is located on the Sirwan River, immediately 
upstream of the town of Derbandikhan.  It is approximately 150 km upstream of the 
Hemren Dam.  The site is approximately 285 km northeast of Baghdad and 65 km 
southeast of Sulaimaniyyah city.  It is also within 15 km of Iran to the southeast.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSIF) 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Previous reports on the safety of the dams, updated during preparation, recommended 
some urgent work which forms part of the project scope.  The project scope includes 
conducting a full dam safety assessment as part of the Environmental Impact Assessment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable for this project, which concerns urgent repairs.  In preparing for the 
subsequent rehabilitation project, alternatives will be considered   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Electricity (MoE) of the KRG 
through a Project Management Team reporting directly to the Minister of MoE.  The 
Ministry of Electricity will be responsible for applying the safeguard screening and 
mitigation requirements and a Safeguards Focal Point (SFP) has been identified with 
responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the framework. Considering the brief 
exposure of KRG counterparts to World Bank guidelines and procedures, training will be 
provided by the World Bank for the PMT staff on Banks procedures, including 
Environmental and Social Safeguards and more specifically the Environmental and 
Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF).  Other technical assistance and 
capacity building activities would include development of Terms of Reference, 
Monitoring and Evaluation, Environmental Auditing and Site Remediation. Provision has 
been made for consultancy services, to be used as needs arise.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/01/0001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/01/0001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/01/0001 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  6
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
09/14/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
09/15/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman 
09/14/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
09/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
09/14/2006 
Comments:   
