Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2230 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P099809 
Project Name: Iraq Emergency Environmental Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Maria Sarraf 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSRE 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (70%);Solid waste management (30%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of this Project are to strengthen the institutional and regulatory 
framework of the Ministry of Environment and to develop its capacity in monitoring 
environmental quality and undertaking sector analysis.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1 
–
Strengthen the Institutional and Regulatory Framework of the Ministry of 
Environment (US$1.1 million) . This component focuses on the four key environmental 
functions of the ministry of environment:  
 
(i) policy formulation and organizational development through the preparation of a national 
environmental strategy for Iraq as well a cost assessment of environmental degradation;  
 
(ii) preparing executive regulations related to environmental impact assessment, hazardous and 
municipal waste management, air, water and wastewater quality; and establishing standards and 
guidelines for ambient air and water quality, as well as emissions and discharges;  
 
(iii) strengthening the monitoring and enforcement capacity by providing guidelines and on-the-
job training to environmental inspectors; and  
Page  2
(iv) raising public awareness about environmental issues especially among school children.  
 
Component 2 
–
Develop Capacity in Environmental Monitoring (US$2.5 million).  
 
Sub-Component 2.1 Rapidly declining water quality is leading to increased salinization of 
agricultural lands, to rising costs for water supply and to negative impacts on ecosystems. 
Untreated sewage is reportedly discharged into rivers at a rate of one million tons a day . The 
responsibility over water quality monitoring is shared between MOEn, the Ministry of Water 
Resources, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Municipalities and Public Works, without 
clear demarcation of roles and mandates. An efficient intervention in this sector will necessitate 
proper coordination among all parties involved. In light of (i) WHO’s recentsupport to MOEn in 
supplying equipment for water quality control laboratories as well as limited training to its staff; 
and of (ii) the World Bank’s current engagement with the principal ministries dealing with water 
pollution, this sub-component will assist the MOEn in improving coordination, collection and 
disclosure of data on water quality in the principal water bodies of Iraq.  
 
Sub-Component 2.2 Air Quality. The deterioration of air quality is a key public health issue in 
Iraq. The major contributors to urban air pollution are: an obsolete fleet of vehicles (using either 
leaded or diesel fuel), heavy traffic in urban areas, emissions from heavy industries (mainly 
metallurgical, petrochemical and refineries and cement plants), as well as open burning of solid 
waste and emissions from smelters.  MOEn is the primary institution responsible for air quality 
monitoring but has no capacity in the subject and has not received any financial or technical 
support to date. This sub-component will establish air quality monitoring networks in three pilot 
cities (possibly Baghdad, Basra and Mosul). Training in operating the stations and in data 
interpretation will also be provided. A decision support system will be developed to enable 
decision-makers to take preventive actions in case of excess air pollution. This will provide the 
Ministry with the tools it needs to identify serious health issues and help establish priorities for a 
pollution control strategy to be implemented jointly with other sector ministries (transport, 
industry, public works etc.).  
 
Component 3 – Undertake Sector Analysis to Improve Solid Waste Management (US$0.8 
million). Poor waste management is a major public health and environmental concern in Iraq. It 
is also a day to day concern of the Ministry of Environment. Municipal waste collection is 
limited to some residential areas while remaining city residents carry waste to informal 
dumpsites within the city. Burning waste in open air deteriorates air quality and its accumulation 
in urban areas poses a direct threat to human health. The lack of proper management of 
hazardous waste (whether hospital, industrial or military) is a critical issue for Iraq and little is 
known about this sector. This component will finance (i) pre-investment studies to rehabilitate 
and close an existing dump site and to establish a new sanitary landfill as a demonstration to be 
replicated for other dumps; (ii) an assessment of the quantity and characteristics of hospital waste 
generated in the city of Baghdad and recommendations for proper collection and disposal; and 
(iii) an assessment and preliminary design of an industrial waste treatment facility for the city of 
Basra. This work will be carried out in close cooperation with the appropriate municipal and 
other authorities.  
 
Component 4 – Establishment of a Project Management Team (US$0.3 million). The project 
will be managed by a Project Management Team (PMT) consisting of a full time project 
Page  3
manager, an air quality specialist, an environmental specialist, a part time procurement specialist, 
a
part time financial specialist and a full time project assistant. The project will also finance the 
purchase of all necessary equipment (cars, furniture, computers, etc.) to enable the PMT to 
implement the project.  
 
The total estimated cost for this proposed project is US$5 million (US$4.7 million + US$0.3 
million in contingencies).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Pilot cities of Baghdad, Basra and Mosul.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of the Environment includes a unit responsible for Environmental Impact 
Assessments. The capacity of this unit is currently weak and it follows a set of very generic 
guidelines (prepared in 1990) to establish industrial, agricultural and services projects. These 
guidelines will be revised, updated and completed during the implementation of the proposed 
project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/30/2006 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not Applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Sarraf 
04/25/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
04/27/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
04/27/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
