Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/09/2006 
Report No.:  AC2083
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iraq 
Project ID:  P087735 
Project Name:  IQ-EMERGENCY  ROAD REHABILITATION 
Task Team Leader:  Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (97%);Central government administration (3%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Conflict prevention 
and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
135.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objective of
 the proposed Emergency Road Rehabilitation Project’s 
(ERRP) is to improve the condition of road assets by rehabilitating highly damaged 
segments of the country’s highway and rural road network, reestablishing critical river 
crossings, and restoring the capacity to manage and maintain road assets.  This would 
contribute to the country’s economic and social recovery.   
 
3. Project Description 
Part A of the proposed ERRP, which covers the 15 central and southern Governorates, 
would have five components:  
 
ï
±
A1: Highway Rehabilitation Works. This sub-component consists of 
rehabilitating priority sections of the highway network (about 400 km).  The identified 
road sections, which are on highways connecting main cities, are in very bad condition 
and cause major travel delays. The works consist mainly of pavement repairs and 
strengthening, but also shoulder stabilization, road furnishings, including lane marking 
and traffic signs, new guardrails, drainage repairs.  
 
ï
±
A2:  Village Access Roads. This component would upgrade about 200 km of 
village access roads in several locations.  It consists of reconstruction and rehabilitation 
Page  2
of numerous access roads between isolated villages in various Governorates.  
Improvements to these rural access roads will facilitate travel and commerce by reducing 
travel time and costs, and by facilitating the movement of agricultural products from 
farms to markets.  
 
ï
±
A3:  Bridge Replacements. This Program would provide a limited number of 
critical river crossings with safer and permanent structures by replacing their old 
decaying floating bridges with permanent two-way concrete bridges.  The amount 
available under this sub-component may limit the number of bridges that can be 
constructed to three, but this will depend on span lengths and construction costs.  
 
ï
±
A4:  Road Asset Management and Road Rehabilitation Programming. This 
initiative would develop road maintenance and management strategies and establish a 
road asset management system.  This would include support for preparing a multi-year 
national road rehabilitation and maintenance program with a financing plan and 
associated capacity building measures.  
 
ï
±
A5: Project Management. Financial support would be provided to manage 
projectactivities and provide on the job training in project management.  The Credit 
would finance the costs of setting up a Project Management Team (PMT) under the 
Ministry of Housing and Construction in Baghdad, including necessary office equipment, 
materials, technical assistance, training, and other related costs.  
 
Part B of the ERRP would be implemented in the three northern Governorates and have 
four components:  
 
ï
±
B1: Rehabilitation and Upgrading of the 43 km long Erbil – Altun Kopri Road. 
Proceeds from the Credit would be utilized to widen and rehabilitate 43 km (about half) 
of the main Erbil to Kirkuk road in the Kurdistan Region, which is a priority for the 
Regional Government.  The section from Erbil to Altum Kopri (Perdi) (43 km) is part of 
the Erbil to Baghdad highway that serves as a critical trade corridor for the regional 
economy.  Due to severe deterioration of the pavement and frequent overtaking, there are 
about twelve serious road crashes daily, resulting in numerous injuries and fatalities 
every year.  
 
ï
±
B2:  Village Access Roads. A portion of the Credit would be utilized to 
rehabilitate up to 100 km of rural roads connecting remote villages in the Kurdistan 
Region.  Around 30 km to 35 km of roads in each of the three northern Governorates 
would be upgraded.  
 
ï
±
B3:  Road Asset Management and Road Rehabilitation Programming. This 
initiative would develop road rehabilitation and maintenance management strategies and 
establish a fully functioning road asset management system for the northern 
Governorates. This would entail preparing a highway rehabilitation and maintenance 
program, as well as a village access road program.  
 
ï
±
B4: Project Management. Financial support would be provided to manage 
projectactivities using the PMT concept and provide on the job training in project 
management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented at various locations throughout the country.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSRE) 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSIF) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Roads, whether primary or village access, have a wide range of potentially positive and 
negative impacts, depending on their location within the country. Roads located in the 
escarpments (mainly village access roads) are characterized by hairpin bends, whereas in 
flat areas they follow rather straight alignments. These geometric features affect the 
volumes of earthworks to be carried out and consequent impacts on the environment. 
Disruption of drainage is a major consideration in road design as it may hamper free 
drainage, cause stagnant pools of water, lead to increased sediments into ponds, streams 
and rivers due to erosion from road tops and sides, as well as increased run-off and 
flooding. In the case of mountain roads, borrow excavation into the mountainside to 
achieve the planned design width of the roadbed may lead to the erosion of exposed slope 
surfaces and possibly to slides of slopes onto the road. Slope stabilization is therefore a 
key design issue in mountainous areas. Loss of natural vegetation may also occur during 
construction, especially when widening works are planned. In that case, revegetation and 
replanting will be envisioned to protect susceptible soil surfaces. Loss of access is 
possible in case roadbeds are raised or villages bisected by road widening. During 
construction, inadequate disposal of oil and bitumen, as well as the introduction of work 
camp or hazardous wastes, may lead to soil and groundwater contamination. 
Environmental impacts resulting from road works are expected to be localized and it is 
therefore reasonable to assume a negligible risk of cumulative negative impacts.  
 
Although land acquisition and resettlement are not anticipated in the project, involuntary 
resettlement issues may still occur, especially in the case of the Erbil-Altun Kopri road 
where widening works are planned. These works may involve unavoidable departure and 
entail the taking of private assets and/or land. As per the Environmental and Social 
Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) designed for Iraq and used in the 
Page  4
project, all land/structures/assets to be acquired will be identified and carefully recorded 
in the Land Acquisition Assessment Data Sheet.  
 
Positive impacts stemming from the project are numerous. The improvement in the road 
network condition should significantly contribute to t
he
country’s economic and social 
recovery. The rehabilitation of key segments of the highway network, village access 
roads and the reestablishment of important river crossings, will restore normal and safety 
traffic operations on critical road corridors and reduce isolation in rural areas. Trade and 
reconstruction efforts in all sectors will thus be significantly facilitated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect impacts include induced commercial and business developments along the 
rehabilitated highway sections and village access roads. An increased risk of road 
accidents due to higher speeds and heavier traffic could also occur.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Analysis of alternatives for each road project will be carried out during project 
preparation and implementation. For category “A” projects, potential adverse impacts and 
alternatives to avoid or minimize them will be identified and analyzed by the 
environmental consultant in charge of the full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
report. Alternatives considered will include design, technology, construction techniques 
and phasing, as well as operation and maintenance procedures.  
 
In terms of land-acquisition and resettlement, alternatives will be considered during 
project implementation when site-specific plans are available and the exact need for 
involuntary resettlement can be ascertained. As per the ESSAF, resettlement or land 
acquisition will be kept to a minimum.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Considering that this project is an emergency recovery project, measures taken by the 
borrower to address safeguard policy issues are those defined in the Environmental and 
Social Screening Assessment Framework designed for Iraq. Under this framework (and 
following Bank guidelines for emergency projects), a check-list of likely environment 
and social impacts will be filled out by the Project Management Teams (PMTs) and 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) prepared for each subproject before 
construction begins. The EMPs include mitigation plans (control measures to reduce or 
eliminate to the extent possible the expected adverse impacts), monitoring plans 
(consisting primarily of field visual inspections. Photographic documentation would be 
implemented at the construction phase and maintained at least one year after completion 
of construction activities), and institutional strengthening-capacity building activities. For 
category “A” subprojects,a full EIA will be prepared.  
 
The main mitigation measures that will be implemented include:  
 
–
Improved and environmentally-sound road standards, especially: (i) adequate 
drainage with minimum changes in flows; (ii) provision of a sufficient number of cross 
drains, energy dissipaters, cascades, steps, and check dams; (iii) balancing of cut and fill; 
Page  5
and (iv) slop stabilization through turfing, planting of a wide range of vegetation, and the 
creation of slope breaks.  
 
–
Adequate measures during construction, such as: (i) removal of work camp waste, 
proper disposal of oil, bitumen and other hazardous wastes; (ii) provision of fuel at work 
camps to prevent cutting of firewood, and sanitation; (iii) management of construction 
period worker health and safety; (iv) use of archeological chance find procedures and 
coordination with appropriate agencies; and (v) comprehensive community participation 
in planning and setting-up of a local conflict resolution system in case of migration 
issues.  
 
–
Systematic public consultations with people affected by subprojects due to land 
acquisition. Discussions with each of these people will be held to confirm their requests 
and preferences for compensation, agreements reached, and any eventual complaint they 
may have.  
 
Depending on the location of the road projects, overall responsibility for the 
implementation of the above process will be with the two Project Management Teams 
(PMTs) set up respectively at the State Commission for Roads and Bridges (SCRB) in 
Baghdad and at the General Directorate for Roads and Bridges (GDRB) in Erbil. PMT 
staff will include Environmental Specialists throughout the project’s duration. An 
environmental consultant will be hired to train those specialists, prepare the EIAs for 
category “A” subprojects, and assist in the implementation of EMPs of all project 
components. After that period of training, the PMT’s Environmental Specialists should 
be qualified enough to adequately manage and monitor EMPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include all population living along or nearby rehabilitated roads, 
especially rural people who will significantly benefit from reconstructed village access 
roads; local governments; the State Commission of Roads and Bridges (SCRB) within the 
Ministry of Housing and Construction (MOHC); and the General Directorate for Roads 
and Bridges (GDRB) within the Ministry of Housing and Construction of the Kurdistan 
Regional Government (KRG).  
 
As per the ESSAF, both implementing agencies (SCRB and GDRB) will systematically 
consult local institutions and groups that may be affected by road sub-projects to gather 
their views on the sub-projects’ environmental and social aspects. SCRB and GDRB will 
ensure that all occupants of land and owners of assets located in the subproject area are 
consulted. These consultations will be initiated as early as possible to make sure 
recommendations and opinions can be incorporated in the sub-projects at an early stage. 
Relevant material describing the sub-projects and their potential impacts will be 
distributed prior to consultation, in a form and language(s) that are understandable and 
accessible to the groups being consulted. The minutes of the consultations will be widely 
disseminated by SCRB and GDRB, and especially to all affected people.  
 
For the category “A” components of the project (i.e. the rehabilitation and upgrading of 
the Erbil-Altun Kopri main road and the replacement of existing pontoon bridges) where 
a
full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be prepared, all potentially affected 
groups will be consulted. For the consultations, the Project Management Team (PMT) 
Page  6
will provide a summary of the sub-
projects’ objectives, description and potential impacts. 
Public consultations will more likely be held in those areas where significant impacts 
(positive or negative) are expected. For each meeting, a formal record will be made 
including the agenda, a list of participants, and a summary of all issues discussed.  
 
The project’s Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA), and all supporting studies, 
will be disclosed in draft and final versions at the World Bank, Washington, DC, and 
with involved governmental authorities within Iraq (SCRB in Baghdad and KRG-BDRG 
in Erbil).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/25/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/25/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  7
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
02/06/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
02/06/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
02/07/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
