                          INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATA SHEET                                      38081
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.:



  Date ISDS PreparedtUpdated:11/22/2006

  I. BASIC INFORMATION

  1. Basic ProjectData
  Country: Iraq                               I Project  ID: PO99687
  Project Name: Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care Project (EONP)
  Task Team Leader: Jean-JacquesFrere
  Estimated Appraisal Date: July 30,2006        EstimatedBoard Date: N/A
  Managing Unit: MNSHD                          Lending Instrument:Emergency Recovery
                                                Loan
  Sector: Health (100%)
  Theme: Population and reproductive health (P);Child health (S)
  IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
  IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
  GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
  PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
  Other financing amountsby source:
          BORROWER                                                           0.00
          SPECIALFINANCING                                                  11.30
                                                                            11.30
                                       -                     -
  ~nvironmentalcategory: B'
  Sim~lifiedProcessing                              Sim~le11            Reueater rl
( Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)          Yes[XI          No 11   I

  2. Project Objectives

  The overall objective of the proposed project is to increasethe availability, utilization and quality
  of emergency obstetric and neonatal care in Iraq. This objective would be achievedthrough:
  (i) improvement of existing obstetric and neonatal care facilitiesin 10hospitals throughout the
 country,including civil works rehabilitation,provision of essential equipment, furniture and
  supplies,and outreach activities to communities;and (ii) capacity building, including
 improvementsin the referral systemfor women with high-risk pregnancies, training of medical
  professionals in provision of emergency obstetric and neonatal care, and strengtheningthe
 capacity of NGOs involved in providingmaternal and child health services.

 The proposed project would have an estimatedtotal cost of US$11.3 million, to be financed
  100%through a Grant from the Iraq Trust Fund. The project is expected to be implemented
  within a two year timeframe, beginning with effectivenessplanned for December 2006.

3. Project Description

There will be two project components, namely: (i) Services Delivery; and (ii) Project
Management.

Component 1:ServicesDelivery (estimatedtotal cost US$10.9 million). The objectiveof this
component is to upgrade the services for emergency obstetric and neonatal care in up to 10
selectedhospitals throughout the country. Activities will support three aspects of the delivery
system: (i) improvingthe physical infrastructureand equipment of existing obstetric and
neonatal care facilities in 10hospitals, most of which have been serious damaged and neglected;
(ii) improving mother and child care during labor and after delivery, using clinical standards,
training of doctors,nurses, midwives and paramedics in the provision of skilled emergency
obstetricsand neonatal care, and improvedmanagement of the health facilities; and (iii)
strengtheningthe continuity of care through improvementsin the referral and follow up systems,
and the provision of support to community-based groups.

Component 2: Project Management (estimated total cost US$0.4 million). The objectiveof this
component is to coordinate the project activities and manage the "business office" functionsof
the project in accordancewith the Bank's fiduciary requirements. The project management
function will build on the existingProject Management Team (PMT) which is coordinatingthe
activitiesof the on-going EHRP and EDP in the MOH, and will expand to accommodate the
needs of the proposed Project. Included will be the establishmentof three Regional Management
Teams (RMTs) to improve oversight and monitoring of the project. The project will finance
goods, technical assistance,training and operatingcosts necessary to manage the project
activities.

4. Project Locationand SalientPhysical CharacteristicsRelevant to the SafeguardAnalysis

The project's civil works rehabilitationwill take place in 10 selected hospitals located
throughout the country. The capacitybuilding aspects of the project will be national in scope.

5. Environmentaland Social Safeguards'Specialists

Kanta K. Rigaud (Sr. EnvironmentalSpecialist,MNSRE)
Yaa Oppong (Social Development Specialist,MNSRE)
Colin Scott (Social SafeguardsSpecialist,MNSRE)

11. Key SafeguardPolicy Issues and TheirManagement

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


1.Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significantandlor irreversibleimpacts:

The Project is rated category "B". Impacts would be those associated mainly with (i)
rehabilitationof obstetric and neonatal units in the 10hospital sites (e.g., safety, dust, noise,
waste material, and vehicular traffic); (ii) provision of sanitary services, water supply and waste
management; and (iii) operation and maintenanceof these hospital units. Because of the
emergency conditions, the requirement to carry out a limitedEnvironmental Analysis as part of
project preparation will be waived. However, for sub-projectswith possible moderateor minor
adverseenvironmentalimpacts, a limitedEnvironmentalAnalysis will be done during project
design for World Bank approval prior to execution of such works. The Environmental and Social
Screeningand Assessment Framework (ESSAF) was sent to the Ministry of Health in July 2006
for disclosure in the country. Based on the ESSAF, the following standards would be applied
during implementation:(i) inclusion of standard environmentalcodes of practice (ECOP) in the
bid documents for rehabilitation and extension works (Annex 7A); (ii) use of Safeguard
Procedures for Inclusion in the Technical Specificationsof Contracts (Annex 7B); (iii) use of the
Checklist of likely Environmental and Social Impacts of Subproject; (iv) review and oversight of
any major reconstruction works by specialists;(v) implementation of environmentallyand
socially sound options for civil works; and (vi) provision for adequatebudget and satisfactory
institutionalarrangementsto monitor effective implementationand adequately operate and
maintain sanitaryfacilities after project completion.Capacitybuilding on Safeguards and on the
implementation of the ESSAF has already been undertaken with the Ministry of Environment
and other line Ministries under the EHRP and EDP.

Resettlement and Land Acquisition:The project would include rehabilitation of obstetric and
neonatal units in 10hospital sites on government owned land without squatters. The building
extensions would be done within existing plots of land owned by MOH, which are not occupied
by squatters.Therefore, World Bank Operational Policy (OP 4.12) would not be triggered since
there would not be any involuntaryrelocation of populations or expropriation of privately owned
land. However, the ESSAF, specificallyelaboratedfor due diligence of emergency projects in

Iraq, would be used to ensure that this is indeed the case and should there be any need for
expropriationof privately owned land orland involuntaryrelocation of population, the same
guidelineswould be followed. Quarterly and annual implementationprogress reports should
include a section for reporting compliancewith World Bank safeguard policy.

2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipatedfuture activitiesin
the project area:

The establishment of Hospital Waste Management Plans is not included in the proposed project
for rehabilitation of obstetric and neonatal units because the project only covers a small part of
the selected hospitals; however, the issue of hospital waste management should be considered in
future projects in Iraq. Factors that govern waste management strategies should be addressed in
the Iraqi legislative and regulatory frameworks, which are not yet in place, and which should
also address institutional arrangements for waste treatment and disposal and associated costs. In
the absence of institutional capacity, the waste management strategy should make provisions for
waste to be collected by specialistcontractorsfor proper disposal in approved landfills elsewhere
in the respective municipalities.

3. Describe any project alternatives(if relevant) consideredto help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.

No, as per Bank policy the project will comply with revised ESSAF guidelines.

4. Describemeasures taken by the borrower to address safeguardpolicy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implementthe measures described.

Capacity building on Safeguards and on the implementation of the ESSAF has already been
undertaken with the Ministry of Environment and other line Ministries under the EHRP and
EDP.

5. Identifythe key stakeholdersand describethe mechanisms for consultation and disclosureon
safeguardpolicies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholdersinclude the Ministry of Health and the concernedhospital staff, as well as the
beneficiarypopulation.The design and execution of renovation and upgrading works of neonatal
and obstetricsunits at selected hospitals will be done in consultation with concernedhospital
staff to properly address any potential environmentalconcerns.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
* Ifthe projecttriggers the Pest Managementandlor Cultural Property, the
respectiveissuesare to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
                                                          -
Assessment/AudiVor EMP.
If in-countrydisclosure of any of the abovedocumentsis not expected, please
explain why:

C. ComplianceMonitoring Indicators at the CorporateLevel (to beflled in when the ZSDS is
finalized by theproject decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosureof Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documentsbeen disclosed in-country in a public place in a      NIA
form and languagethat are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs? Not Applicable, Revised OP17.50 limits disclosure
of EMPs to Category A projectslsubprojects.
All SafeguardPolicies
Have satisfactorycalendar,budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies? The project as designed includes the cost of addressing
environmental aspects associated with the renovation and upgrading of neo-
natal and obstetrics units in selected hospitals. Consultantsselected for
carryingout the design of the renovation and upgrading works will take into
account environmental criteria.
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost? Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Yes
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the samebeen adequately reflected in the project legal
documents? The Project ManagementTeam includes a M&E staff who will
follow up and report on safeguard aspects of the project.

D. Approvals

  Signed and submitted by:             Name
  Task TeamLeader:                     Mr Jean-Jacques Fr
  SeniorEnvironmental Specialist:      Kanta K. Rigaud   -
  Social Development Specialist        Yaa Oppong
  AdditionalEnvironmental andlor       Colin Scott   &&I&
  Social DevelopmentSpecialist(s):     Mario A. Zelaya (STC)

  Approved by:
  Sector Manager:                   @ Ms.  Akiko Maeda
  Comments:
                                                TI5
                                                       12-0     L

