Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2341 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/02/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P100726 
Project Name: ESCRP - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Francis Peter Buckland 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 26, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 1, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Emergency School Construction and Rehabilitation Project is to improve 
conditions of learning in primary and secondary schools in the Recipient's territory through the 
construction of new schools and rehabilitation of schools in need of urgent repair. The proposed 
component is consistent with this project objective.  
 
The specific objective of the proposed component is to finance construction of approximately 
30 small schools in the marshland areas of Basra, Nasiriyah and Missan, to benefit 6,000-8,000 
children and help stabilize the resettlement of about 30 communities in existing villages.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Subcomponent 1: Construction of approximately 30 new school buildings (US$4.1 million) with 
priority on communities with no school buildings. The schools will be equipped with water and 
sanitation facilities, furniture, equipment, and administration offices.  
 
Subcomponent 2: Capacity building for local stakeholders' involvement in planning and 
maintenance in the target schools (US$0.5 million). The proposed component will involve NGOs 
Page  2
to mobilize communities for site selection and supervision. Civil society participation will help 
strengthen MOE's capacity to increase transparency and accountability in the long term.  
 
Subcomponent 3: The proposed component will be implemented by MOE's existing Project 
Management Team (PMT), supported by a local implementation team to be comprised of 
representatives from the three governorates. The PMT will hire consultants to assist in 
supervision. (US$0.4 million).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Marshlands of Basra, Nasiriyah and Missan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The additional financing is considered not to change 
the environmental category "B" of the project. The Environmental and Social Screening and 
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) for the ongoing project was disclosed in the country on April 
26, 2004; it spells out the mitigation measures for environmental impacts, such as: use of 
checklists, Codes of Practice, inclusion of technical specifications of contract, and certification 
for new school construction to verify that sites identified by the MOE are vacant and do not 
require population resettlement. Supervision of the implementation of the mitigation measures 
through the focal points and the monitoring agents is ongoing and will be strengthened. Special 
attention will be given to the construction of sewage systems and water supply for the new 
schools. Under the proposed component, schools will not be constructed in any area which is 
designated for wetland rehabilitation or restoration.  
 
Indigenous Peoples Safeguard Policy (OP 4.20): In terms of the revised ESSAF signed by the 
Managing Director, the policy would not be triggered. However, because of the sensitive nature 
and history of the project location, it was agreed that close attention to social impacts in 
preparation and implementation would be prudent. This would best be achieved by a consultation 
process with affected populations, probably through contracting an NGO. A full social analysis 
was not viable or commensurate with the risks associated with the project, but due diligence 
indicated that a brief stakeholder analysis from secondary sources could inform the TORs for any 
such consultation.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Under the proposed project, schools will be 
constructed on sites where no resettlement is required. The team will obtain written assurance 
from the Government on this matter. NGOs and communities' involvement in site selection and 
supervision will help ensure this matter.  
 
It is expected, that new construction will be limited only to vacant sites that are on public 
property assigned by the relevant authorities for the use of MOE. Selection of any new sites will 
require filing by the MOE-PMT documentary evidence, that (a) the site is on public land that has 
been assigned for sole use by the MOE, and (b) the site is vacant and has no persons residing 
either legally or illegally. Since no land acquisition was anticipated, it was agreed the existing 
mechanisms in the project extended to this additional financing were sufficient. Should there be 
need for land acquisition for school building constructions, such acquisition will be done in 
consultation with MNA safeguard specialists.  
Page  3
The team will obtain from the counterpart maps of the sites of the proposed schools. The team 
will consult with local NGOs to assess participation of the NGOs in supervision and monitoring 
and evaluation.  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03): It was agreed that special attention would be paid to any impact 
on sites of any potential archaeological significance and that the chance find procedures included 
in ESSAF would be applied.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
See E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguards Policies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/26/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Peter Buckland 
06/01/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
06/01/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Regina Maria Bendokat 
06/01/2006 
Comments:   
