Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2334 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P099687 
Project Name: Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care Project 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Jacques Frere 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Population and reproductive health (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to increase the availability, utilization and quality 
of emergency obstetrical and neonatal care in Iraq.  This objective will be achieved through: (i) 
improvement of existing obstetrical and neonatal care facilities in 12 hospitals throughout the 
country, including civil works rehabilitation, provision of essential equipment, supplies and 
drugs, and outreach activities to communities; and (ii) capacity building, including 
improvements in the referral system for women with high-risk pregnancies, training of medical 
professionals in provision of emergency obstetric and neonatal care, and supporting NGOs 
involved in maternal and child health.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The Project would comprise three components, to be implemented over a period of up to 18 
months. It will be fully funded as a Grant under the Iraq Trust Fund, operating under OP 8.50, 
Emergency Recovery Assistance.  The three components are described below:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Service Delivery (US$ 9.5 million total)  
 
The objective of this component is to upgrade the services for emergency obstetrical and 
neonatal care in 12 selected hospitals throughout the country.  Activities will support two aspects 
of the delivery system: (i) improving the physical infrastructure and equipment of existing 
obstetrical and neonatal care facilities in 12 hospitals, most of which have been seriously 
damaged and neglected; and (ii) improving antenatal and postnatal care through the use of 
mobile clinics and an improved communication system for these services.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building (US$1.5 million total)  
 
The objective of this component is to develop the capacity of the professional medical staff, i.e., 
doctors, nurses, midwives and paramedics, to provide skilled maternal and neonatal care, 
emergency obstetric care and emergency neonatal care. Activities would include technical 
assistance and training for these staff inside Iraq as well as in other countries inside or outside 
the region to acquire the skills that are needed. This will include but not limited to training on 
proper medical waste handling and disposal. The project would support the rehabilitation of three 
regional training facilities to ensure that the largest possible number of health professionals are 
able to access in-country training and continuing medical education. In addition, support will be 
provided to identify what kinds of NGOs are currently working in the field of maternal and child 
health, and to allocate funding, on a limited pilot basis, to the MOH to contract NGOs for 
provision of a selected number of specific services for expectant and new mothers and their 
newborns at the community level.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management (US$1.0 million total)  
 
The objectives of this component are three-fold: (i) to put in place a project management 
function, building on the Project Management Team (PMT) which is coordinating the activities 
of the on-going EHRP and EDP in the MOH; and (ii) to develop planning and managerial 
capacity, ownership and accountability at the regional level through the creation of three PIUs in 
each of the three regions; and (iii) to establish a framework for monitoring and evaluation of 
project and Government program performance through tracking of project and program outputs 
and impact, based on key indicators and relevant baseline data.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project’s civil works rehabilitation will take place in the selected 12 hospitals under the on-
going Emergency Health Rehabilitation Project (EHRP) located throughout the country.  The 
capacity building aspects of the project will be national in scope.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Recipient’s institutional capacity will be re-assessed during the upcoming mission in May 
2006.  Initial training on environmental aspects of the project was provided to the current Project 
Management Team responsible for coordination of the project activities under the EHRP during 
Page  3
the Project Launch Workshop in December 2004. Additional training will be provided as needed, 
and the training program will be integrated into project design.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Kanta Rigaud, Environmental Team Member 
Colin Scott, Social Team Member 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/14/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Jacques Frere 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Akiko Maeda 
 
Comments:   
Martha Jarosewich-Holder (Environmental Specialist, MNSRE) 
 
Colin Scott (Social Safeguard Specialist, MNSRE) 
 
wb23256 
P:\IRAQ\HD\99687\PREAPPR\ISDSMay2006.doc 
07/31/2006 4:36:00 PM
 
