Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2244 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/29/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P099059 
Project Name: Dokan and Derbandikhan Emergency Hydro Power Project 
Task Team Leader: Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeu 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 17, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Dokan and Derbandikhan, with a capacity of 400 MW and 249 MW respectively, are the two 
largest power stations in the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), and are connected to the 
national power grid.  Each is part of a multipurpose scheme for power production and irrigation 
at each of the locations.  
 
Dokan Power Station became fully operational in 1979.  Repair and maintenance have been 
substandard because of unavailability of spares and equipment.  These factors have contributed 
to long outages and unreliable performance.  Moreover, due to the long operational period (29 
years) the power plant is now due for rehabilitation.  This would need to be preceded by a 
detailed assessment of the plant’s condition.  The work would also explore the feasibility of 
redesign of some of the equipment, in particular the turbine and generator, in order to increase 
the overall efficiency of the power plant.  It would also take into account the unavailability of 
spares from the original manufacturer.  
 
The construction of Derbandikhan Power Station was completed in 1983 but operation 
commenced in 1990 due to a delay in construction of the overhead line to connect the power 
plant to the national grid.  Only one unit was commissioned by the contractor, who had to leave 
Page  2
the site because of the Second Gulf War.  The other two units came into operation without proper 
commissioning. A combination of this and faulty design of the hydraulic system are considered 
to have contributed to unsatisfactory performance of this power plant since its commissioning.  
The plant suffers from severe cavitation of the runners and draft tubes.  It also needs complete 
rehabilitation preceded by investigation of the cause of cavitation and redesign.  
 
The objective of the project is to help alleviate the current power supply shortfall through 
urgent repair works, and prepare for the subsequent rehabilitation of the Dokan and 
Derbandikhan hydropower plants to restore their original capacity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This project would support the first phase, consisting of urgent repairs to keep the two power 
plants operational, as well as studies and designs for the second phase which would involve 
rehabilitation.  
 
Component 1:  Replacement of the excitation systems of both power plants (US$1.5 million)  
 
The equipment for this work was supplied by ABB (Italy) under the UN OFFP and is in storage 
at the two sites.  ABB would be contracted to install, test and commission the systems, and 
provide training for operation and maintenance staff of the power plant.    
 
Component 2:  Replacement of four compressors at Dokan (US$280,000)  
 
The equipment for this work was supplied by CompAir (France) under the OFFP and is in 
storage at Dokan.  CompAir would be contracted to install, test and commission the air 
compressor system, as well as provide training for operation and maintenance staff and spare 
parts.  
 
Component 3: Repair of GIS for Unit No. 1 at Dokan (US$900,000)  
 
This will involve the repair of compartment No. 1 of the GIS for Unit No. 1 and the provision 
of training for operation and maintenance staff.  The work will be carried out by Siemens who 
have already supplied the equipment.  
 
Component 4:  Replacement of synchronous condenser for Dokan (US$300,000)  
 
The equipment was also supplied under the UN OFFP, by Technopromexport (Russia) and is 
on site.  The same contractor would install, test and commission the synchronous condenser 
system, as well as provide training for operation and maintenance staff.  
 
Component 5:  Replacement of control systems at Derbandikhan and Dokan (US$12 million)  
 
This will involve the design, supply, installation and commissioning of a new control system at 
each of the power plants, as well as training for operation and maintenance staff.  Technical 
specifications for Derbandikhan were prepared under the UN OFFP.  KRG will require the 
services of a consultant to assist with design and other pre-award activities, as well as in 
Page  3
supervision of the work.  Procurement will be through International Competitive Bidding (ICB) 
for Supply and Installation.  
 
Component 6:  Derbandikhan Switchyard (US$12 million)  
 
This will consist of replacement of 11 kV vacuum switchgear, 33 kV SF6 switchgear, metering, 
control and protection equipment for the 132 kV GIS, a 63 MVA, 132/33/11 kV transformer, and 
132 kV cables between the Generation Transformer 132 kV circuit breaker and the GIS 
switchgear, and the provision of spare parts for the GIS switchgear.  The spare parts will be 
procured from the original supplier, Mitsubishi.  The rest will be procured through ICB for 
Supply and Installation.  
 
Component 7:  Repair of Intake Structures and Dam Monitoring Equipment (US$3.5 million)  
 
The work will involve the repair or replacement of spillway and power intake gates, and 
instrumentation for monitoring the condition of the dams.  
 
At Derbandikhan, the work will comprise urgent repair to the spillway and power intake gates, 
repair or replacement of the embankment and upstream abutment instrumentation, restoration of 
the core and filters at the dam crest, and replacement of a 63 kVA transformer.  
 
At Dokan the work will comprise the replacement of spillway gate gauges, installation of an 
accelerometer to monitor seismic activity and provision of mechanical means of cleaning 
piezometers, drains, etc.  
 
Component 8:  Consultancy for Derbandikhan and Dokan Rehabilitation (US$7 million)  
 
This component will be divided into the following six sub-components:  
 
1- Detailed assessment of rehabilitation needs of the Derbandikhan power plant, from the intake 
to the switchyard.  
 
2-
Re-design of the hydraulic system to address the cavitation problem.  
 
3-
Hydrographic survey to determine the capacity of two reservoirs and if found necessary 
recalibration of the inflow/outflow models.  
 
4-
Detailed assessment of the rehabilitation needs of the Dokan power plant.  
 
5-
Design and preparation of bid documents for rehabilitation of Derbandikhan.  
 
6-
Design and preparation of bid documents for rehabilitation of Dokan.  
 
7-
Environmental Assessment for the project, including a complete assessment of the safety of 
the two dams.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Dokan Dam is located on the Lesser Zab River, approximately 220 km upstream from its 
confluence with the Tigris River.  The site is located adjacent to the town of Dokan.  As for the 
Derbandikhan Dam, it is located on the Diyala River, immediately upstream of the town of 
Derbandikhan.  It is approximately 150 km upstream of the Hemren Dam.  The site is 
Page  4
approximately 285 km northeast of Baghdad and 65 km southeast of Sulaimaniyyah city.  It is 
also within 15 km of Iran to the southeast.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Industry and Electricity (MoIE) of the KRG 
through a Project Management Team reporting directly to the Minister of MoIE.  The Ministry of 
Industry and Electricity will be responsible for applying the safeguard screening and mitigation 
requirements and a Safeguards Focal Point (SFP) will be identified with responsibility for 
overseeing the implementation of the framework. Considering the brief exposure of KRG 
counterparts to World Bank guidelines and procedures, training will be provided by the World 
Bank for the PMT staff on Bank’s procedures, including Environmental and Social Safeguards 
and more specifically the Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework 
(ESSAF).  Other technical assistance and capacity building activities would include development 
of Terms of Reference, Monitoring and Evaluation, Environmental Auditing and Site 
Remediation. Provision shall be made for consultancy services as needs arise.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef (MNSRE) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project is rated as a category “B” as it will concentrate on the urgent repair works, and 
will be processed under OP 8.50 in accordance with the Environmental and Social Screening and 
Assessment Framework (ESSAF). The ESSAF entails that: (i) sub-projects be screened by the 
Borrower through the checklist attached to the Framework. An independent professional third 
party will be hired to fill-in this checklist in close collaboration with the borrower; (ii) the 
Safeguard Procedures, as per Attachment 6 of the ESSAF, would be included in the Technical 
Specifications of the contracts of all Contractors; (iii) standard environmental codes of practice 
will be included in the repair and reconstruction bid documents of all project components. Due 
consideration should be given to wastes, specially hazardous ones and PCBs (if any) that should 
be disposed of following environmentally and socially sound options; and (iv); (iv) appropriate 
staffing and adequate budget will be allocated for the effective implementation and monitoring 
of the management plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
During appraisal and prior to negotiations, a consultant will be contracted out to confirm 
and/or up-date the critical dam safety issues. One important aspect to be included in the TORs of 
the consultant is the assessment of the landslide at the Derbandikhan Dam. A complete dam 
safety ass
essment will be conducted as part of the preparation of the rehabilitation studies and an 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
appropriate course of action to address the safety of the dams will be developed.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
A
waiver/exception to the notification requirement under para. 7(a) of the O.P. 7.50 (the 
operational policy on International Waterways) is being sought, because the repairs are not 
expected to alter the water flow in the rivers or to have down stream implications.  However, as 
part of the studies to be financed under this project for the subsequent rehabilitation of both 
hydropower plants a comprehensive Environmental and Social Assessment will be carried out.  
The need for notification of riparians will be reassessed once these studies are completed.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/31/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
MoIE, with the help of consultants, will prepare Environmental Management Plans relevant 
to the specific contracts to be financed under this project based on the ESSAF applicable to 
current IDA operations in Iraq. If found necessary, a code of practice will be included in the 
contracts financing the various components to adequately deal with the environmental 
impacts, such as disposal of materials, etc.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
03/27/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
03/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
03/27/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
