Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1669 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/19/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iran, Islamic Republic of 
Project ID: P095165 
Project Name: Iran Technical and Vocational Training Project 
Task Team Leader: Soren Nellemann 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Improving labor markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 DENMARK, 
GOV. 
OF 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The goals set out in the 4th Development Plan are further articulated in the Training Strategy: 
?Improving Quality, Relevance and Equity in a Sustainable Manner? from 2005-2016 (1384-
1395).  The objectives stated in the strategy for the 12-year period are to improve quality, 
relevance and equity in a sustainable manner.  
 
The proposed project development objective is to: ?build the human and institutional capacity 
and support the development of a flexible and adjustable training system? to contribute to the 
equitable and sustainable social and economic development of Iran with a skilled population 
responsive to the needs of the labor market.  
 
Success in achieving this objective would be measured by two outcome performance indicators: 
(i) the percentage of TVTO graduates finding employment within six months of training 
completion, and (ii) the percentage of women and youth as TVTO graduates, respectively, who 
are able to find employment within six months of training completion.  
Page  2
Output and input performance indicators related to achieving the development objective and its 
underlying expectations of improvements in the quality and relevance of training offered and 
more equitable access may include: (i) number of revised skill standards and curricula 
completed, (ii) number of instructors upgraded for revised skill standards and curricula, (iii) 
number of women instructors trained for revised skill standards and curricula, and (iv) number of 
innovative training programs financed for women and youth by the Fund.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
a.  Alternative interventions  
 
As an alternative to the current project approach, it was initially planned to support 
development of a national training strategy. This alternative was dropped in favor of a narrower 
focus on a training strategy for non-formal training whose principal responsibility rests with 
TVTO.  A broader sector focus for upgrading of capacity for non-formal training was rejected in 
favor of a more targeted focus on priority sectors linked to national development goals to 
mitigate implementation capacity constraints and emphasize skills linked to areas of expected 
employment growth.  A typical supply-driven approach for TVET investments was rejected in 
favor of a demand-driven approach that will base investment decisions on evidence of market 
demand for the skills to be produced.  A focus on exclusive pre-employment or in-service skills 
needs has been replaced with a balanced approach to both.  
 
b.  Lending instruments  
 
Experience in other countries shows that the reform of TVET systems requires a long-term 
commitment of 10 to 15 years.  Iran?s own program and its approach to piloting and learning on 
many key reforms anticipate sa similar long-term commitment.  An Adaptable Program Loan 
would fit these circumstances, but the team plans to recommend instead the use of a five-year 
Specific Investment Loan instrument, since only the first five years of the reform program have 
been elaborated.The current project is focused on building the policy and institutional framework 
for reform and capacity for implementation.  Success in achieving these goals would provide the 
trigger for a subsequent operation.  
 
c.  Sector program aspects  
 
The proposed operation is not supporting a fully-elaborated sector program, but instead, is 
based on a training strategy for TVTO as the principal government body responsible for non-
formal training in Iran.  The project addresses formal training, such as that offered by the 
Ministry of Education, but only in a limited fashion in the form of standards setting for the Kar 
Danesh program, and does not anticipate investments in formal training capacity.  The project 
will support policy reforms to integrate more effectively non-formal training capacity, public and 
private, and make strategic investments in non-formal training capacity closely linked to a set of 
priority sectors and skills key to national development under the 4th Five-Year Development 
Plan.  
 
d. Project description  
Page  3
The project will improve the quality and relevance of skills training for public and private 
providers and link this training more closely to demand for skills.  It will improve equity of 
access for women in industrial training and introduce innovative approaches to reaching 
underserved groups with training linked to market demand, while promoting sustainability 
through the diversification of sector financing and the more efficient use of resources.  These 
goals would be reached by reforms that use market demand, competition, and performance-based 
criteria to guide public investments in training provision, strengthen private provision, and 
support institutions that foster more effective governance and operation of training markets.  
Government?s role in skills training will be more closely focused on strategic skills needs, equity 
outcomes, regulation, and promoting a learning culture through piloting and evaluation of 
training innovations and reforms.  
 
Component 1: Policy and System-wide Reforms. This component supports the design and 
implementation of policies for system-wide reform of non-formal vocational training, including 
its governance and financing.  It will support studies for this purpose, stakeholder consultations 
and consensus building on reform options, and pilot and evaluate options with regard to the 
financing of training provision.  The component will also include short-term capacity building 
for TVTO management and other key stakeholders responsible for the design and 
implementation of reforms.  The component has three sub-components: (i) policy and 
implementation studies, (ii) conduct of pilot activities and evaluation of reform options, and (iii), 
short-term capacity building for policy reform.  
 
Component 2: Quality, Relevance and Equity: This component invests in improving the quality 
and relevance of public and private training provision and promoting equity.  Quality 
improvement will focus on sectors considered as strategic priorities for national development 
under the 4th Five-Year Development Plan.  The component sets skills standards for priority 
sectors and updates curricula for these new skill standards.  It strengthens instructional resources 
to meet these standards for selected TVTO training centers. The component has seven sub-
components: (i) updating skill standards and curricula for high-demand skills in priority sectors, 
(ii) piloting reforms for selected skills standards to test the adoption of outcomes-based training 
delivery models, (iii) upgrading the Karaj Instructor Training Center to introduce the new skills 
standards and curricula, (iv) upgrading the general pedagogical skills of all instructors, (v) 
upgrading the technical skills of instructors for introducing the new standards and curricula, 
including training women as instructors for priority industrial skills, (vi) upgrading of 
management skills of senior staff of TVTO and public and private training centers; (vii) 
upgrading the equipment and instructional materials of selected TVTO training centers to 
introduce the new standards and curricula.  
 
Component 3: Supporting Institutions: This component develops and strengthens institutions 
that provide the framework for policymaking, programming, and coordination of the training 
system.  The focus is on strengthening governance of the training system as planned under 
Article 55(a) of the 4th Five-Year Development Plan, and providing tools for planning and 
management of the system.  The component contains five subcomponents: (i) a study for 
designing and implementing a national training authority as a governing body for the training 
system, including consultations and consensus building on recommendations, (ii) support for 
Page  4
implementation of the national training authority, (iii) development and strengthening of a 
management information system and use of labor market information for better planning, policy 
development, and beneficiary training choices, (iv) strengthening monitoring and evaluation 
capacity in TVTO for management and policy development at national and provincial levels, and 
(v) strengthening capacity for curriculum development, testing and certification.  
 
Component 4: Pilot Training Innovation Fund:  This component implements and evaluates a 
training fund to test the use of small-scale financial grants as an incentive to foster the 
development of innovative approaches by public and private providers of training to underserved 
beneficiary groups, e.g. women, youth, and spatially isolated groups providing skills training 
closely linked to market demand.  In addition, the component will make competitive grants to 
upgrade training capacity of private and public trainers other than those selected for strategic 
development where institutions are able to demonstrate market demand for and cost-effective 
approaches to the training proposed.  Design of the fund will be completed during project 
preparation.  The component will include five subcomponents: (i) provision of capacity building 
for fund operation, (ii) implementation of the marketing and communications strategy, (iii) 
preparation of baseline for monitoring and evaluation plan, (iv) technical assistance for 
applicants submitting proposals to the fund, (v) implementation of grant activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The priority industrial vocational skills sectors and location of training centers will be 
determined during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Currently, the environmental management at each training center is delegated to the provincial 
offices of TVTO. The training centers are equipped with on site disposal of sewage as, for the 
most part, there are no municipal wastewater collection and disposal systems in place. Solid 
waste generated by the training centers generally consist of dry material waste, which is disposed 
of at the public waste disposal sites. However, during project preparation, environmental 
management plans will be developed for each training center included in the project to ensure the 
project design provides for mitigation measures that might be required.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud (MNSRE) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
The environmental category is currently C - TBD during project preparation.   However, it 
should be category C or B.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/28/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/06/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
January - February 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Soren Nellemann 
09/12/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
09/12/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Regina Maria Bendokat 
09/22/2005 
Comments:  The ISDS has also been reviewed and signed by Kanta Rigaud (Environmental Reviewer) 
and Meskerem Brhane (Social Reviewer) on September 12, 2005 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
