Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/24/2006 
Report No.:  AC2047
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jamaica 
Project ID:  P091299 
Project Name:  JM Inner City Basic Services for the Poor Project 
Task Team Leader:  Abhas Kumar Jha 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 27, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFU 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (30%);Sanitation (30%);Other social services (30%);Micro- and 
SME finance (10%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
29.30 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
3.50 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
0.00
3.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve quality of life in Jamaican inner cities 
and poor urban informal settlements through improved access to basic urban 
infrastructure, financial services, land tenure regularization, enhanced community 
capacity and improvements in public safety.  Specifically, the project will: (a) increase 
access and improve the quality of water, sanitation, solid waste management, electricity, 
roads, drainage and related community infrastructure in for over 66,000 residents of poor 
urban informal settlements through capital investments and innovative arrangements for 
operations and maintenance; (b) facilitate access to microfinance for enterprise 
development and incremental home improvement for entrepreneurs and residents in 
project areas; (c) increase security of tenure for eligible households in project areas; and 
(d) enhance public safety through mediation services, community capacity building, skills 
training and related social services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project is structured with three components. For a detailed Project description see 
Annex 4.  
Page  2
Component 1: Access to Services (US$ 21.65 million of Bank financing) will include 
three key subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Basic Infrastructure (US$ 19.80 million):  This subcomponent will 
finance: (i) integrated tertiary network infrastructure in project areas for water, sanitation, 
drainage, roads and solid waste management infrastructure; (ii) community peace and 
justice centers; (iii) community-based infrastructure including the construction and 
rehabilitation of recreational facilities, installation of trash bins, replacement of zinc 
fencing and the installation of in-house water and sanitation connections; (iv) street 
lighting and the regularization of illegal electricity connections; (v) the rehabilitation and 
construction of complimentary offsite network infrastructure; (vi) the procurement of 
compactor trucks to be operated by NSWMA and the analysis of waste collection 
systems; and (vii) technical assistance to parish councils to strengthen operations and 
maintenance capacity.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Access to Financial Services (US$ 1.25 million):  This 
subcomponent will facilitate access to micro-finance services in project areas for 
productive purposes and incremental home improvements through performance-based 
service contracts aimed at creating incentives for existing Financial Institutions (FIs) to 
provide microfinance services in project areas. Specifically, the subcomponent will 
finance three activities: (i) a performance-based mechanism for the extension of 
microfinance loans and technical assistance in project areas; (ii) consultant services for 
the orientation of potential bidders and the technical evaluation of bids; and (iii) an 
independent technical audit of FI portfolios.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3: Land Tenure Regularization (US$ 0.60 million): This 
subcomponent will finance the implementation of a pilot land titling initiative and 
technical assistance to the Government of Jamaica for the preparation of a national policy 
on squatter management and informal urban settlements.  
 
Component 2: Public Safety Enhancement and Capacity Building (US$ 4.10 million, all 
from Bank financing) will finance integrated packages of consultant services, training 
and technical assistance focused on both short-term mitigation and conflict resolution and 
medium-term social prevention and capacity enhancement interventions.  In particular, 
the component will finance the delivery of violence prevention services in five core 
social prevention areas including: (i) mediation and conflict resolution; (ii) alternative 
livelihoods and skills development; (iii) family support programs; (iv) youth education 
and recreation; and (v) CBO capacity building.  The component will also finance the 
mobilization of community liaison officers in project areas to serve as facilitators.  
 
Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6.33 million, with US$ 2.83 million in Bank 
financing) will finance consultant services, training, goods and operating costs for project 
management and administration.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in inner city and urban informal settlements in four 
parishes including Kingston and St.Andrews, St.  Catherine, St. James and Clarendon.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Heinrich K. Unger (LCSFU) 
Mr Asger Christensen (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Executing Agency, the Jamaica Social Investment Fund (JSIF), has established a set 
of steps and procedures for compliance with the Bank’s environmental assessment policy.  
Through its “Environmental Guidelines” which form part of its Operations Manual (OM), 
JSIF had established a system to identify, mitigate and monitor environmental impacts of 
projects under preparation and implementation.  In addition, JSIF has executed two Bank 
projects in the past, including the ongoing National Community Development Project 
(NCDP).  Through these projects, JSIF has demonstrated adequate capacity to ensure 
compliance with regard to environmental impacts. The current Environmental Guidelines 
for environmental site screening and construction activities have been upgraded and 
expanded into an Environmental Management Framework (EMF).   This framework 
addresses small urban infrastructure and services, construction, safety, and chance finds 
of cultural property.  The EMF forms part of the revised OM.  
 
While the infrastructure investments under the 12 community projects may require 
access to limited areas of land either temporarily during construction or permanently for 
specific community project investments, they are not expected to involve any significant 
land acquisition and displacement.  The land required under a community project may 
either be furnished through voluntary private land donations, transactions between 
willing-seller-willing-buyer, donations of vacant government land, or involuntary land 
acquisition based on eminent domain.  
Page  4
A
generic Land Acquisition & Resettlement Policy Framework that establishes 
equivalence with OP 4.12 has been developed for JSIF financed community projects and 
submitted to the Bank for review and clearance.  The Policy Framework addresses the 
gaps in the previous draft.  It defines eligibility and entitlements, means and 
documentation requirements for obtaining land for project activities, a process to ensure 
coordination between the technical dimensions of community project preparation and the 
identification of land acquisition impacts together with consultations to avoid or 
minimize such impacts, grievance redress arrangements, roles of JSIF, the Commissioner 
of Land, and the Land Valuation Division regarding land acquisition, and monitoring 
arrangements and indicators.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project investments are expected to have generally positive environmental impacts, 
albeit some could result in minor adverse environmental impacts that would be local and 
reversible. Appropriate design, environmental permits, construction and operational 
practices are expected to adequately address the environmental impacts of this project, 
mainly through site screening, project screening and use of generic environmental 
management plans (EMPs).  
 
The proposed ICBSP is not expected to have any impacts on physical cultural property, 
and the project neighborhoods selected in the historic Spanish Town are away from the 
historic buildings and other monuments. However, there could be some chance finds of 
culturally important artifacts, particularly in the Spanish town/ St. Catherine area.  This is 
addressed through appropriate provisions in the technical specifications in the 
construction contracts.  Thus no indirect or long term environmental impacts are expected 
from the infrastructure works.  
 
No indirect or long term impacts are expected to derive from the minor land acquisition 
that may be required for specific structures under some of the community infrastructure 
upgrading plans.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The development of each neighborhood infrastructure upgrading plan takes place through 
a
community based participatory planning process.  This process involves consideration 
of alternatives to avoid or minimize environmental impacts and land acquisition and 
displacement.  Given that the persons potentially affected by land acquisition and 
displacement are in most cases also project beneficiaries with a voice in decision making 
on both the type of investments and technical alternatives, there is a strong incentive to 
seek solutions that avoid or reduce adverse impacts from land acquisition.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The following sections describe the diagnostic review and the resulting equivalence and 
acceptability assessments, carried out by an interdisciplinary team of Bank staff  in co-
operation with the National Environment and Planning Agency (NEPA), as well as JSIF 
staff, local environmental and legal specialists and consultants.  The respective 
assessments were done for two Bank policy areas (Environmental Assessment and 
Involuntary Resettlement) and their scope was limited to the requirements of this specific 
operation.   
 
Equivalence Assessment  
 
The review of Jamaican laws and regulations that govern environmental assessment 
showed that there are some gaps, but except for the budgeting and staffing for 
environmental management plans, the gaps are not relevant to the types of activities to be 
supported by this project. Moreover, the environmental aspects of the proposed ICBSP 
will be addressed by JSIF’s internal environmental assessment and management 
procedures.  JSIF’s environmental guidelines have been expanded and upgraded into an 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to meet the requirements of Jamaican 
laws and the objectives and operational principles stated in OP 4. 00.  
 
As stated before, the proposed ICBSP is not expected to have any impacts on known 
physical cultural properties. However, procedures for dealing with chance finds of 
culturally significant artifacts have been incorporated into the EMF.  
 
As far as land acquisition (and any involuntary resettlement) is concerned, there is no 
applicable policy in Jamaica (although a draft policy had been prepared some years ago). 
Therefore, JSIF assisted by their project preparation consultants has prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the proposed ICBSP incorporating the 
objectives and operational principles of the Draft Green Paper and the Bank OP 4.00.  
The draft RPF includes:  
 
•
An entitlement matrix of eligibility criteria/type of loss, definition of entitled 
persons, and entitlements;  
 
•
Consultation arrangements that includes integration into the community planning 
process with indications of how and where in this process land acquisition is assessed, 
alternatives considered, and possible acquisition methods and compensation 
arrangements agreed;  
 
•
Valuation methods for compensation for lost assets;  
 
•
Institutional arrangements and coordination with other agencies;  
 
•
Compensation for assets lost by squatters;  
 
•
Grievance redress procedures; and  
 
•
Monitoring indicators and arrangements.  
 
The gaps identified in the equivalence assessments will be filled by (i) expanding and 
upgrading JSIF’s environmental guidelines into an EMF, and (ii) preparing an RPF, to 
Page  6
deal with voluntary and involuntary land acquisition under ICBSP. Both frameworks will 
be incorporated into JSIF’s Operational Manual (OM) and adopted as a corporate policy 
by JSIF’s Board before negotiations. Once approved, JSIF will apply the OM to all its 
projects, irrespective the source of financing.  
 
Acceptability Assessment  
 
JSIF has, to a great extent, fully integrated environmental analysis and management 
actions into its sub-project processing procedures. JSIF’s responsibility for good 
environmental management extends to all types of sub-projects, including those to be 
implemented by other agencies, such as the National Water Commission or the National 
Works Agency.  As part of JSIF’s monitoring and evaluation program, the environmental 
performance of 37 randomly selected sub-projects was reviewed in early 2005 by 
independent environmental consultants: only minor problems were found with 6 of these 
sub-projects .  Also, in the recent past JSIF had taken some positive steps to improve its 
environmental performance.  More specifically, JSIF has already: (i) conducted staff 
training focusing on environmental management of projects; (ii) recruited a full time 
environmental specialist and designated an alternate; and (iii) trained additional staff and 
retain environmental consultants as needed to improve its performance.  JSIF is also in 
the process of extending its management information system (MIS) to cover 
environmental and land acquisition / resettlement aspects.  Furthermore, JSIF has 
incorporated the Environmental Management Plans (EMP) into the contract documents, 
and remedies under the contract will apply for any non-compliance by contractors with 
EMPs and environmental specifications.   JSIF has also started the process for obtaining 
ISO 14000 Environmental Management Systems certification. The latter action is 
expected to enhance JSIF’s capacity and ability to take appropriate actionsover the 
medium term, and to make acceptability sustainable.  
 
JSIF has not previously been dealing with land acquisition in the projects it has 
managed and it does not at present have staff dedicated to the planning, implementation, 
and monitoring of land acquisition and resettlement.  However, JSIF has several field-
based, qualified community organizers who have extensive experience in organizing 
community consultations and participation. JSIF is committed to strengthen its capacity 
in this area, by designating a minimum of two staff to manage land acquisition and 
resettlement (before negotiations) and train them possibly at the World Bank combined 
with exposure visits to projects in the region with well-functioning ongoing resettlement 
activities.  Their role would be to ensure that land acquisition is adequately addressed in 
the project preparation and implementation process, and at the same time serve as trainers 
for the JSIF Community Organizers and for field staff from the Social Development 
Commission (SDC) involved in the proposed project.  
 
Based on the assessments summarized above, some gap-filling actions by JSIF are still 
required to achieve and sustain acceptability.    
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
JSIF, NEPA and the Bank jointly organized a public consultation workshop on 
November 1, 2005 to discuss the draft Equivalence and Acceptability Assessment report 
prepared by the Bank team.  Apart from sending personal invitations (along with a copy 
of the draft report) to a large number of relevant agencies and individuals, JSIF had 
placed the draft report and an open invitation to the workshop in its web site. Over sixty 
people, representing NGOs, consultants, donor agencies, and other Government 
departments attended this workshop. While most of the questions and discussions were 
on the project design and criteria for selecting communities, the participants expressed 
their support to the proposed pilot approach and endorsed the proposed gap filling 
measures.  Representatives of National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) 
clarified the environmental permitting requirements for activities that are likely to be 
financed under ICBSP.  The Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) expressed its strong 
interest to expand the scope of the proposed pilot beyond JSIF 
and sought Bank’s 
assistance to support its efforts to harmonize NEPA’s laws and regulations with those of 
key donors activein Jamaica and improve its overall environmental performance 
standards.  The draft equivalence and acceptability assessment report has been disclosed 
both in Kingston (JSIF’s website and in their office) and in Washington (in the Bank’s 
external website on use of country systems – it is being posted in the Bank’s infoshop).  
 
JSIF conducted consultations on January 13, 2006, on its revised Land Acquisition & 
Resettlement Policy Framework and the Environmental Management Framework, with 
participation by representatives of all the 12 beneficiary communities and NGOs.  A total 
of 73 persons participated in the consultation.  In addition to a presentation and 
discussion of key features in the two Policy Frameworks, which were endorsed by the 
participants, the meeting also reviewed the need for land for specific activities as 
identified in the infrastructure improvement plans for each of the 12 communities.  
 
4. 
Community consultations  
 
An extensive process of consultation with community and focus groups has informed 
project identification and design.  The consultation process was led by the Jamaica Social 
Investment Fund (JSIF) and consultants to the agency to ensure that the selection of 
project investments was demand-driven, constituted the most appropriate and least-cost 
technical alternatives, and would avoid land acquisition.  The consultation process 
engaged over 1000 community members through over 120 formal meetings and focus 
group discussions.  Additional outreach has taken place though frequent informal 
dialogues between JSIF community liaison officers (CLO), technical consultants and 
community leaders and residents.  Feedback from communities was also solicited through 
a
rapid voluntary questionnaire to which over 34 percent of households responded.  
 
Four key phases of consultation took place during preparation: (i) sensitization, 
diagnosis and needs assessment; (ii) participatory public safety audits and planning; (iii) 
infrastructure planning focus groups; and (iv) focus group discussions in integrated 
neighborhood plans.   The extensive consultation process proved critical in building up 
Page  8
trust and confidence between JSIF and communities and also within project areas 
–
many 
of which are deeply fragmented across political and gang affiliations. The dialogue 
process was also partially successful aiding community leaders to negotiate – if fragile – 
truces between rival gangs.  However, JSIF did encounter real limits to the extent to 
which communities and residents were willing to communicate openly regarding crime 
and violence patterns where residents often did not feel comfortable sharing information 
and data on the incidence and root causes of violent crime.  
 
Nonetheless, the community consultations did provide rich foundation of diagnostic 
information, needs assessment feedback and public safety audit data upon which project 
planning and design took place.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  9
Manager review the plan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abhas Kumar Jha 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Heinrich K. Unger 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Asger Christensen 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
