Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3161 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/01/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jamaica 
Project ID: P105024 
Project Name: Jamaica Social Protection Project 
Task Team Leader: Chingboon Lee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (75%);Central government administration (25%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P);Other social protection and risk management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
75.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
75.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project would support the Government of Jamaica in strengthening its social protection 
system by: (i) improving the effectiveness of the PATH in fostering investment by poor families 
in human capital accumulation; (ii) developing a structured system to assist working-age persons 
of PATH households seek and retain employment; (iii) building capacity to formulate and 
implement an integrated reform program for both the pension schemes for public employees and 
the NIS; and (iv) developing a social protection strategy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Project, comprising four components, would be supported by an IBRD loan of 
US$40 million.  The first component, which focuses on improving the effectiveness of the 
PATH, would take up the largest share of the loan (US$30 million) to co-finance the 
Government’s conditional cash transfers, and provide technical assistance for increasing the 
Program’s impact on desired outcomes. The other components (US$10 million) would build 
institutional capacity for: (a) instituting the Welfare-to-Work program; (b) designing and 
Page  2
implementing a multi-year program for pension system reform covering both the NIS and the 
complementary schemes for public employees; and (c) developing a social protection strategy.  
 
Component 1:  Improving effectiveness of the PATH  
 
Sub-component 1.a Conditional Cash Transfers (PATH Grants)  
 
Under this sub-component, IBRD loan proceeds would be used to co-finance government 
spending on PATH grants that is currently running at about US$23 million per year.  
Disbursement levels would be linked to performance implementation milestones agreed with the 
Government during project preparation.  These milestones are likely to include: (i) introduction 
of additional educational incentives for secondary school students to motivate higher educational 
attainment, retention, and completion rates; (ii) increase in coverage of poor eligible families 
receiving grants that are linked to compliance with required school attendance and utilization of 
preventive health care services; (iii) review of the BIS and recertification of beneficiaries; and 
(iv) carrying out of an impact evaluation.  
 
Sub-component 1.b Institutional strengthening of PATH  
 
This sub-component would support activities in two areas: (i) strengthening the operational 
processes of PATH and (ii) improving accountability, monitoring, and evaluation.  
 
(i) 
To strengthen the operational processes of PATH, support would be provided to: (a) 
review and improve targeting, enrollment, and recertification; (b) review and refine the health 
conditionalities, including parenting education and early childhood development requirements; 
(c) develop an improved system for monitoring compliance of beneficiaries with co-
responsibilities; (d) improve the capacity to implement a differentiated benefits schemes; (e) 
further develop the MIS to enable decentralized operations at the parish level; (f) train social 
workers for more effective case management, including helping beneficiaries bridge to 
complementary social services ;  
 
(ii) 
To improve accountability, monitoring, and evaluation the project would support: (a) 
periodic process evaluations (including spot checks); (b) strengthening the financial management 
and internal audit capacity for detection and correction of errors and irregularities; (c) improving 
the appeals mechanisms; (d) increasing access to program information and knowledge among 
PATH beneficiaries; (e) development and implementation of a monitoring system using the MIS 
indicators; and (f) design and implementation of a new round of impact evaluation focusing on 
secondary school attainment.  
 
To carry out these activities, the Project would finance consultancies, training, and some ICT 
equipment.  
 
Component 2:  Building capacity for the Welfare-to-Work program  
 
This component would support capacity building within the MoLSS to pilot and evaluate the 
Welfare-to-Work program, and to develop a scaling-up strategy based on pilot findings. Specific 
activities include: (a) studies to determine social inclusion barriers experienced by PATH 
families; (b) feasibility studies on the different options for linking PATH beneficiaries to 
complementary service provision programs; (c) database linkages for greater networking among 
relevant agencies; (d) international study tours and exchanges to review the Latin America and 
the Caribbean and OECD experience on helping beneficiaries avoid welfare dependency; (e) 
Page  3
equipping One-Stop service centers in the pilot sites with the requisite software and hardware; (f) 
evaluation of the pilot; and (g) preparation of a scaling-up strategy.  
 
To carry out these activities, the Project would finance consultancies, training, workshops, and 
some IT equipment for the One-Stop service centers.  
 
Component 3: Improving pension system administration and building capacity for pension 
system reform  
 
The pension component would support core activities in two main areas:  (i) preparation of a 
pension reform program; and (ii) improving administrative and information systems in the NIS 
and the pension scheme for public employees.  
 
Sub-component 1.a Preparation of Pension Reform Program  
 
This sub-component will support the preparation and dissemination of a White Paper outlining 
a
multi-year reform program for the Jamaican pension system, including an assessment of the 
associated fiscal, welfare and institutional impacts. Specifically, the Project will finance: (i) 
various training activities related to the design and operations of mandatory pension schemes, 
targeted to the members of the Pension Technical Unit and the Steering Committee; (ii) technical 
assistance in policy analysis; (iii) the preparation and implementation of a consultation program 
targeted to various stakeholders; and (iv) after completion of the White Paper, technical 
assistance for drafting the necessary legislation/regulations and for carrying out a public 
information campaign to build support for the reform program.  
 
Sub-component 1.b Improving administrative and information systems  
 
The sub-subcomponent consists of two main activities. The first would entail improving 
registration, reconciliation, and record-keeping in the NIS and the pension schemes for public 
sector workers -- paying particular attention to the interactions between the two systems.  
Specific tasks include reviewing current business processes and developing a new IT system 
(including a new platform both in terms of the operating system, databases, and hardware).  
Ideally, the new system will be centralized to avoid duplication between the public and private 
sectors.  The Project will also produce an action plan to expand the system to other business 
processes in response to the needs of the reform program.  
 
The second activity is to update the registry of plan members. The Project will support the 
implementation of a census of plan members and the upgrading of electronic records.  The latter 
implies merging the new and the old databases, entering and correcting data, and implementing 
controls on information quality and accuracy.  
 
Component 4:  Development of a social protection strategy  
 
This component would support activities in the following areas: (i) a comprehensive review of 
current social protection interventions to identify gaps, weaknesses and further needed reforms; 
(ii) review of the Beneficiary Identification System; (iii) development of reform options and 
assessment of their welfare impact; (iv) consultations with stakeholders; (v) development of a 
public education program.  
 
Safeguards implications.  The Project does not trigger any of the Bank's safeguards.  Given the 
large number of poor families in need of education and health grants or opportunities for 
Page  4
employment, there is a risk that some vulnerable groups may not have access to the PATH or 
Welfare-to-Work programs. During project preparation, a social assessment will be carried out to 
inform project design and implementation. The social assessment will be centered on three areas: 
(i) improving program operations and targeting as a mean to expand inclusion; (ii) expanding 
linkages between the PATH program and the community to maximize opportunities for the poor; 
and (iii) rebuilding self-esteem and identifying approaches to address social stigma. Activities 
related to these areas will also be supported by the Project under the institutional strengthening 
components.  No adverse environmental impact is foreseen, given that the expected increase in 
health care utilization by PATH beneficiaries will not generate additional medical waste. The 
project is placing increasing emphasis on health promotion, parenting, and preventive care at the 
primary level with a strong emphasis on healthy lifestyles.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National scope.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
None of the safeguards policies are triggered by the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Josefina Stubbs (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/19/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/28/2008 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
During project preparation, a social assessment will be carried out to inform project design 
and implementation mechanisms.  The social assessment will be centered on three areas: (i) 
improving program operations and targeting as a mean to expand inclusion; (ii) expanding 
linkages between the PATH program and the community to maximize opportunities for the 
poor; and (iii) rebuilding self-esteem and tackling social stigma. Activities related to these 
areas will also be supported by the Project under the institutional strengthening components.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
11/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
11/01/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
