Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3059 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/25/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jamaica 
Project ID: P095673 
Project Name: Jamaica Early Childhood Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Christoph Kurowski 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Learning and 
Innovation Loan 
Sector: Pre-primary education (70%);Health (30%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Other social protection and risk management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Ultimately, the proposed Early Child Development Project (the Project) would emulate the 
objectives and activities of the ECD sector strategy currently being developed under the auspices 
of the ECC. A first draft of the strategy will be available at the end of July; the final draft is 
expected for the end of August.  
 
As the process of developing the ECD strategy has yet to be concluded, the preliminary Project 
Development Objective (PDO) and Project description reflect a broad consensus about sector 
priorities that emerged in consultations between the Bank team and a wide-range of stakeholders 
over the past 6 months. While it is anticipated that the PDO and Project description generally 
correspond to the priorities of the forthcoming sector strategy, future refinements may be 
necessary.  
 
The preliminary PDO is to support the Government of Jamaica in strengthening the ECD 
service system by: (i) enhancing the quality of ECD services; (ii) increasing access to early ECD 
services, specifically, access of at risk children; and, (iii) strengthening the organizational and 
institutional arrangements that govern the ECD sector.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project would include two components, each carried out under different implementation 
arrangements. Component one would be carried out using a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp) and 
comprise two sub-components; component two would be carried out using standard 
implementation arrangements.  
 
Component 1: Sector-Wide Approach  
 
Subcomponent A: Improve the quality of ECD services  
 
Activities carried out under this sub-component would sustain and improve the quality of ECD 
services. They would support the ECC in establishing and maintaining an inspectorate to enforce 
the newly established standards for ECIs serving the 3 to 5 year old. At the same time, activities 
would assist ECIs serving the 3 to 5 year old in attaining these standards. Pilot studies suggest 
that the most glaring gap between standards and current practice exist in terms of staffing. 
Project activities would therefore not only support ECIs in expanding their personnel base, but 
also training institutions in augmenting their programs for ECD practitioners and teachers. Other 
activities would assist resource centers in expanding their continuing education programs and 
support services for ECD practitioners and teachers, as well as strengthen their feeding 
programs. Finally, the sub-component would include activities to help parents make informed 
choices about ECIs. Notable exceptions of activities implemented under this sub-component 
would entail the expansion or construction of infrastructure.  
 
As soon as the GoJ adopts corresponding standards and norms, activities similar to those in 
support of ECIs serving the 3 to 5 year old would be carried out in support of ECIs serving the 0 
to 3 year old as well as parenting education programs.  
 
Sub-Component B: Increase access to ECD services  
 
Activities carried out under this sub-component would support the development of a unified 
screening system for at-risk children. Activities would include the development of assessment 
tools and the training of service providers. Special emphasis would be given to the screening 
capacity of Well-Baby Clinics. Activities carried out under this sub-component would also help 
these clinics provide comprehensive support to at-risk children. Activities would include the 
training of a new cadre of health professionals, child development therapists, to be placed in 
Well-Baby Clinics. Finally, activities would support the consolidation and expansion of the early 
stimulation program for disabled children.  
 
In addition, activities would focus on bringing to scale a service delivery model for the 0 to 3 
year old, including a model for ECIs serving this age group. The sub-component would primarily 
support existing service providers in developing their delivery capacity, for example, the 
expansion of their personnel base and the purchase of equipment and teaching materials. 
Activities would also support the development and expansion of parenting education programs, 
and would assist sector stakeholders in developing national Information, Education and 
Communication and Behavior Change Communication programs.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Technical Assistance  
 
Activities carried out under this project component would strengthen the organizational and 
institutional arrangements governing the sector. Activities would support public agencies in 
internal reform processes and the development of sector-specific capacity; furthermore, they 
would assist the GoJ in streamlining the subsidy system for non-for-profit ECD service 
providers. Other activities would support initiatives to strengthen the sector’s governance 
framework, such as the development of policies, regulatory frameworks, budgeting processes 
and a national ECD monitoring and evaluation, the latter including regular impact evaluations. 
Activities would also assist the development of action plans for the implementation of the sector 
strategy as well as relevant operational research.  
 
Based on current design, the Project would not finance the construction or expansion of ECD 
infrastructure. The financing of investment in ECD infrastructure would fall outside the scope of 
the SWAp arrangement. The GoJ does not consider investments in infrastructure a priority to 
improve the quality and access to services. Furthermore, the sector, dominated by a large number 
of private institutions usually run by communities and churches receives funding for 
infrastructure improvements through mechanisms outside the GoJ’s consolidated fund, thus, 
outside the scope of the SWAp.  
 
Furthermore, the Project would not finance health services that produce health care waste. 
While the Project would finance preventive child health visits which require strengthening and 
scaling up, it would not finance vaccination services for which high levels of coverage have 
already been achieved.  
 
If necessary, the Project may finance minor refurbishments to existing infrastructure in order to 
appropriately accommodate IT equipment in participating agencies. Such small-scale activities 
would be limited to minor interior building remodeling and are not expected to generate negative 
environmental impacts requiring attention under OP/BP 4.01. Nonetheless, as a good practice 
measure, basic construction rules for contractors detailing provisions to minimize dust, noise and 
other nuisances, safeguard worker health and safety, and require adequate disposal of any 
construction materials will be outlined in the Project’s Operational Manual, and will be 
incorporated into all bidding documents.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
In general, the Project’s scope would be national. However, dependent on the Project's social 
assessment and a study to define at-risk and enumerate at-risk children, geographical targeting 
mechanisms may be incorporated into the Project's design.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrow
er’s institutional capacity for relevant safeguard policies (OP/BP 4.10) will be 
assessed as part of the social assessment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
Page  4
Ms Josefina Stubbs (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The task team suggests that a decision as to whether OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) 
applies should be taken based on the results of the social assessment shortly being carried out as 
part of Project preparation. The study will assess opportunities, inclusion, empowerment and 
accountability of different social groups and make recommendations on how to integrate social 
aspects into the Project’s design and implementation mechanisms. The assessment will give 
particular attention to the maroons, a group of afro-descendants living in Jamaica. If the 
assessment should find that significant cultural barriers exist for maroon communities to benefit 
from Project activities, OP/BP 4.10 would be triggered and an Indigenous Peoples Plan 
developed in accordance with the policy.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/16/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Study 
  Launch  Completion 
 
 
Social Assessment:  
July 2007 
        October 2007   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christoph Kurowski 
07/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/23/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
07/23/2007 
Comments:  This reflects the discussions.  I have no comments. 
