Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2614 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/29/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P100546 
Project Name: Jordan Social Protection Enhancement Project 
Task Team Leader: Aleksandra Posarac 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to enhance the poverty alleviation and reduction 
impact of the safety net programs. This will be achieved through: (i) increased coverage, better 
targeting and improved administration of the cash assistance program; (ii) improved access to 
and quality of social work, care and rehabilitation services at the community level; and (iii) 
expanded and strengthened programs aimed at developing earning skills and capacities of the 
poor and vulnerable and linking them to other safety net interventions.  
 
The primary target groups for the project are the poor and vulnerable households.  The principal 
improvements for the target population are expected to be: (i) availability of short-term income 
support; (ii) increased self-reliance and ability to benefit from economic opportunities; and (iii) 
increased access to community based care and rehabilitation services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would have the following components for an approximate project cost of 
US$17.5 million:  
 
Page  2
Component A:  Institutional strengthening and capacity building for development and 
implementation of social safety net programs (US$1.5 million):  The project would support: (i) 
establishment of an apex institutional body with the mandate of coordinating poverty programs; 
(ii) restructuring the implementation arrangements of the Ministry of Social Development 
(MOSD), as well as other safety net implementation agencies, including the NAF; (iii) the 
establishment and development of the policy making, and monitoring and evaluation units within 
the Ministry of Social Development; (iv) human resources development at various levels/parts of 
the safety net system; and (v) development of a unified, automated information base on the poor 
and vulnerable population.  
 
Component B: Policy development and strengthening and capacity building of the National Aid 
Fund (US$4.5 million): The NAF programs will be consolidated and refocused to increase the 
coverage of the poor and significantly decrease leakage to the non-poor.  New targeting 
mechanism for NAF will be developed and implemented.  The program will be streamlined and 
calibrated to the needs of eligible families, so as to avoid work disincentives and dependency on 
the program.  The program administration will be strengthened including introduction of a case 
management and an integrated management information system. A new operational manual and 
methodological instructions and guidelines will be developed, with an appropriate complaint 
mechanism.  A system for monitoring and evaluation will be developed and introduced.  
 
Component C: Linking safety nets to skills enhancing and income earning opportunities  
(US$4.0 million): Programs aimed at enhancing skills and income earning capacity of the poor, 
such as training, small grants for business start up, as well as work fare, will be piloted, 
evaluated and scaled up/mainstreamed.  The objective is to graduate NAF recipients into 
sustainable means.  
 
Component D: Integrated community based social work and care services (US 6.0 million):  
Social welfare services at the community level aimed at persons with disabilities, disadvantaged 
women, children and youth, dysfunctional families and single, frail elderly, will be strengthened 
by expanding the network of service providers and the menu of services and improve their 
quality. Service standards will be developed and their implementation supported.  The 
environment for service provision will be improved, including physical plant improvements and 
provision of adequate equipment such as teaching aids, physical rehabilitation aids and 
equipment, computers, etc. Contracting out of services would be reorganized and enhanced. 
Given the limited availability of protection services for women, particular attention will be paid 
to expanding capacity in this important sector.Community-based social welfare services with 
case management will be piloted. An innovation fund to support the development of community 
based services will be established.  
 
Component E: Project management (US$1.5 million): This component would support project 
implementation, including the cost of program impact assessments.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Amman, Jordan  
 
Ministry of Social Development   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is a category C project, and therefore requires no institutional set up for safeguard policies.  
 
However, as project prepration progresses, the task team should determine if sub-projects might 
have more significant environmental impacts, particularly in connection with the financing of 
works.  Adequate screening procedures should be put in place to evaluate and mitigate impacts.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/16/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This is a category C project.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Aleksandra Posarac 
11/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
11/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr David J. Steel 
11/28/2006 
Comments:   
