Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1479 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/26/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P093201 
Project Name: Promotion of a Wind Power Market 
Task Team Leader: Reynold Duncan 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 4, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Other economic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
0.00 
 
FOREIGN PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
78.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of this IPP Wind Power project is to help create a sustainable wind power 
market in Jordan in order to increase the supply of electricity in an environmentally sustainable 
way.  This would be achieved by overcoming barriers to windfarm development  such as lack of 
a
legal and regulatory framework for windfarm development under which wind could be reliably 
dispatched.  Also, an insufficient tariff; lack of institutional capacity and information on wind 
resources, lack of knowledge, especially in the financial sector, about wind energy and how to 
evaluate the risks involved in lending for this type of activity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will consist of the following three main components:  
 
Page  2
•
Technical assistance (US$2 million): This would consist of: (i) a willingness-to-pay 
study,  (ii) development of a legal and regulatory framework, (iii) development of a model PPA, 
(iv) capacity building and raising awareness, (v) strengthening of project development 
capabilities, (vi) wind power portfolio development, (vii) monitoring and evaluation and (viii) 
dissemination of information on wind farms.  
 
•
Wind Power Development (US$85 million):  Initial prefeasibility results show more 
promising results than earlier expected, with capacity factors of over 39 percent achievable at 
several locations.  The current proposal is to install up to 60 MW in Fujeij, Wadi or Araba.  The 
exact location(s) will be decided when the prefeasibility work is completed.  The initial results 
show that a total of 200 GWh could be produced annually.  The GEF grant would finance part of 
the incremental costs.  
 
•
Project Development Support (US$2 million): This is a contingent funding designed to 
promote market development for renewable energy beyond the proposed project.  It need not be 
repaid if the project moves to implementation.  The development costs that can be financed are: 
pre-feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs, preparation, launch and evaluation of bids, 
miscellaneous project financing costs, environmental and other permit costs, regulatory approval, 
land titling, and other development costs.  The percentage and the maximum level that can be 
financed will be determined during preparation.  
 
The overall indicative project cost is expected to be around US$89 million.  The project is 
expected to be co-financed by the government of Jordan (US$2 million), the private sector 
(US$78 million) and GEF (US$9 million).  GEF would finance part of the performance-based 
subsidy, project development support and part of the technical assistance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposal envisages building one windfarm(s) at Fujei and/or Wadi Araba, both located in the 
Southern part of the country. These two sites have been pre-selected by the GoJ.  Project 
preparation will include some visit at the proposed sites for a pre-screening of potential non-
identified safeguard issues.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR) will be the executive agency, through 
two specifically involved units: the Renewable Energy Department, and the Non-Conventional 
Power generation section of the Electricity Department. Both these units have competent staff 
with experience in wind energy.  
 
The Ministry also has been working in a number of renewable energy areas since the early 
1970s and collaborating with international organizations like GTZ, UNDP, RISO, etc. in 
research, training, measurements, feasibility studies and pilot projects.  
 
Part of the project preparation work will aim at assessing more specific capacity of the 
Borrower on dealing with World Bank safeguards policies, in particular for environmental 
capabilities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSRE) 
Page  3
Mr Raffaello Cervigni (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environment category B (partial assessment)  
 
The assessment work would include a review of potential environmental and social impacts, 
and address mitigating measures as appropriate. This will serve as a pilot for subsequent wind 
farms in Jordan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
This could be triggered depending on the exact sites selected.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
All effort will be made to avoid resettlement but compensation for clearance of right-of-way 
for the transmission line(s) may be required.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/06/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
draft management plan will be prepared prior to the QER.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Reynold Duncan 
04/25/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
04/26/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna Maria Bjerde 
04/25/2006 
Comments:   
