Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/05/2006 
Report No.:  AC2154
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P070958 
Project Name:  JO-REGIONAL & LOCAL DEVELOPMENT 
Task Team Leader:  Stephen George Karam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (40%);Central government 
administration (40%);Solid waste management (10%);Roads and highways (10%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Municipal finance (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Pollution management and environmental health (S);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
3.00 
 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
25.30
28.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to assist the government of Jordan in 
promoting regionally balanced local development, principally through municipalities and 
other ancillary support institutions by (a) improving the equity and adequacy of central-
local resource transfers; (b) restructuring CVDB to improve its efficiency and diversify 
its financial products and services to municipalities; (c) strengthening municipal financial 
management, revenue generation and service delivery capacity; and (d) improving 
regional planning and inter-municipal coordination to take advantage of economies of 
scale and strategic development opportunities. To this end, the project will be 
implemented within a governance framework of increased participation and 
downward/upward accountability, coupled with increased coverage and quality of 
municipal service provision particularly in underserved areas.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project will include four components as follows: (1) Strengthening National Level 
Institutions Involved in the Municipal Sector; (2) Municipal Infrastructure and Services; 
(3) Municipal Capacity Building; (4) Regional Economic Development Strategy & 
Investment Planning.  
 
Component 1:  Strengthening Selected National Level Institutions involved in the 
Municipal Sector.  This component would focus on strengthening the capacity of 
Ministry of Municipal Affairs (MOMA) to more effectively regulate the sector, 
particularly with regard to municipal financial management, budget preparation and 
reporting, and urban planning. It would also provide technical assistance to restructure 
the transfer formula and support the establishment of a Municipal Sector M&E database 
which would include both sector and project-specific baseline indicators and performance 
benchmarks. With regard to CVDB, the project would support implementation of an 
improved governance structure, as well as other organizational enhancements, including 
preparation and implementation of a multi-year Business Plan. Support to CVDB will 
also aim to strengthen and further develop analytical tools, forms, documentation systems 
and procedures, as well as credit analysis and portfolio management techniques.  
 
Component 2: Municipal Infrastructure & Services.  This component would introduce a 
performance-based grant system to finance locally identified and prioritized investments 
in municipal infrastructure and service-provision (e.g. solid waste equipment, 
water/wastewater network rehabilitation/extension, storm water drainage, roads 
rehab/extension, and street lighting).  It would also finance investments in municipal 
assets that provide services while generating revenue streams (e.g. vegetable markets, 
bus/transport terminals, parking areas, public parks with vending areas, small/medium 
scale slaughter houses, etc.). The implementation process at municipal level will be 
supported/regulated by a formal agreement in the form of a Municipal Compact. Access 
to grant funds would be conditional on meeting specified performance criteria.  
 
Component 3:  Municipal Capacity Building.  At the municipal level, technical 
assistance and training would be provided through CVDB to strengthen municipal 
financial management and budgeting, asset management, local revenue collection, human 
resource capacity, investment project analysis and feasibility study preparation. This 
Component would build on CVDB?s existing training program that includes facilities, 
administrative staff and curriculum that has benefited from WBI and GTZ support in 
upgrading. The Component would be primarily financed by AFD and would also involve 
twinning partnerships with French municipalities.  
 
Component 4: Regional Economic Development Strategy & Investment Planning: This 
component would include technical assistance intended to strengthen regional 
development planning and ensure effective linkage and coordination among 
municipalities in their development planning efforts. It will support and expand upon 
ongoing work of the Local Development Department of Ministry of Planning and 
International Cooperation (MOPIC) and explore current institutional arrangements to 
Page  3
develop options for consideration to realign and improve regional and local government 
coordination.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Seventy-eight municipalities spanning across the Kingdom (notably excluding the Capital 
of Amman) would be eligible to benefit directly from financing for sub-project 
implementation in view of other donor cofinancing available and being provided in the 
sector. RLDP will finance sub-projects especially in under-served/poor areas to be 
selected on the basis of agreed priority/eligibility criteria. These criteria will be identified 
and applied to a restructured municipal classification system with new physical, socio-
economic and performance-based dimensions. In addition to investing in rehabilitating 
and expanding basic municipal infrastructure and services, municipalities would be able 
to invest in the development of assets that provide services while generating revenue 
streams (e.g. vegetable markets, bus/transport terminals, small-scale manufacturing areas, 
tourism facilities, small/medium scale slaughter houses, etc.). The use of municipal asset 
management strategies/plans will be supported, together with methodologies for 
participatory planning, budgeting and implementation at local level.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Bryant Collier (MNSRE) 
Ms Rosanna Nitti (MNSIF) 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani (MNSIF) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Sub-projects would be identified by municipalities in consultation with their communities 
against a positive list of projects pre-approved in concept design for financing.  The 
positive list has already been tested during the Project design and preparation stage and 
deemed to be flexible and responsive to municipal investment priorities while avoiding 
Page  4
activities that could potentially pose negative social or environmental safeguard risks.  
Individual sub-projects would each be reviewed on the basis of specific screening 
criteria, including economic/financial, social and environmental considerations.  Typical 
investments would be in small civil works sub-projects that would likely include 
improvements in basic municipal infrastructure and services (e.g. solid waste equipment, 
water/wastewater network rehabilitation/extension, storm water drainage systems, roads 
rehab/extension, street lighting; retaining walls, etc.), as well as building municipal assets 
that would generate municipal revenue streams (e.g. vegetable markets, bus/transport 
terminals, small-scale manufacturing areas, tourism facilities, small/medium scale 
slaughter houses, etc.). The financing of any slaughter houses would be subject to review 
on a case-by-case basis. For example, small to medium scale subprojects would be 
financed only if the measures stipulated in the Environmental Monitoring Plan (EMP) are 
adopted. This would require carrying out an Environmental Assessment (EA) with a 
focus on method of disposal of the generated solid and liquid waste and sanitary 
operation of the new investments. For larger scale slaughter houses, and prior agreement 
to financing, a full fledged Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) would be prepared 
and presented to the Bank team for review and clearance. Finally, it is anticipated that 
some negative impacts may occur due to the implementation of the rehabilitation and 
maintenance sub-projects but will be easily mitigated and reversed through measures set 
out in the EMP.  
 
Several measures have been taken into account in project design to avert triggering O.P. 
4.12.  First, a detailed Project Operations Manual (POM) has been prepared that sets out 
the parameters for sub-project selection, including a pre-screened positive list of sub-
projects, drawing attention to key safeguard issues, with specific reference to O.P. 4.12.  
Second, a dedicated Social Scientist would be engaged by CVDB as the implementing 
agency for Component 2 who would have as his/her responsibility that of screening all 
municipal sub-projects from a social safeguard point of view and would specifically 
address aspects of land acquisition, resettlement/displacement of people and economic 
activities.  Any sub-project that would trigger a safeguard issue would be classified as 
ineligible for funding.  Third, the Bank team would be equipped with a Social Scientist 
during supervision missions to ensure appropriate staffing, compliance with the agreed 
screening mechanism, and to provide regular guidance and feedback to counterparts on 
relevant social safeguard provisions.  Finally, a Beneficiary Impact Assessment (BIA) 
would be carried out just prior to the Midterm Review and at Project Close-out in which 
social issues, including relevant safeguards, would be reviewed and counterpart agency 
compliance assessed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The following are the expected impacts:  
 
*
Dust, noise and odor due to demolition and new  
 
construction;  
 
*
Dumping demolition and construction wastes and traffic  
 
accidental risk, etc;  
Page  5
*
Risk for aesthetic and vegetation;  
 
*
Risk for inadequate handling of waste material during  
 
construction and operation;  
 
*
Water (wastewater, surface water discharge, storm  
 
water)during construction and operation;  
 
*
Risk for road accessibility and health; and  
 
*
Risk for cultural heritage assets.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The investments made through RLDP can be classified under category ?B? in accordance 
with World Bank Operational Policy 4.01 (January 1998) and requires the preparation 
and implementation of an Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMP has been 
prepared by a qualified international consulting firm recruited competitively by the 
Government per Terms of Reference acceptable to IBRD. The EMP provides a review 
and analysis of a sample sub-projects that will likely be supported by RLDP and 
recommends appropriate mitigation measures that the MOPIC, CVDB and municipalities 
shall consider during implementation.  
 
CVDB has been in operation for many years now providing financial assistance to 
municipalities towards infrastructure development investments. The CVDB team has the 
necessary professional and technical background but will be strengthened especially in 
the area of environment. This will be done through the recruitment of qualified 
environmental specialist to ensure municipal compliance with the EMP mitigation 
measures, to coordinate environment monitoring with mandated government agencies 
and to prepare terms of reference for environmental consultants who will carry out 
environmental training for municipal staff and contractors as per the EMP.  
 
EAs and EIAs for slaughter houses have been carried out by the CVDB in the past.  
However, any such investments would be subject to the Bank?s review and clearance at 
all stages.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main beneficiaries are the communities in which the investments are made and the 
eligible municipalities that would operate and manage them. An Environment 
Assessment was carried out by an independent qualified international consulting firm 
recruited by MOPIC as part of an overall Municipal Infrastructure and Service Delivery 
Assessment performed through a well designed consultation process with the 
stakeholders and sample beneficiaries. The result of the Assessment and the EMP will be 
posted on the websites of the MOPIC and CVDB.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/26/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen George Karam 
09/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
09/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
09/21/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
09/26/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:  The project has been transferred to the Task Team Leader since 5/27/04.  Therefore 
there is no need for the Regional Safeguards Advisor to sign off. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
09/26/2006 
Comments:   
