Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/04/2006 
Report No.:  AC2451
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P081823 
Project Name:  JO-CULTURAL HERITAGE,TOURISM & URBAN DEV 
Task Team Leader:  Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 7, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 30, 2007 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (35%);Sub-national government administration 
(30%);Other industry (25%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
12.00
12.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the project are to contribute to: (a) tourism development in five key 
historically and culturally important secondary cities of Jerash, Karak, Madaba, Salt and 
Ajloun, and thereby create the conditions for local economic development; and (b) the 
consolidation of the tourism industry in Petra, Jordan's premier tourism asset and 
destination.  
 
These objectives would be pursued by: (a) the physical and economic revitalization of 
the historic cores, and the preservation and regeneration of cultural (natural) landscapes 
(Ajloun only); (b) the establishment of (i) Municipal Compacts between central and local 
government aimed at improving urban management, financial capacity, and financial 
autonomy, and (ii) Strategic Partnerships for local development between the city 
authorities, private sector and community groups aimed at mobilizing local 
entrepreneurial, managerial and financial resources and capacities; and (c) the 
construction and operationalization of a new Visitors Center at the Petra Sanctuary.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project would consist of four main components:  
 
Page  2
1.  
Revitalization of Historic City Centers, Urban Infrastructure Improvements and 
Cultural Landscapes Regeneration.  This component focuses on activities in and around 
the historic cores of Jerash, Karak, Madaba, Salt and Ajloun (the PMs), and includes: (1) 
upgrading and improvements to street networks and allied public spaces; (2) 
rehabilitation and upgrading of pivotal urban spaces; (3) rehabilitation of facades, as well 
as landscaping and furnishing of primary streets; (4) renovation and preservation of 
selected heritage buildings through adaptive reuse, including a pilot Historic Preservation 
Fund for privately owned historic buildings in Salt Municipality;  (5) traffic and parking 
management; (6) construction/rehabilitation of essential municipal buildings and 
facilities; (7) regeneration of cultural (natural) landscapes (Ajloun only); and (8) design 
and supervision services for 1 to 7 above.  
 
2.  
Petra Gateway.  The component supports: (a) the construction of a new Visitors 
Center at the Petra Sanctuary including essential equipment and furnishing; and (b) 
consultant services and training for detailed design engineering and supervision, and for 
organization and management.  
 
3.  
Local Economic Development.  This component supports financial and technical 
assistance to local entrepreneurs, investors and community groups to encourage the 
creation and/or expansion of environmentally appropriate and financially viable small 
and medium enterprises in the civic core areas.  
 
4.  
Capacity Building and Project Management.  This component supports capacity 
building and project management activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project would support investments in the 5 targeted municipalities (the PMs?Jerash, 
Karak, Madaba, Salt, and Ajloun) and Petra in relation to urban upgrading and tourism 
development. This would include rehabilitation of street networks and street furniture, 
installation/widening of pedestrian sidewalks, rehabilitation and cleaning of building 
fa?ades, improvement of significant nodes of public spaces, protection and landscaping 
of green areas, conservation and adaptive reuse of monuments and historic buildings, 
rehabilitation of public transport facilities, conservation of significant natural landscape, 
and construction of a gateway complex at the entrance of the Petra site.  
 
Limited negative social and environmental impacts which are easily mitigated may 
occur during the implementation of the rehabilitation and construction works.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Keith Rennie (QAG) 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSIF) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As presented above in the project description, the project will focus on rehabilitation and 
upgrading of infrastructure, roads and buildings as well as on the construction of a visitor 
center and that of specific municipal buildings. It is anticipated that limited negative 
social and environmental impacts which are easily mitigated may occur during the 
implementation of the rehabilitation and construction works.  As a result, this Project is 
rated a category B in accordance with World Bank Operational Policy 4.01 (January 
1998) and requires the preparation and implementation of Environmental Assessment 
(EA) including preparation of project specific Environmental Management Plan (EMP).  
 
The project would finance the rehabilitation and upgrading of cultural heritage buildings 
and structures in historic cores of the targeted cities and therefore the Cultural Heritage 
safeguard has been triggered. The Executing Agency (Technical Development 
Department at the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities - MOTA-TDD) has identified 
specific buildings which would be rehabilitated and specific precautionary and mitigation 
measures have been detailed in the EMP specifying the methods of handling such works. 
In particular, the staff of the Department of Antiquities, assisted by recruited consultants, 
is expected to carryout prescreening of any proposed intervention by the project which 
may affect these buildings. Moreover, the staff will also carryout structured site 
investigations to ensure compliance with the measures stipulated in the EMP.  
 
The project would require the expropriation of properties and land as well as the 
relocation of Project Affected People which will cause the Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguard to be triggered. The MOTA-TDD and in cooperation with key stakeholders 
(Ministry of Municipal Affairs MoMA and Project Municipalities --PMs) has prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) and specific Resettlement Action Plans to ensure 
that any expropriation or relocation activities in the project area will be carried out in 
accordance with the Bank?s Safeguard Policies.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternatives or intervention options in every city were reviewed as apart of the 
preliminary design studies.  The Do Nothing option is not favorable given the general 
consensus about the degrading quality of the urban fabric in the historic cores. Not 
undertaking the project will lead to further environmental degradation, destruction and 
continued deterioration of sensitive cultural sites and landscapes.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The implementation responsibility of this Project will be with the Ministry of Tourism 
and Antiquities (MoTA) in close cooperation and coordination with Ministry of 
Municipal Affairs (MoMA) and the Project Municipalities (PMs). MoTA?s Technical 
Development Department (TDD) project management team, which worked on the Jordan 
Second Tourism Development Project (closed June 30, 2005), is familiar with the Bank?s 
Safeguard Policies, and has a proven track record to effectively monitor the 
implementation of the planned measures to mitigate the anticipated project environmental 
impacts.  This Project would further develop such capacity by financing (a) additional 
training to specific MoTA-TDD?s operational staff, and (b) the recruitment of a 
specialized environment consulting firm who would work closely with the MoTA-TDD 
team and would be responsible for reviewing, advising and reporting on environmental 
issues throughout the project life.  The environmental firm will also assist the project 
municipalities to develop their capacities for better environment management, 
particularly in their historic cores.  
 
The implementing Agency has prepared and disclosed: (a) appropriate Environmental 
Management Plan; (b) detailed Resettlement Policy Framework; and (c) specific 
Resettlement Action Plans for sub-projects requiring expropriations.  Stakeholders in all 
project municipalities were consulted prior to finalizing these plans.  
 
MoTA and the PMs would also benefit from the services of qualified local consulting 
firms who will assist in the supervision of the infrastructure related activities. Throughout 
the years of Bank operations in Jordan, several leading Jordanian consulting firms have 
developed good knowledge and experiences with Bank?s environmental safeguards. 
These firms would supervise sub-projects implementation on the ground and ensure the 
contractors compliance with the EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
An Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out by the implementing agency 
(MoTA-TDD) through a contract with a specialized environment consultant who was 
mobilized during the period of December 2005 and March 2006. The EA process was a 
Page  5
participatory one which featured stakeholder workshops and meetings with municipal 
councils, business owners, residents, NGOs and special interest groups. In addition to a 
summary of the socio-economic characteristics of each of the 5 PMs, the EA report 
presents:  (a) the legal, regulatory and administrative frameworks currently in use; (b) a 
baseline of the environmental conditions; and (c) the potential environmental impacts 
which may be caused by the activities that would be financed by the project.  
 
Key findings of the consultant included the positive impact expected from the project on 
the socio-economic conditions at the PMs and the preservation of essential natural and 
cultural resources while introducing improved management techniques for the overall 
city core management, including better traffic circulation and flow, better collection and 
disposal of municipal and commercial waste and improved public safety.  
 
The instrument for municipality participation would be Municipality Revitalization 
Pacts agreed between the PMs, MoTA, MoMA, MoPIC and the Governorates. In order to 
ensure effective local participation, the PMs would establish and maintain broadly based 
Community Partnerships comprised of key representatives from local civil society. These 
Partnerships would elect a chairman from among their membership, and would meet 
quarterly or as necessary to review local priorities and progress, and to provide guidance 
to the PMs and MoTA on the project and, where relevant, solving the problems 
encountered. Local level coordination would be assured through Municipality Program 
Coordination Committees (MPCC) comprising the respective mayors and provincial 
governors, senior representatives of MoTA and representatives of local civil society. 
MPCC would meet monthly or as necessary to review progress and solve problems, and 
would be chaired by the Governor of the Province. All of the above implementation 
structures and arrangements would be supported under the project. Particular support 
would be given to MoTA-TDD and the PMs to strengthen their capacity to discharge 
their respective responsibilities effectively (including implementation of EMP and RAP).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
11/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr John Keith Rennie 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
11/30/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
12/04/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
12/22/2006 
Comments:   
