Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2028 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P081823 
Project Name: JO-CULTURAL HERITAGE,TOURISM & URBAN DEV 
Task Team Leader: Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (35%);Sub-national government administration (30%);Other 
industry (25%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
12.00
12.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve local economic growth, social cohesion, and 
municipal governance in the secondary cities of Jerash, Karak, Madaba, and Salt by endowing 
these historic cities with revitalized and well functioning urban centers.  
 
Project objectives will be achieved through assisting the four project municipalities to 
reestablish the function of centrality of historic cores in the socio-economic development of their 
cities and to improve their capacity to manage and maintain the public spaces and heritage assets, 
concentrated in these cores in close cooperation with the local population and the private sector. 
The pr
oject’s achievement of its development objectives will be measured by: (a)the increased 
value added of economic activities taking place in the city center, in particular tourism related 
economic activities and businesses; (b) the increased intensity of social interaction taking place 
in the center, in particular pedestrian traffic in main public spaces of the city center; and (c)the 
increased collection of local revenues by the municipality, in particular property taxes and 
business taxes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project will be a sector investment operation targeting central areas (“historic 
cores”) in the four cities of Jerash, Karak, Madaba, and Salt.It would consist of four Sustainable 
City Revitalization Programs (SCRPs) to be implemented through three components: (a) 
rehabilitation of historic city centers and urban infrastructure improvements; (b) support to 
development of local economic initiatives; and (c) capacity building and project management 
support.  
 
Component 1 – Rehabilitation of Historic City Centers and Urban Infrastructure Improvements.  
This component includes activities in and around the old towns of the four project cities of 
Jerash, Karak, Madaba and Salt and includes: (a) upgrading of and improvements to street 
networks and public spaces; (b) protection and landscaping of green areas; (c) conservation and 
adaptive reuse of monuments and historic buildings; (d) rehabilitation of public transport 
facilities; (e) enforcement of city center zoning and building regulations; and (f) traffic and 
parking improvements for historic centers.  
 
Component 2 – Support to development of local economic initiatives. This component includes 
financing and technical assistance to encourage creation and expansion of small and medium 
enterprises in: (a) cultural heritage and tourism related productive and commercial activities; (b) 
management and marketing of local heritage assets and products; (c) training and organization of 
local artisans.  
 
Component 3 – Capacity Building and Project Management Support.  This componentincludes 
the following capacity building, technical assistance and project management activities: (a) 
management of historic centers by municipalities; (b) support to local economic development 
and communications; and (c) support to MoTA and Municipalities for project management and 
monitoring and evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in the cities of Jerash, Karak, Madaba and Salt.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Most of the works proposed under the CHTUD will involve rehabilitation of existing assets.  
expropriation of property, or resettlement of project-affected persons is anticipated.  
Improvements to streets and roads will be done within existing alignments, footprints and 
structures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSIF) 
Mr John Keith Rennie (MNSIF) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
To be determined.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
To be determined.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
To be determined.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be determined.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
12/12/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
01/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
01/19/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
