Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/13/2007 
Report No.:  AC2631
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P094306 
Project Name:  JO-AMMAN EAST POWER PLANT 
Task Team Leader:  Reynold Duncan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 8, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 13, 2007 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:   
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00 
 IBRD 
Guarantee 
45.00 
 
JAPAN: Sumitomo Bank Limited 
45.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified) 
210.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
310.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's main objective is to meet the electricity needs of the country in an 
economically and environmentally sustainable manner to contribute to economic growth 
and well-being of the population of Jordan. The project would add about 370 MW of 
additional power to the system, help to ensure the reliability of power supply and help 
maintain a margin between available capacity and demand of at least 10%. The purpose 
of the PRG and MIGA guarantee is to enhance competition and therefore help reduce the 
project's financing costs. Furthermore, as one of the largest foreign direct investments in 
Jordan, successful development of the project by the private sector should help pave the 
way for additional private capital investment flows for infrastructure development in 
Jordan. By enabling the Government to shift some risks to the private sector, and thereby 
reducing fiscal risk as compared to direct public investment in power, this project would 
help make available scarce public resources to increase Government support for other 
sectors.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project consists of a 370 MW natural gas-fired combined-cycle power 
station to be developed, owned, and operated by a private-sector project company, and 
the asscoiated transmission line, substation, natural gas pipeline and water pipeline.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The US$ 300 million power station will be constructed on a site located at Almanakher 
village, east of Amman Jordan, about 1km from the Jordanian Gas Transmission Pipeline 
(JGTP) and 6km from the main transmission line. The fuel supply will be natural gas 
from Egypt; Distilate Fuel Oil (DFO) will serve as backup fuel for emergency operations 
only. The first phase of the power station will comprise two simple-cycle gas turbines. 
The second phase will add a heat recovery steam generator (HSRG) and thus increase the 
capacity by 50%. The water for steam generation will be provided by the Jordan Water 
Authority (WAJ).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNSSD) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The dispersion modeling exercise shows that the emission levels will be within the 
Jordanian and World Bank limits.  The noise model shows that night time niose levels 
from the power plant could be exceeded by about 1 dB, but this would be the worst-case 
scenario when all power units are operational.  Negative visual impacts might be 
associated with the transmission line, substation and power plant structures. For the 
power plant the noise level could exceed 60bB(A) for a distance of 300m during 
construction.  
 
Page  3
About 95% of the land that the transmission land will traverse is unoccupied. The other 
5%, although classified as agricultural, is desert with no agricultural use. Land 
acquisition compensation will be required for a maximum of about 30 tower bases, 
covering between 2400 and 7500 sq m. The maximum area whose use could be reduced 
due to the line in order to ensure safety of communities is approximately 0.4 sq km. For 
this, compensation will be paid as necessary for reduced land use, based on the RPF and 
as determined by the detailed survey and line routing.  
 
The following are among the key concerns of the consultation porcess included in the 
ESMP:  (i) the transmission line will be routed to avoid as much as possible of the small 
area with human settlement; (ii) compensation will be paid for loss of land use at market 
rates; (iii) employment will be offered to local residents; (iv) emission level will be 
monitored and managed to meet Jordanian and World Bank standards and (v) in the event 
archaeological findings are made, the relevant authorities will be consulted for their 
removal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
positive impact is the creation of jobs and other income generation activities in the 
area.  The amount of road traffic will be increased but it is predicted that the impact shall 
be minimal.  Land for the power plant and substaion is currently idle and was provided 
by GoJ for the project.  Only about 5% of the land over which the power lines will 
traverse has human settlements, for which land use will be compensated, but involuntary 
resettlement will be avoided.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The site was selected to avoid involuntary resettlement since the land is not in use, the 
transmission line route is only 6.5km (but the line length will be about 13km, for 
incoming and out-going feeders) from the power station site and the gas pipeline route is 
only 1km away.  The air-cooled design avoids excessive use of water which is scarce in 
the country.  The only other solution which would meet the output requirement would be 
to run the power plant on distillate fuel, which would result in more severe emission 
levels.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The developer has put in put in place a team that will be responsible for the mitigation 
and monitoring activities, and has allowed for external expertise if deemed necessary.  
The team is headed by a specialist who has worked on similar projects in Asia and the 
Middle East.  The developer has worldwide experience in developing and operating 
similar projects and a good record in environmental management and mitigation, for 
projects with more advere impacts that the current project.  Similarly, the transmission 
line operator has extensive experience in transmission line projects in Jordan and has in 
place a permanent team to ensure proper implementation of the ESMP. The cost of 
compensation has been included in the project budget.   
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the communities in and around the project site, Almanakher 
village and Al-Baidaa village.  The communities were consulted during the scoping phase 
and on completion of the draft report through surveys and meetings in the villages, 
separately for the transmission line and the rest of the project. Almanakher School was 
included as one point of disclosure of the ESIA and RPF.  During the consultation, a 
direct point of contact for the communities and the developer was appointed.  Other key 
stakeholders are the GOJ, represented by the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of 
Environment and the RSCM all of whom reviewed the ESIA.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/10/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/20/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/10/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  5
Manager review the plan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Reynold Duncan 
02/13/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
02/13/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
02/13/2007 
Comments:   
