Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2838 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P100534 
Project Name: Jordan Employer Driven Skills Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Soren Nellemann 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (100%) 
Theme: Improving labor markets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Bank aims at supporting the policy of the GoJ on reforming its TVET system. The 
development objective of the proposed project is to: Enhance the internal and external efficiency 
of the E-TVET sector to make it more flexible and demand driven through the development of 
employer community participation in (i) sector policy formulation; (ii) institutional development 
and reform; and (iii) skill development program design and delivery.  
 
This will be achieved by:  (i) making effective the participation of the employers in the planned 
ETVET Council through wide capacity building; (ii) increasing the interaction of employers in 
skill development through their active role in occupational profiling, definition of related 
competences, program design and delivery, and certification; (iii) turn the TEF Fund into an 
efficient mechanism for effective use of the financial resources, with active role of employers; 
(iv) create the conditions for increasing the relevance and quality of the TVET, especially at the 
level of VTC; and (v) systematize the production and analysis of labor market information and 
widen its use for both planning and evaluation purposes.  From the perspective of the 
beneficiaries the focus is on increased employability through increased relevance of 
qualifications.  At the policy and system management level, the development issue is to establish 
Page  2
a
functioning dialogue between governmental, public entities and the employers, and to make 
this dialogue effective and result-oriented.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Bank supported project totaling an estimated US$10.0 million, would allocate 
resources through the four project components described below.  
 
Component 1 (US$1.5 million):  Establishment of an Employer Driven Training and Funding 
Mechanism.  
 
GoJ has established a National Training and Employment Program (NTEP) and the Training 
and Employment Fund (TEF), which is the financing arm of the NTEP. While the TEF is 
currently collecting funds, it is not disbursing said funds. There is a need to strengthen those 
mechanisms that will ensure employers that play a leading role with respect to developing 
training initiatives, allocating fund resources, and ensuring that the skill development objectives 
have been met. This would be achieved by facilitating the establishment of Employer Sector 
Skills Councils which will undertake profiling of occupations and skill demand in their 
respective sectors in order to participate more effectively in training program design and delivery 
through the development of operating procedure manuals, management training, staff training, 
employer liaison, and performance monitoring. Activities will also fund training for relevant 
employees in occupational skill profiling, training needs analysis, preparation and 
implementation of skill development programs, and evaluation of outcomes. The component 
would finance long term technical assistance, training studies, workshops, study tours and minor 
equipment.  
 
A
key outcome of this activity will be an integrated system for collecting resources, linked to 
efficient mechanisms for the design and delivery of employer driven skill development 
initiatives.  This would be supported by an increased capacity to assist employers in the 
identification of training needs, assessment and other intermediary services designed to ensure 
the effective delivery of employer defined occupational competencies.  
 
Component 2 (US$3.5 million):  Restructuring of the Vocational Training Corporation and 
System-wide Capacity Building  
 
This would include an investment in the key institutions to build their systems and capacity for 
demand driven training provision. This component will finance investment in IT equipment and 
upgrading of administrative systems. In addition it will finance training, workshops and technical 
assistance. This will include the following sub-components:  
 
Vocational Training Corporation (VTC) Organizational Development: this sub-component will 
support the restructuring of the VTC in redefining the policy objectives that the organization 
would serve, including the governance and management model, amendments to the VTC Law 
and regulations, development of a strategic plan and a three-year business plan and support the 
development and implementation of a strategy to move from paper-based communication and 
management systems to e-based systems. A key outcome of the VTC re-organization will be the 
adoption of management financing and administrative practices that would enable all VTC 
Page  3
Training Centers to respond to their primary client groups in a timely and effective manner, 
while also divesting the organization of other responsibilities inconsistent with their core 
business and mandate.  
 
ETVET Council Development and System wide Capacity Building: the National Agenda 
proposes a more diversified and holistic approach to the development of a skilled workforce 
based on the establishment of an ETVET Council. The Agenda proposes that the Minister of 
Labor chair this Council. There is a self-evident need to harmonize the roles and responsibilities 
of the MoL and the proposed Council. This requires clarification of the legal and regulatory 
context within which the ETVET Council will operate; the establishment of a strong technical 
secretariat; and detailed definition of the functional responsibilities associated with each area of 
the Council’s mandate. This sub-component of the project would support development of the 
ETVET Council and its Technical Secretariat; define, mobilize and support employer community 
participation in the ETVET Council; provide professional development for staff in the TVET 
sector and build capacity within the Ministry of Labor in the areas of policy analysis; strategic 
and operational planning; labor market analysis; cost and efficiency studies; performance 
assessment; and licensing and accreditation procedures. Finally, it will support the establishment 
of a department/entity for expatriate (migrant) workers. A key outcome of this sub-component 
will be a strengthened and possible re-organized MoL and an operational ETVET Council and 
Technical Secretariat.  
 
Component 3 (US$3.5 million): Labor Market Information System Development.  
 
GoJ has invested in the development of a labor market database built on household surveys, 
enterprise surveys and employment and unemployment surveys undertaken by the Department of 
Statistics. While the raw data have been collected, Al-Manar, the labor market information unit, 
does not currently mine the data and generate labor market information products that are 
meaningful to different categories of users for policy analysis or operational planning. This 
component would include investment in a national system and collaboration with Al-Manar to 
develop and distribute labor market information products to serve a wider range of stakeholders; 
the migration of the Electronic Labor Exchange capability from Al-Manar to MoL and its 
regional offices; and further development of the MoL ICT and information management 
capability. This component will finance investment in IT equipment. In addition it will finance 
training, workshops and technical assistance.  
 
A
key outcome of this activity would be an improved understanding of the structure and 
dynamics of the labor force in Jordan, and the development of capacity in MoL to deliver 
effective labor market matching services to employers and workers.  
 
Component 4 (US$1.5 million):  Project Management and Implementation  
 
This component will finance the project management team and project related fiduciary 
management. The project team will be integrated into the Ministry of Labor and implementation 
will be undertaken through existing units, departments and institutions. This will also include 
project monitoring and implementation.   
 
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ai Chin Wee (MNSSD) 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif (MNACS) 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud (MNSSD) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/01/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
NA   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Soren Nellemann 
04/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
05/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel J. Welmond 
04/27/2007 
Comments:   
