Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/14/2007 
Report No.:  AC2375
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jordan 
Project ID:  P075534 
Project Name:  Integrated Ecosystems in the Jordan Rift Valley 
Task Team Leader:  Kanta K. Rigaud 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management 
(S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.15 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.50 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
0.00 
 
Non-Government Organization (NGO) of Borrowing Country 
4.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.05
6.55 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is as follows:  ‘To apply the principles of integrated 
ecosystem management to the existing land use master plan of the Jordan Rift Valley and 
establish a network of well managed protected areas that meets local ecological, social 
and economic needs.’  
 
The project development objective will be achieved through the following outcomes:  
 
-
Consultative planning and management procedures involving all relevant stakeholders, 
and based on IEM principles, successfully introduced to the Rift Valley to support the 
conservation of key biodiversity sites.  
 
Page  2
-
A
network of 4 PAs (c. 57,000 ha) and 7 SCAs in the JRV legally established and 
operating as models of IEM principles to support community driven biodiversity 
conservation.  
 
-
Sustainable financing mechanisms for PAs strengthened through increased 
capitalization of $ 2 million for the endowment fund, and adoption of economically 
viable, nature-based livelihood options by local communities in PAs and SCAs.  
 
-
Project managed successfully, and development objective achieved through an 
effective monitoring program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has 5 components.  
 
Component 1: Assessment and Planning for Integrated Ecosystem Management ((Total 
USM $ 1.43)  
 
The objective of this component is to lay the groundwork for integrated ecosystem 
management in the JRV by introducing biodiversity conservation and community 
participation measures into the existing land use planning framework, using the proposed 
protected areas and special conservation areas as pilot sites. Building on previous survey 
data, detailed assessments will be undertaken in the PAs and SCAs to determine their 
ecological, social and economic status and to finalize their boundaries. This information 
will be used to update and develop the existing Land Use Master Plan (LUMP) for the 
Rift Valley, prepared by the Jordan Valley Authority (JVA) during 2004, which 
delineates known conservation sites (It will also be vital for shaping the management 
strategies under component 2). In particular, it will be used to formulate the guidelines 
and procedures necessary to make the master plan designations part of a consultative 
planning process. RSCN will partner with the JVA to develop these mechanisms and 
apply them to approved conservation sites, building on its current role as a member of the 
Joint Steering Committee for the National Land Use Strategy . By targeting the 
intervention in this way, the project’s land use aspirations are achievable and the process 
will strengthen the JVA’s planning capabilities. It will also ensure that the network of 
conservation sites, vital for securing the ecological integrity of the Rift Valley, is 
mainstreamed into development control and given recognition and protection under the 
planning system.  
 
Component 2: Development of a Network of Biodiversity Conservation sites, 
Embodying the Principles of Integrated Ecosystem Management (Total USM $ 9.12)  
 
The objective of this component is to legally establish the network of protected areas 
and special conservation areas defined under the land use planning framework above, and 
to develop management systems for these sites that become working models of IEM 
principles.  
 
Page  3
A
total of four new protected areas and seven special conservation areas will comprise 
the network, representing a cross section of all key habitats and ecosystem types in the 
Rift Valley. The PAs cover a total area of 56,950 hectares and are all delineated on the 
JVA’s land use master plan. As for the SCAs, the delineations and total areas will be 
agreed upon with consultation with relevant stakeholders. The proposed protected areas 
from north to south are:  (1) the oak-clad valley of the Yarmouk river; (2) the sub-tropical 
vegetation communities at Fifa; (3) the arid mountain systems of Jebel Masu’ada; and (4) 
the mudflats of Qatar. They are all of national or international importance and meet 
agreed national criteria for PA designation. They will be legally established by RSCN 
through the Ministry of Environment, under the Environment Law. RSCN will apply the 
lessons learned from previous GEF experiences and involve key stakeholders in the 
designation process and use socio-economic programmes to gain the support and 
involvement of local people. It will also apply the business and marketing approaches 
recently developed under its ‘Wild Jordan’ division to pioneer the use of economic 
incentives to pave the way for site designation. Such economic initiatives will be 
integrated with conservation and social programmes, in line with IEM principles, through 
the preparation and implementation of management plans. Some income generation 
initiatives will run parallel to the designation process to demonstrate that PAs can be 
economic assets if developed in the right way. Such economic initiatives will be 
integrated with conservation and social programmes, in line with IEM principles, through 
the preparation and implementation of management plans.  
 
The SCAs in the network are generally smaller sites, having specific ecological roles, 
such as providing ‘stop-overs' for migrating birds, protecting isolated wetlands or acting 
as buffer zones to the protected areas.  They are all earmarked as Important Bird Areas.   
SCAs are a new concept in Jordan and will be anchored in the planning system, rather 
than under Ministerial by-laws, and managed by local communities. The project will 
work on 4 out of the 7 proposed SCAs, reflecting different situations, to create 
community-driven conservation plans.  Locally based management structures will be 
developed for integrating community action with the land-use planning processes to be 
developed under component 1. RSCN will facilitate the pilot programmes in 
collaboration with the Jordan Hashemite Fund for Development (JOHUD), which has 
presence throughout the country and decades of experience in community based 
enterprises.  
 
Component 3: Integrated Assessments of Climate Change Impacts on Biodiversity 
Conservation in the JRV Developed to Support Conservation Planning and 
Implementation (Total USM $ 0.5)  
 
The objective of this component is to assess the regional impacts of climatic change on 
the future distribution of some major floristic groups and ecosystems dynamic in the 
JRV, in terms of biodiversity conservation, and incorporate the results into the 
conservation planning and management of PAs and SCAs. This would entail an 
assessment of the shifts in climatic patterns, shifts in species range (range expansion, 
range contraction, range extinction) and other key parameters in the context of the 
conservation planning (including the demarcation of boundaries, and the long-term 
Page  4
management of PAs and SCAs). The impacts of climatic changes and the development of 
climate proofing measures would be assessed against their potential to generate social 
benefits and/or misbenefits.  
 
Component 4: Development of Sustainable Financing Mechanisms (Total USM $ 0.44)  
 
Effort will be directed at increasing the capital base of RSCN’s existing endowment 
fund, known as the Jordan Fund for Nature. This currently invests about $7 million in the 
finance market to provide core revenue for the Society, some of which is used to support 
PAs. By employing a full-time fund raiser, the intention is to increase the capital base by 
$2 million to account for the additional costs of running the four new PAs in the Rift 
Valley.  Business plans will also be prepared for all the new PAs as a tool to aid financial 
forecasting and to identify ways of meeting expenditure shortfalls through concrete fund-
raising strategies. Further support will also be given to marketing the eco-tourism and 
other income generation programmes developed under component 2 to enable them to 
contribute significantly to PA running costs. RSCN’s experience through its ‘Wild 
Jordan’ division and brand name has shown that nature-business enterprises, if well 
marketed, can make a major contribution to PA running costs. In 2005, tourism revenue 
from RSCN sites contributed over 50% of total PA running costs (and almost 100% of 
the running costs of Dana Nature Reserve). The project will further this business 
approach to protected area financing, by encouraging service franchising and other 
investment partnerships with the private sector. To ensure that pledged co-financing 
contributions are realised during the project, a systematic plan to secure these will be 
prepared and implemented by the project director.  
 
Component 5: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (Total 
USM $ 1.21)  
 
The objective of this component is to develop an effective project management unit 
capable of directing and supporting project implementation, liaising with stakeholders 
and carrying out monitoring and evaluation according to agreed indicators. A project 
management unit (PMU), consisting of a project director and team which will be 
embedded into the organizational structure of RSCN, reflecting previously successful 
GEF and non-GEF projects in Jordan. RSCN’s wealth of institutional and technical 
experience and its national mandate for protected areas will enable it to support the work 
of the PMU and to cooperate harmoniously with government partners to achieve the 
project’s objectives. The project will, however, need to enhance RSCN’s skills base in 
critical areas; notably land-use planning, community driven conservation schemes and 
private sector integration.  
 
The work of the PMU will be guided and monitored by a Steering Committee of key 
stakeholders and a project implementation group will be established to develop and 
coordinate activities between the partners. A monitoring system will be put in place that 
tracks performance of the PMU and its partners’ in relation to (i) progress in achieving 
scheduled activities and outputs; (ii) income and expenditure against budget allocations; 
and (iii) project impact on biodiversity conservation.   
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will focus on seven IEM demonstration sites namely: A network of 7 SCAs 
in the JRV legally established and operating as models of IEM principles to support 
biodiversity conservation (including the 4 PAs mentioned above): Jordan River IEM 
Area, Mujib North IEM Area, Mujib South IEM Area, The Yarmouk River IEM Area, 
Fifa IEM Area, Qatar IEM Area, and Masu’ada IEM Area. These seven areas were 
selected in partnership with counterpart organizations (ministries, agencies as well as the 
Steering Committee), while considering the following points: a) coverage and 
diversification of the major ecological zones in the JRV, b) coverage of the four selected 
Protected Areas and Important Bird Areas and their adjacent land areas, c) ecosystem 
connectivity (i.e. ensuring that a conservation corridor is ensured along the JRV), d) 
presence of globally significant biodiversity assets and vulnerability of local ecosystems, 
and e) coverage of areas with observed unsustainable development (specifically in the 
area of agriculture or tourism) putting the biodiversity conservation in the adjacent 
proposed protected areas at stake.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as a Category B project and the GOJ has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA), consistent with the requirements of OP 
4.01. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared as part of 
the ESA. All activities are designed to improve the ecosystem and socio-economic 
conditions. Potential adverse environmental or social impacts are likely to be transitory 
and short-term, largely occurring prior to the full-scale operation on alternative 
sustainable management practices. These impacts can be avoided or minimized through 
appropriate preventive actions and mitigation measures. The interventions and activities 
Page  6
to be carried out under the alternative livelihood and income generation component 
which could potentially have negative environmental or social impacts will be reviewed 
prior to implementation and mitigation measures put in place. Similarly, project activities 
to be financed through the Biodiversity Enterprise Grant Program will be screened on 
their impact on the environment prior to acceptance. The RSCN/PMU will be responsible 
for the development and implementation of a detailed M&E system, and implementation 
of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).  
 
In order to address potential negative impacts on the livelihoods of the local populations 
because of the restricted access to natural resources in the project areas, a Process 
Framework is being prepared according to World Bank Safeguard Policy on Involuntary 
Resettlement OP 4.12 and applies to all project areas.  
 
In addition, OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats and OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources 
are also triggered, and potential impacts related to these are addressed as integral parts of 
the ESA and the ESMP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The main features of the ESMP include five major elements:  
 
(i) Specific Environmental Review Procedures for the IEM Sub-Projects. A committee 
will be established for the environmental appraisal of the IEM sub-projects based on the 
environmental sub-project screening checklists. The IEM sub-project environmental 
appraisal review committee will meet, review the sub-project screening checklist and 
decide whether it requires a comprehensive ESIA, an environmental review, or eliminates 
the need for an environmental study and approves the sub-project directly. In case the 
sub-project was deemed to require a comprehensive ESIA or an environmental review, 
the adopted procedure shall be that of the MOE and according to the EIA Bylaw No. (37) 
of 2005. In case the sub-project did not require any further environmental assessment, the 
IEM Project Management Unit and their local partner can start the implementation of 
their project.  
 
(ii) Mitigation Measures for Establishing the Natural Reserves. Mitigation measures will 
include the control and supervision of the construction activities, the establishment of 
appropriate liquid and solid waste collection systems, the mitigation of high noise levels, 
the protection of biological diversity, the formulation of public safety program for the 
local population and the workers in the project construction areas.  
Page  7
(iii) Public Communication and Participation Program. A public communication and 
participation program will be established for the project and a detailed action plan will be 
produced and implemented for each IEM region. This plan should identify the different 
communicators including partners, local community leaders of opinion, sub-projects 
beneficiaries/partner, awareness targets, private sector, etc. Also, it should identify the 
communication themes, channels, objectives, messages and tools.  
 
(iv) Control of ESMP implementation. All ESMP associated documentation and records 
are stored and distributed. The implementation of the ESMP should be audited on a 
regular basis. Audit reports are the basis for verification of the compliance of the various 
parties, the completion and implementation of programs and restoration plans, and the 
effectiveness of such actions and other elements of the ESMP. The audit will be used for 
review and will rely on the monitoring data.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Involvement of relevant stakeholders is a strong element throughout the project, which is 
based on a bottom up approach concerning community engagement and interventions. 
Different groups of people (community representatives) will be involved in planning the 
future land use in order to ensure the accomplishment of the project objectives. The 
planning process will pay attention to the different roles of men and women in the 
various land uses.  
 
The primary beneficiaries of the project would be the communities living in and around 
the seven IEM pilot areas. Marginalizedsections of the population, including women, 
herders and other underprivileged groups will be actively targeted to ensure that they 
receive their share of benefits from project activities and are able to effectively 
participate in decisions regarding Land Use Planning (LUP) in general and the 
development of their community in particular. Project staff - in partnership with 
government and NGO staff - will support communities in these IEM areas, in 
participatory assessments and in the IEM/LUP preparation and implementation. During 
the early stages of implementation a full Social Assessment (SA) and PRA surveys will 
be carried out in which all relevant data on the socio-economic status of the community 
members will be collected. An effort has been made to link the PF to the participatory 
components of the project. Based on SA/PRA findings, local interventions will be 
specified in Community Development Conservation Plans (CDCPs) for each of the 
PAs/SCAs. This will jointly serve as a Plan of Action required by the Bank’s policy on 
involuntary resettlement to be developed and submitted to the Bank during project 
implementation and prior to the enforcement of new restrictions of access to resources in 
and around the project sites. These updated documents should be disclosed in-country 
and at the InfoShop at the World Bank, as per the disclosure requirements.  
 
In order to encourage community involvement, the project will provide specific 
expertise through the appointment of community development specialists as project staff 
members. The project will establish a M&E system that will be based at PMU level. This 
Page  8
M&E system will monitor the performance of the project towards the achievements of 
the social development outcomes.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/14/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
Page  9
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
05/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Knut Opsal 
05/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Knut Opsal 
05/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Bachir Souhlal 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef 
05/09/2007 
05/09/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
05/09/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
05/10/2007 
Comments:   
