Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/13/2007 
Report No.:  AC3174
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P101928 
Project Name:  Health Sector Technology Transfer and Institutional Reform 
Task Team Leader:  Peyvand Khaleghian 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 31, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (40%);Information technology (35%);Compulsory health finance 
(10%);Central government administration (10%);Vocational training (5%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Administrative and civil service reform 
(P);Education for the knowledge economy (S);Other human development (S);Trade 
facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
118.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
180.00
180.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To introduce international standards and build long-term institutional capacity in MOH 
and related healthcare institutions in support of key health sector reforms pursued by the 
Government of Kazakhstan in the context of the State Health Care Reform and 
Development Program.  
 
1. 
Improved efficiency and equity of health expenditure and better financial 
protection for households in oblasts that implement a comprehensive package of 
healthcare financing and management reforms;  
 
2.
Improved quality and efficiency of medical care through the establishment of 
functioning systems/ institutions for clinical practice guideline 
development/dissemination and health facility accreditation, and through improved 
performance in the laboratory and blood transfusion systems;  
Page  2
3. 
Improved quality of medical graduates and improved ability to carry out medical 
research through upgrading the medical/pharmacological education and research systems 
and introducing international standards;  
 
4.
Improved efficiency and quality in health facility management through access to 
reliable, timely health information from a unified health information system;  
 
5.
Improved safety, efficacy, quality and affordability of drugs through reforms in 
pharmaceutical procurement, pricing, prescribing monitoring, information provision, 
benefit package design and quality control; and  
 
6.
Improved food safety and speedier WTO accession through the introduction of 
international sanitary and phytosanitary norms.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Health Financing and Management  
 
Subcomponent A1.  Strengthening the Capacity for Health Policy and Strategy 
Formulation.  This subcomponent would improve the quality of policymaking at the 
Ministry of Health by establishing a twinning arrangement between an internationally-
recognized health policy agency and a newly-established Economics and Policy Analysis 
Unit in MOH to carry out economic and policy analysis (including survey-based 
exercises) and develop strategic options for policy reform and budget development in the 
health sector. These capacities are weak in MOH but are essential if the Ministry is to 
modernize its operations and bring them in line with international practice.  The 
subcomponent would provide equipment for an Economics and Policy Analysis Unit 
under the Department for Strategic Development and International Cooperation and 
would finance international TA, training, study tours and a series of special 
studies/surveys to provide factual input to policy decisions on financing issues.  The 
subcomponent would also finance special studies/surveys including inter alia household 
health surveys, out-of-pocket payment surveys, patient and provider satisfaction surveys 
and surveys of human resource surveys.  
 
Subcomponent A2.  Strengthening Budgeting, Planning and Management in the Health 
Sector.  This subcomponent would extend the above-mentioned twinning relationship to 
strengthen planning, budgeting and “purchasing” functions in the health sector by 
strengthening performance among health sector “principals” such as MOH,the Oblast 
Health Departments (OHD) , and regulatory agencies/financial departments such as 
Treasury, the Ministry of Economy and Budget Planning (MOEBP) and oblast finance 
departments.  With a move towards output-based financing, arm’s-length relationships 
and managerial autonomy in public administration in general and the health system in 
particular, the importance of specifying roles, responsibilities and performance indicators 
becomes critical.  This subcomponent would finance capacity building activities to 
strengthen the ability of MOH and OHDs to plan, execute and monitor health spending 
under three headings: collection, pooling and purchasing.  Collection of health sector 
resources would be strengthened by (a) helping MOH staff (and several oblasts) complete 
a
comprehensive National Health Accounts for Kazakhstan, including study tours and 
dissemination efforts; and (b) providing technical support, training and special studies on 
budget planning, the role of health insurance and the role of additional tax sources for the 
Page  3
health budget (including training in how to regulate health insurance markets and how to 
model budgets and alternative revenue sources).  Pooling of health sector resources 
would be strengthened by (a) developing and refining a risk-adjusted geographic 
allocation formula; (b) moving toward output-based program budgeting and (c) carrying 
out an advocacy program to help policymakers, oblast leaders and the public understand 
the rationale and benefits of oblast-level budget consolidation.  Purchasing of health care 
services, i.e. moving away from input-based financing (e.g. financing beds and staff 
directly) to a more market-oriented model that finances outputs, would be strengthened at 
national and oblast levels.  At the national level, purchasing would be strengthened by (a) 
reviewing and reforming the health sector control environment to streamline operations 
and improve the business climate for private providers; (b) continuously refining the 
Basic Benefits Package and co-payment policy; (c) introducing performance-based 
payment methods for all MOH programs and implementing the necessary regulatory 
changes; and (d) reviewing and implement reforms in health sector governance (esp. 
appointment of health facility managers).  At the oblast level, purchasing would be 
strengthened by providing training for OHD, OFD and others in implementation of these 
reforms, especially those concerning provider autonomy, performance-based provider 
payment methods and health facility governance.  
 
Subcomponent A3.  Management Training and Investment Planning for the Health 
Sector.  This component would improve the quality and efficiency of healthcare facility 
management and the efficiency and effectiveness of investment decisions in the health 
sector by (a) strengthening the capacity of health care managers and building capacity for 
long-term health care management training in Kazakhstan and (b) introducing modern 
techniques for investment planning in the health sector.  Management training would be 
strengthened by (i) identifying and building capacity in a long-term home for health 
management training in Kazakhstan, including through the development of faculty and 
training materials and the establishment of satellite training centers in the six Medical 
Academies; (ii) providing advanced on-the-job training and overseas training 
opportunities for managers of large and/or merged facilities, especially in oblast capitals; 
and (iii) establishing a formal set of health management qualifications, including possibly 
a
Master of Health Care Management program.  The modernization of investment 
planning would be achieved in three steps: (i) upgrading health facility planning 
standards to international standards and establishing a cogent, comprehensive set of 
planning standards in the form of a new
 health planning “atlas”; (ii) training MOHand 
OHD staff to carry out a detailed review of existing health systems using the new 
standards to identify gaps, surpluses and opportunities for rationalization; and (iii) 
carrying out a detailed master-planning exercise in four oblasts through a twinning 
relationship between international experts and MOH/OHD staff through which detailed 
opportunities for rationalization and a prioritized list of investments would be identified.  
 
Component B: Health Care Quality Improvement  
 
Subcomponent B1: Accreditation: Modernizing Standards for Health Facilities. This 
subcomponent would improve the quality of healthcare facilities by establishing an 
accreditation system and carrying out first-cut accreditation of at least 30 health facilities 
Page  4
by 2012.  This would involve: (a) contracting an internationally-recognized accreditation 
body to review Kazakhstan’s accreditation standards and accreditation system regulations 
(including those of the planned accreditation body) and develop business    investment 
and communication plans for the accreditation agency as well as a training program, 
curriculum and guide book for assessors; (b) establishing a permanent institutional 
mechanism for training of surveyors and quality managers; (c) training 500 surveyors and 
500 quality managers; (d) printing of standards for all health facilities in Kazakhstan; (e) 
creating a permanent review and upgrading mechanism for periodically adjusting 
standards; (f) developing a national and subnational monitoring and evaluation indicator 
packages for eventual recognition by an international accreditation body.  The 
subcomponent would also finance training, study tours and learning activities for staff 
involved in the design and implementation of accreditation system reforms.  
 
Subcomponent B2: Upgrading Clinical Practice and Introducing Health Technology 
Assessment.  This subcomponent would improve the quality of clinical/ medical practice 
by (a) establishing a system for continuous development and review of evidence-based 
clinical practice guidelines (CPG); (b) supporting the development and widespread 
dissemination of 50 international-standard CPGs in each of five key clinical specialties; 
(c) printing and training 65 percent of the workforce in each of these clinical specialties 
in the updated CPGs; (d) and building the capacity of Kazakhstani specialists to carry out 
Health Technology Assessment (HTA) and conduct 3-4 HTAs independently by 2012  
 
The subcomponent would support two lines of action: one on institution and capacity 
building (to build the capacity of Kazakhstani institutions and specialists in economics, 
epidemiology, clinical epidemiology, medical statistics and evaluation methods and 
develop a national cadre of leaders in evidence-based medicine) and one on 
dissemination and implementation (to upgrade clinical practice among the body of 
practicing physicians in Kazakhstan by disseminating and providing training in 50 core 
CPGs).   The institution and capacity building line would finance a twinning relationship 
between an internationally-recognized institution and the Health Care Development 
Institute (plus other key players such as the Expert Council and professional associations) 
on CPG/HTA development and in developing a business plan, budget (investment and 
recurrent costs), training plan, communication plan, CPG uptake plan and overall work-
plan for HTA and CPG development.  The twinning institution would also arrange for 
training and professional exchange opportunities for Kazakhstani specialists from MOH, 
clinical centers, universities and professional associations on subjects including health 
economics, epidemiology, evaluation methods, pharmacoeconomics, evidence-based 
medicine and HTA.  The dissemination line would involve a large-scale effort to 
disseminate the 50 core CPGs among practicing physicians throughout Kazakhstan using 
a
combination of cascade training, classroom/skills lab education and distance learning 
using the Internet, modern videoconferencing/IT techniques and self-directed learning 
through CD-ROMs and DVDs.  This would involve printing CPG manuals for the entire 
targeted medical workforce, building training capacity and establishing distance learning 
facilities in each oblast.  
 
Page  5
Subcomponent B3: Reform of Laboratories.  This subcomponent would help improve 
quality in the laboratory network in two ways: by supporting organizational reform, 
network restructuring and the establishment of a quality control function for state and 
private laboratories (including specifications and profiles for equipment, staffing, 
reference laboratories and a preventive maintenance program) by upgrading skills and 
knowledge through training and study tours for laboratory staff, managers and 
policymakers.  These would be carried out in the context of a twinning relationship 
between Kazakhstani specialists and an internationally-recognized agency/firm.  No 
equipment financing is envisaged.  
 
Subcomponent B4: Reform of Blood Transfusion System.  Following the HIV 
contamination of more than 70 children in South Kazakhstan, MOH carried out a major 
review of the Blood Transfusion Service (BTS) and decided to reform of the whole 
system of sourcing, processing, handling and utilization of blood and blood products.   
The Minis
try’s program includes a structural overhaul of the agencies and configuration 
of BTS sites; progressive implementation of WHO guidelines, benchmarking with 
established BTS in other countries; a major upgrade of equipment, facilities and 
processes including a preventive maintenance program; social marketing to increase the 
number of voluntary donors; training for physicians in international guidelines on the use 
of blood products; and a comprehensive system for monitoring and evaluation and 
continuous quality improvement in the BTS.  This subcomponent would support 
implementation of the Ministry’s program in two ways:by supporting organizational 
reform, network restructuring and the establishment of a quality control function for the 
BTS (including specifications and profiles for equipment, staffing,  a reference 
laboratories and preventive maintenance) and by upgrading skills and knowledge through 
training and study tours for laboratory staff, managers and policymakers.  These would 
be carried out in the context of a twinning relationship between the Republican Blood 
Transfusion Service and an internationally-recognized peer agency.  
 
Component C: Reform of Medical Education and Medical Science  
 
Subcomponent C1.  Reform of Undergraduate and Continuing Medical Education. This 
subcomponent would improve the quality of undergraduate and continuing medical 
education in Kazakhstan by (a) upgrading admission criteria, curricula, teaching methods, 
teaching materials, examination procedures, faculty skills and the overall structure of 
Kazakhstan’s six medical universities; (b) supporting effortsto obtain international 
accreditation for at least one of these medical universities; (c) helping modernize 
Kazakhstan’s licensing/attestation procedures for medical graduates; and (d) upgrading 
and institutionalize Continuing Medical Education in Kazakhstan.  These would be 
carried out  in three blocks: one to carry out an in-depth review of the current system and 
develop a change management plan; one to support MOH in implementing this plan; and 
one to finance study tours, professional exchanges, training, conferences and workshops 
for Kazakhstani specialists involved in the reform effort.  These would be carried out in 
the context of a twinning relationship between the Ministry of Health and an 
internationally-recognized peer agency/university, including provisions for professional 
Page  6
change management services (to help sequence and manage the transition) and for 
maintaining a dedicated medical education reform team in MOH.  
 
Subcomponent C2.  Reform of Medical Science. This subcomponent would improve the 
quality, efficiency and relevance of medical science research in Kazakhstan by helping 
implement MOH’s Concept of Medical Science Reform to 2010 (see PAD Annex 4 for 
details).  This would be achieved by (a) designing, communicating and introducing a 
contemporary competitive system for priority-setting, reviewing and financing medical 
research (including detailed specification of operational arrangements and procedures for 
the new system); (b) designing and introducing a system for patient protection in medical 
research, including detailed specifications of governance arrangements and operational 
procedures for a national medical ethical/research committee and corresponding institute-
/university-level committees; and (c) introducing and providing training for researchers 
and research managers in internationally-recognized research management tools.  These 
would be carried out in the context of a twinning relationship between the Ministry of 
Health and an internationally-recognized peer agency/university.  Additional support 
would be provided to maintain a dedicated medical science reform, including provisions 
for professional change management services (to help sequence and manage the 
transition) and for maintaining a dedicated medical science reform team in MOH.  
 
Component D: Health Information System Development  
 
This component would improve the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of health sector 
and healthcare facility management by introducing a world-class integrated health 
information system to three oblasts and one city over a 3-4 year period.  This would build 
on work already done under MOH Program 19 (informatics) to develop standards and 
software for a unified health information system including inter alia modules on patient 
management, resource management and financial management.  The component would 
finance a consolidated contract with an internationally-recognized and experience 
healthcare IT provider including technical assistance, training, project management and 
communication services and equipment procurement, aimed at ensuring that at least 75 
percent of key users in the target oblasts (Karaganda, East Kazakhstan and Pavlodar) and 
city (Astana City) are fully trained and able to use the system to its full functionality and 
that a sustainable institutional base is established for further deployment of the system. 
Based on results from the demonstration oblasts/city, the system would be rolled out to 
the rest of Kazakhstan over a 5-8 year period.   Expected results include the introduction 
of a Kazakhstan-tailored Health Management Information System (HMIS) with inter alia 
patient care management, financial management and resource management 
functionalities and the use of a common patient identifiers with swipe-card technology; 
deployment of the system to all health facilities in Astana City, East Kazakhstan, 
Pavlodar and Karaganda as Phase I of a nationwide rollout; training of the full user 
community (managers, administrators, clinicians etc.) in informatics, computer literacy 
and use of the new system; information campaigns to inform the healthcare community 
and general pubic of the system’s benefits and implications; and connectivity among all 
health facilities to provide real-time access to data on patient care, financial management 
and resource management.  
Page  7
Component E: Pharmaceutical Policy Reform  
 
This component would help improve the safety, efficiency, economy, quality and 
affordability of pharmaceuticals in Kazakhstan by supporting reforms in pharmaceutical 
procurement, pricing, monitoring, information provision, benefit package design and 
quality control.  Specific activities would include: (a) restructuring the benefit system; (b) 
introducing internationally-recognized methods for price control such as reference 
pricing and tender negotiation techniques; (c) studying underlying reasons for the 
proliferation of counterfeit and substandard drugs and developing mechanisms to address 
them; (d) establishing of institutional mechanisms to promote rational prescribing (e.g. 
drug information centers/bulletins, a National Formulary and advisory services); and (e) 
using evidence-based analysis to remove of outdated and/or unreliable drugs from the 
market.  These would be carried out in the context of a twinning relationship between the 
Pharmaceutical Committee (and other key players in the drug control system) and an 
internationally-recognized peer agency [1].  
 
Component F: Food Safety and WTO Accession  
 
This component would help improve food safety and Kazakhstan’s WTO accession 
efforts by introducing international sanitary and phytosanitary norms.  This would 
involve: (a) harmonizing an agreed set of food safety standards and practices with the 
Codex Alimentarius and other key international standards/benchmarks; (b) developing 
standards and specifications for food safety laboratories to comply with WTO 
requirements and obtaining accreditation for these laboratories; and (c) upgrading the 
knowledge and skills of staff involved in food safety oversight functions.  These would 
be carried out in the context of a twinning relationship between Kazakhstani specialists in 
the Sanitary-Epidemiological Service and an internationally-recognized food safety 
regulatory agency, preferably from an OECD or similarly-advanced economy.  The 
component would also support a dialogue on structural changes in the food safety system, 
including the possibility of institutional consolidation between MOH and the Ministry of 
Agriculture, and would avoid duplicating work being done under the World Bank, 
Agricultural Competitiveness Project and other WTO-related programs financed by the 
European Commission and USAID.  
 
Component G: Project Management  
 
This component would finance project management and monitoring and evaluation 
activities for the project.  While technical oversight and management of project activities 
would be carried out by the same Core Coordination Team (CCT) already established by 
MOH and MOEBP to oversee the Project during preparation, day-to-day administrative 
support for implementation would be provided by a team of local consultants in a Project 
Implementation Support Team (PIST).  This would consist of an administrative 
coordinator responsible for Component A and for overall PIST management; 
coordinators for Components B-F; an office manager; a procurement specialist; and a 
financial management specialist.  The component would also finance a range of surveys 
Page  8
for project monitoring and evaluation [2];  annual financial audits; and training, 
equipment/furniture and incremental operating costs for the PIST.  
 
Footnote [1]: The final institutional structure for oversight of the pharmaceutical sector 
in Kazakhstan has yet to be determined. Activities under this subcomponent would begin 
within the current institutional structure (centered on the Pharmaceutical Committee and 
the National Expertise Center) but may migrate over time to a National Drug Agency, 
especially on issues to do with pricing, information and the promotion of rational 
prescribing and drug use.  
 
Footnote [2]: These are included here rather than in the individual components because 
of their cross-component nature, e.g. household health surveys, patient/provider 
satisfaction surveys, etc..   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Various locations in Kazakhstan.  
 
No safeguard policies are expected to be triggered.  The project would focus on capacity 
building through training and technical assistance.  No civil works or medical 
infrastructure investments are envisaged, nor would there be work on medical waste 
issues.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None   
 
Page  9
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
N/A 
Page  10
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peyvand Khaleghian 
11/13/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Daniel Dulitzky 
11/13/2007 
Comments:  Approved as acting Health Sector Manager, ECSHD 
