Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1964 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/09/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kazakhstan 
Project ID: P086592 
Project Name: IRRIGATION & DRAINAGE II 
Task Team Leader: Masood Ahmad 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural policies and institutions (S);Rural services 
and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
155.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project’s main objectives would be to:  (a) improve water resources management and 
increase water use efficiency in irrigation and drainage sub-sector by improving irrigation and 
drainage systems, better operation and maintenance with broader participation of users through 
water users’ associations (WUAs).  This would lead to increased agriculture production, 
employment and incomes; (b) introduce improved agricultural, irrigation, drainage and water 
management practices and farmers’ information services to increase agriculture productivity; and 
(c) strengthen water management, and irrigation and drainage institutions   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components.   To achieve project objectives, the following components are foreseen 
under the project:  
 
Component A:  Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Systems.  A systemic approach would 
be adopted in rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage (I&D) infrastructure to remove all 
bottlenecks in the system and to assure proper supply and/or drainage to and from the farms 
fields.  Rehabilitation works would include reconstruction of off-farm and on-farm irrigation and 
Page  2
drainage systems over the project area (more than 200,000 ha) as described above.  The works 
would include:  (a) rehabilitation of headworks, main canals, branch canals, secondary canals, 
pumping stations, water distribution pipelines, control structures and on-farm network; (b) 
rehabilitation of drainage systems covering main, secondary and tertiary drains, surface, vertical 
or horizontal drainage systems; and (c) other works such as reconfiguration of the fields, furrow 
sizing, check structures, land leveling etc, for improved irrigation practices.  In areas where I&D 
systems are to be rehabilitated, WUAs would be developed before undertaking the rehabilitation 
works.  The WUAs would help in identification and prioritization of the construction works and 
would be responsible for operation and maintenance after rehabilitation.  Rehabilitation of I&D 
systems would be carried out in hydrologic blocks of at least 20,000 ha wherever possible.  
However, separate contracts may be prepared for rehabilitation of major headworks, pumping 
stations, main canals or drains.  
 
Component B:  Community Participation and Support.  To achieve the project objectives, a 
basic requirement would be effective community participation in all phases of project 
development and implementation process.  The component would include development of 
effective WUAs for improving water management, including responsibility for operation and 
maintenance (O&M) of the rehabilitated system; and promotion of improved irrigation and 
agricultural practices.  Necessary technical assistance would be provided for development of 
WUAs, including training, institutional development, and O&M of I&D systems that would be 
taking over after completion of rehabilitation.  
 
Component C.  Agricultural Development.  The purpose of this component would be to 
enhance productivity of the irrigated lands. The activities under this component would include:  
(a) effective research, extension, and agricultural information services; (b) Farmers participatory 
training, involving training of specific target groups in various agro-technical fields and farm 
management; (c) demonstration of improved and modern technologies and methods to increase 
agricultural production through better agronomic practices such as, crop rotation, crop 
diversification, and crop husbandry, improved irrigation and drainage practices and better water 
management to improve water use efficiencies and reduce environmental degradation, including 
optimal field size, land leveling, and furrow irrigation.  For this purpose, demonstration plots, 
about 5-10 ha each, would be developed in various sub-projects possibly one for each WUA or 
an area of 10,000 ha; (d) the establishment of a Farmers Information Services Desk in the project 
area to provide relevant information to farmers through different means (pamphlets, videos, 
radio, T.V, weekly papers etc) to advise them on making their farms more productive and 
sensitive to the market demands; and most importantly (e) provision of farm machinery as 
machinery stock have deteriorated considerably over the last decade.  
 
Component D.  Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project Impact.  The project would also 
include a program for monitoring and evaluation of project impacts.  The objective of the 
monitoring and evaluation studies would be to evaluate the impact of project implementation in 
terms of meeting the proje
ct’s goals through assessing its physical, environmental/ecological, 
social, agricultural, and economic impacts.  The project impact evaluation studies would focus 
on:  (i) agricultural growth and cropping patterns, yields, crop diversification, and changes in use 
of agricultural input; (ii) impact on income and employment, and secondary effects on regional 
economy; (iii) impact on surface and groundwater supplies and water quality; (iv) impact on 
Page  3
water use and equity in distribution; (v) performance of the irrigation schemes, farmers activities, 
performance of water users’ associations, effectiveness and approach to community mobilization 
for establishment of WUAs; (vi) environmental impact of construction activities; and (vii) 
estimation of project’s overall benefits and economic rate of return.  
 
Component E.  Project Management, Technical Assistance and Training.  This component 
would support the Government in implementing the project.  It would include:  (a) support for 
the operation of the PMU, and financing of overall project management, as well as technical 
assistance in such areas as detailed design, contract administration and construction supervision, 
procurement, financial management, and agricultural development; (b) institutional 
strengthening program including introduction of modern tools for irrigation scheduling in the 
sub-projects, at the Oblast and at the Raion level; (c) assistance in operation and maintenance of 
the I&D systems including budgeting, accounting and financing; and (d) training and study tours.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
A
major part of the project area would be located in the Syr Darya Basin in South Kazakhstan 
and Kzyl Orda Oblasts.  The project is proposed to cover more than 200,000 hectares primarily 
in the southern oblasts of Kazakhstan at four major locations in Maktral region, Kzylkum canal 
command area, Ayers-Turkistan Canal command and Kzylorda oblast.  In addition, some areas 
in Dzhambul and Almaty Oblasts may also be covered.  Tentatively, the IDIP-II would cover:  (i) 
the remaining 75,000 hectares in Maktaral area that has about 125,000 ha of irrigated land (of 
which about 10,000 ha were rehabilitated under IDIP and some 40,000 ha are covered under an 
ongoing ADB WRMLIP); (ii) about 90,000 ha in Kzylkum Canal area which off-takes from the 
Shardara dam, thus has assured water supply; (iii) about 50,000 hectare may be included from 
other irrigation systems in the South Kazakhstan Oblast such as the Arys-Turkistan canal system 
that also has assured water supply from the Bugun dam; (iv) about 50,000 ha from Kzyl Orda 
Oblast; and (v) 30,000 ha may be included from other Oblasts possibly Dzhambul and Almaty 
Oblasts, particularly the Shengeldi area close to Almaty with assured water supply from 
Kapchagai reservoir.  The area that could be included in the project from each location would 
ultimately be determined based on the findings of the feasibility study, and discussions with the 
Government during feasibility studies and at the time of the project appraisal.  
 
While the project feasibility study would focus on the areas listed above, the IDIP-II project 
investment may include funds for carrying out additional feasibility and design studies for 
rehabilitation and improvement of additional irrigated areas in these or other oblasts in the 
northern and eastern parts of Kazakhstan.  IDIP-II investment would also include funds for 
carrying out rehabilitation and improvement of the irrigation and the drainage systems on these 
additional lands.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project would reverse environmental degradation caused by mismanagement of land and 
water resources and provision of inadequate drainage hence it has an overall positive 
environmental impact.  The project itself is in fact an environmental management/mitigation 
project for controlling waterlogging and soil salinization through improvement in water use 
efficiency on the irrigated land.  From the outset, there are no major concerns that may need to 
be addressed.  
Page  4
However, Kazakhstan has adequate environmental legislation institutional capacity and 
mechanisms to deal with the environmental issues if they arise during project preparation or 
implementation, which include an environmental assessment procedure for projects, including a 
State Environment Expertise Review.  Under IDIP-I 15 sub-projects were implemented all over 
the country for rehabilitation of I&D systems.  Also, rehabilitation of I&D systems is nearing 
completion over about 40,000 ha in the Maktral region under the ADB assisted project.  
Rehabilitation of I&D infrastructure under these projects has not resulted in significant 
environmental concerns.  Implementation of mitigation measures (e.g. covering pollution 
prevention, protection of natural resources, and worker and public safety) will be required from 
contractors who will have to follow guidelines for environmentally sound construction practices.  
These requirements will be included in bidding documents and meeting them will be a 
contractual requirement of the works, to be supervised by construction supervision consultants.  
The staff of the Ministry of Environment and Oblast level Environment agencies would regularly 
visit project sites to monitor the performance of the contractor with regard to environmental 
conditions.  
 
Under IDIP, the institutional capacity for environmental assessments and monitoring was 
enhanced considerably.  Several steps were undertaken to harmonize and streamline the Kazakh 
EA procedures, including the State Ecological Expertise (SEE) and World Bank Guidelines for 
EA.  For this purpose, an EA Harmonization Seminar was held in 1997, with the aim to 
harmonize the environmental requirements and procedures of the Republic of Kazakhstan with 
those of the World Bank.  Two documents were developed during the Seminar:  (i) a document, 
“On Understanding of Requirements and Procedures of ROK for EIA and State Ecological 
Expertise and one for EA of the World Bank,” and (ii) a letter on “Strengthening Environmental 
Assessment Management for World Bank- Financed Projects.”  The final report ofthe 
Harmonization Seminar was formally accepted by the MOA and the Ministry of Environment 
and Natural Resources (MOENR) in 1998.  The two mentioned documents thereby became the 
guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment preparation and SEE review for the IDIP sub-
projects. Over time, a streamlined procedure was developed for carrying out an EIA and SEE for 
each sub-project rehabilitated under IDIP-I.  This system worked well for IDIP-I and the same 
procedures would be used for EA and environmental monitoring of IDIP-II.  
 
In addition, for strengthening of monitoring and evaluation of environmental aspects of 
projects, the three existing hydro-amelioration expedition centers in the cities of Almaty, Kzyl 
Orda and Shymkent for water quality, soil salinity and environmental monitoring were outfitted 
with the necessary equipment and materials, and a new such center was established in Astana.  
The laboratories are operational and are carrying out environmental monitoring in the country.  
Also under the project, a detailed guideline for sub-project performance monitoring and 
evaluation system, based on GIS software, was developed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
Mr Shahridan Faiez (ECSSD) 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An overall Environmental Assessment (EA) will be carried out to ensure that the 
rehabilitation and modernization works will be environmentally acceptable and cause no or 
minimum damage to the environment.  The EA would also set out an overall framework for 
carrying out special EIAs for each construction contract expected to cover about 20,000 ha.  The 
EA will include an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) aimed at enhancing the 
environmental benefits of the project.  In accordance with the Bank guidelines, the tasks under 
the EA will include:  (i) analysis of policy, legal, and administrative framework relevant to the 
proposed project; (ii) collection and analysis of the baseline data on the environmental issues and 
their trends, including issues identified during the implementation; (iii) identification of possible 
negative and positive environmental impacts of the proposed project and propose mitigating 
measures as required; (iv) development of key criteria for environmental quality monitoring in 
the project implementation areas; and (v) review of the guidelines developed under IDIP for 
environmentally sound construction practices, and making improvements as needed.  
 
The site specific Environmental Impact Assessments will be carried out as a part of 
preparation of the detailed design and bidding documents of various work contracts, which will 
be subject to State Expertise including the State Environment Expertise Review and approval  As 
the project will focus on rehabilitation of the existing irrigated areas, there are no resettlement 
issue involved.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
The Project triggers OP 7.50 as project area lies in Syr Darya Basin which is international 
waterway of which Kazakhstan is a downstream riparian.  The project works are of rehabilitation 
nature.  Also the riparian states have signed water sharing agreements.  The project works would 
not result in changes in water quantity or quality affecting interests of any other riparian.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/31/2006 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
August 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Masood Ahmad 
12/14/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/12/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards at the Concept Stage 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
01/12/2006 
Comments:  Approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
