Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/11/2007 
Report No.:  AC2133
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P078342 
Project Name:  Ust-Kamenogorsk Environmental Remediation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Frank Van Woerden 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 25, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 1, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (50%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Water resource 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
24.29 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
15.80 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
15.80 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project has two development objectives: (i) to provide secure containment of the 
plume with contaminants in the groundwater of Ust-Kamenogorsk and therefore prevent 
the plume's further migration towards the city's residential areas, its sources of drinking 
water supply; and eventually into the Irtysh River; and (ii) address water quality issues 
around Ust-Kamenogorsk by building strong institutional mechanisms for water quality 
monitoring and control of ongoing pollution by local municipal and industrial water 
users.  
 
The project is expected to benefit the present and future population of Ust-Kamenogorsk 
and residents of downstream communities by improving the quality of the local 
environment and averting a significant risk of hazardous compounds that could 
negatively affect the local environment and in the long term the Irtysh River.  
 
The main project indicators are: (i) prevention of further pollution through containment 
of identified high-risk waste dumps and slurry ponds located within the city, (ii) stopping 
Page  2
the pollution infiltration into the groundwater from these contained sites, and (iii) 
establishment and implementation of a local groundwater quality monitoring system.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes the following three components and related activities:  
 
Component A. Containment of high-priority sources of groundwater contamination The 
component will provide technical and financial resources for the rehabilitation of the 
following industrial contaminated sites with particularly high potential for groundwater 
contamination identified in the project feasibility study and as approved by the MEBP: i) 
uranium slurry pond (UMP 6) situated in the premises of the Ulba Metallurgical Plant; ii) 
KazZinc?s waste dumps (ULZP cone waste pile # 6 and experimental waste pile); iii) 
Condenser Plant (CP) sludge pond; and (iv) UKHPP waste and ash dumps.  
 
Component B. Remediation of Current Contaminated Groundwater Sites This 
component will finance the following activities: (i) pump and treat groundwater 
remediation system; (ii) groundwater monitoring network, and (iii) Vodokanal technical 
capacity enhancement towards the rehabilitation of drinking water supply network 
leakages in the project area.  
 
Component C. Project Management and Monitoring This component will cover a 
number of activities related to project management and monitoring. The component will 
provide support to the Project Management Unit (PMU) for: (i) project management and 
technical assistance in such areas as construction supervision, procurement and financial 
management; and (ii) monitoring and evaluation of project impacts, including 
implementation of environmental management plan for construction activities under the 
project.  
 
The European Commission of the European Union has made available a grant of US$ 
4.48 million to complement the Ust-Kamenogorsk Project. The funds would be used for 
additional groundwater quality monitoring equipment, institutional strengthening and a 
program for drinking water leakage detection and repair in the Project area close to the 
groundwater extraction wells.  
 
The project will at a later stage be complemented with GEF resources for specific 
activities related to building local capacity and providing technical assistance for sound 
management of POPs-contaminated wastes and improvement of water quality in the 
international water Irtysh River. Currently, the proposed project only includes the three 
above components because it is scheduled to be submitted to the Bank's Board on 
February 1, 2007 and the GEF resources will not be available before this date.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Ust-Kamenogorsk, a city of about 300,000 people in 
Northeastern Kazakhstan. The city lies on the Irtysh River which flows from the 
Xianjiang region of China through Kazakhstan and into Russia (Omsk Region). Through 
Page  3
its activities the project intends to stop further migration of historical industrial pollution 
present in a mixed groundwater plume contamination of a localized aquifer to the 
residential areas, the city's drinking water wells, and eventually the Irtysh River.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
Ms Irina Petrovna Novikova (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has an EA category A because of the risks associated with remediation of the 
toxic waste plume that is contaminating the groundwater of Ust-Kamenogorsk and with 
the containment of three identified high-risk waste dumps and slurry pond located in the 
vicinity of the city's main industrial complex.  
 
The Environmental Assessment (EA) of the project identified and analyzed the potential 
environmental impacts (on air, groundwater, surface water, soil and fauna) during the 
construction and execution of the remediation activities proposed under the project such 
as drilling, soil extractions, pump out and re-injection of the groundwater through wells, 
on-site groundwater treatment, covering of the slurry sludge pond and dumps, and pipe 
leakages rehabilitation.  These identified impacts are common environmental effects 
related to construction and installation works and will need safeguarding procedures 
integrated in the construction contracts. Special attention will be required to prevent dust 
generation from remediating the waste dumps.  The most important environmental issue 
related to the operation of the groundwater facility is the generation of wastewater 
treatment sludge.  This sludge will contain all the heavy metals removed from the treated 
groundwater and will need to be co-disposed with similar waste from UMP in its 
designated facility.  
 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been developed as part of the EIA 
preparation.  It recommends preventive actions and mitigation measures to address the 
Page  4
environmental impacts of the operations proposed under component A and B, including 
activities involved in the containment of high-priority sources of groundwater 
contamination, the remediation of current contaminated groundwater sites and further 
monitoring, and the rehabilitation of drinking water supply network leakages. During the 
design stage at the initiation of project implementation, the EIA and EMP will be revised, 
to integrate the most recent environmental data and will be presented in a consultation 
roundtable to stakeholders and the public before finalization.  
 
After the revision as part of the design stage, the EMP will be attached to the civil works 
(e.g. drilling) contracts and include guidance to provide consistent technical standards on 
proper well construction procedures such as well siting, construction, testing, and 
development/rehabilitation to ensure the protection of public health and the city?s ground 
water resources.  The contractors will follow the construction standards for both 
permanent and temporary well installations and will be responsible for ensuring that all 
local existing regulatory standards and requirements are met before the wells are 
constructed.  
 
Overall, the Project is expected to have important and positive local and global 
environmental impacts on the present and future population of Ust-Kamenogorsk, by 
improving the protection of human health and local environment quality and by 
preventing a significant risk of toxic wastes entering the international waterway Irtysh 
River.  
 
The Project investments will have a positive impact on the quality waters of Irtysh River 
by stopping contaminated groundwater plume from advancing towards the river and 
contaminating the drinking water wells located in the vicinity of the river.  The project 
design and implementation involves the treatment of historically polluted groundwater 
and the re-injection into the underground of the treated groundwater without any 
discharges to or extraction from the Irtysh river.  Consequently, since (i) the aquifer 
under the project is a local aquifer and does not extend into any other country, and (ii) the 
project will not carry any works on the Irtysh river, the World Bank Operational Policy 
OP 7.50 initially triggered at project concept stage is not applicable for this project. 
Therefore it is not necessary to notify the riparian countries of the proposed project 
intentions through a letter signed by the Government of Kazakhstan or to seek exemption 
from notification.  
 
The Dam Safety safeguard policy (OP4.37) is not triggered since the proposed project 
will not involve remediation of containment structures for wet tailings and waste 
disposal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The investments supported are all intended to provide to the population of Ust-
Kamenogorsk long-term benefits on public health and the environment by reducing the 
impact of pollution associated with the reduction of exposure to hazardous substances in 
Page  5
air, surface water and contaminated groundwater.  No significant indirect or long term 
impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project has been designed to prevent pollution of Ust-Kamenogorsk's underground, 
drinking water wells and the Irtysh River and will have a positive effect on the future 
environmental condition of the city. One negative effect of the project is that the 
treatment of contaminated groundwater will generate wastewater treatment sludge that 
contains heavy metals as mentioned in paragraph 1 of this section. Project alternatives 
have been considered that do not produce wastewater treatment sludge, particularly 
replacement of drinking water intake from the existing wells under risk of contamination 
to locations that do not face this problem.  The  alternative of drinking water intake 
relocation has been rejected because it does not reduce the risk of spreading underground 
pollution to residential areas and future pollution of the Irtysh River.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The government has assigned project management responsibility to an existing qualified 
PMU under the Committee for Water Resources. The Committee and the PMU staff have 
extensive experience in the implementation of World Bank projects, including solving 
related safeguards issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The draft final EA was presented at a stakeholder workshop on May 11, 2005 and was 
authorized by the participants.  Following disclosure in the country, the final EA report 
was submitted to the Infoshop on March 1, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/11/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/22/2006  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
09/22/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
09/12/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Irina Petrovna Novikova 
09/11/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
09/26/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
09/27/2006 
Comments:   
