Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2722 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kazakhstan 
Project ID: P102772 
Project Name: Territorial Development Project (JERP) 
Task Team Leader: Yoko Katakura 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (30%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (30%);Vocational training (20%);Roads and highways (20%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Municipal governance and institution building 
(S);Export development and competitiveness (S);Access to urban services and housing 
(S);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
55.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
160.00
160.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The GoK have requested the World Bank's involvement in this pilot program because it wishes 
to address the problems of: (i) inefficient use of government funds; (ii) ad-hoc and non-
transparent investment project selection, despite a theoretically rigorous and lengthy investment 
project selection process; (iii) focus on disbursement and inputs as measures of program 
performance, rather than results and impacts; and (iv) lack of sub-national government 
commitment and capacity to implement the national initiatives to enhance competitiveness (e.g. 
cluster initiative, innovation, etc.). The development objective of the proposed Territorial 
Competitiveness Project would be to help the Government launch the National Territorial 
Development Program, a special Funding Program aimed at enhancing regional economic 
development and competitiveness that would: (a) create capacity at all levels of the Government; 
and (b) fund the first batch of carefully selected strategic investment projects in the regions that 
would set a standard for the subsequent phases of the Program.  
 
Page  2
The expected project outcomes on outputs are: (i) the successful implementation of the pilot 
Territorial Competitiveness Project, as evidenced by (a) the implementation of eligible projects 
with clear monitoring and evaluation indicators and by (b) a GoK decision to use the proposed 
methodology for its own investment projects and inter-governmental transfers; (ii) increased 
capacity of the regional governments to elaborate economic development strategies that 
incorporate the international best practice and approaches, as evidenced by the number of 
strategies that meet minimum quality criteria (score card to be developed during project 
preparation, and baseline score calculated); (iii) establishment of a simple competitiveness 
monitoring system at the national, regional, and project levels, as evidenced by the collection of 
baseline data, and appointment of agencies to update and maintain such a system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will draw upon the recently prepared Policy Note?  Implementation for Regional 
Development Strategy International good Practices and Implications for Kazakhstan?.  The 
report reviewed selected international experiences in implementing regional development 
strategies and identified key factors of successful strategy formulation and implementation 
applicable to Kazakhstan. The international good practices of regional development strategy 
formulation include:  (i) a sound socio economic analysis at the regional level, based on existing 
statistical data, as well as through business surveys; (b) multi-sector, integrated strategy 
formulation, with key stakeholder participation (cities, business community, etc.) in the strategy 
formulation process so as to ensure ownership; (c) clearly defined visions, priority objectives, 
and priority measures that are multi-sectoral and spatial (not sector by sector) in nature; and (d) 
clear identification of monitoring and evaluation indicators that would be used for project 
prioritization as well as impact evaluation.  The design of the proposed Project, in terms of 
funding windows, preconditions for access, eligibility and ranking criteria will be largely based 
on the EU's regional development and cohesion funding programs.  
 
The National Territorial Development Funding Program will have three windows of 
interventions (infrastructure, human resources and business facilitation) adapted to the specificity 
of the regions: (a) leading regions; (b) transforming regions; (c) slower growth regions.  This is 
to ensure a differentiated approach, depending upon the phase of economic development, to 
provide an appropriate incentive framework based on regional performance.  
 
The first tranche of the funding program will be US$215 million of which the Bank will finance 
US$55 million. The project components considered are:  
 
Component A:  Institutional Development  
 
Amount:  US$15 million (WB $5 million; Government $10 million)  
 
The specific objective of this component is to create capacity at the national and regional levels 
to formulate economic development and competitiveness strategies, prepare and select strategic 
investments, monitor and evaluate the results and outcomes, and to launch a national and 
regional competitiveness monitoring system. This component will finance:  
 
Page  3
a) 
technical assistance to the regions to prepare regional development strategies that 
incorporate international best practices (direct TA and quality control);  
 
b)
establishment of a competitiveness monitoring system at the national and regional levels;  
 
c) 
training programs for the regions for strategy formulation, project identification and 
elaboration, etc.;  
 
d)
training programs for national government staff to evaluate strategies and projects;  
 
e) 
technical assistance for project preparation and monitoring and evaluation;  
 
f) 
training for project selection;  
 
g) 
project management, including issuance of guidelines, manuals, and dissemination of 
best practices; and  
 
h)
support to the pilot regional development agencies, may be one role of Socio 
Entrepreneurial Corporation (SEC), especially in the area of business facilitation and human 
capital (e.g., vocational training, skills upgrade).  
 
Component B:  Investment  
 
Amount:  US$200 million (WB $50 million, Gov $150 million)  
 
The specific objective of this component is to finance the first batch of investment projects 
under the National Territorial Development Program, with World Bank financing and thus 
involvement, so as to ensure projects are designed, evaluated, and selected appropriately.  These 
projects would serve as examples for the rest of the Program.  
 
Although more detailed eligibility and selection criteria are being designed, the key elements of 
eligibility and selection would be as follows:  
 
Pre-conditions for the regions to participate in the Program:  
 
a)  Submission and approval of a regional economic development strategy.  The strategy should 
be formulated following the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Economy and Budget Planning? 
MoEBP? (WB is providing TA under the JERP to elaborate such guidelines), and approved by 
the MoEBP.  
 
b)
Appointment/establishment of a project implementation unit (perhaps a regional 
development agency or SEC) that would supervise, monitor and evaluate projects.  
 
Project eligibility and selection criteria:  
 
a) 
Co financing by the regional government or any other project partners (% to be 
determined).  
 
b)
Fit with the regional economic development and competitiveness strategy.  Eligible 
projects should clearly fit into programs and measures that are identified as priority in the 
regional economic development strategy.  
 
c) 
Identification of project monitoring indicators with baseline data and targets, 
demonstrating a contribution to regional economic development.  
Page  4
d) 
The projects will be ranked and selected according to strategic criteria and an objective 
ranking system that would take into account: (i) contribution to economic development and 
competitiveness; (ii) fit with strategy; (iii) quality of application.  
 
(e) 
Investment projects in the following areas: a. Infrastructure:  Intra-region infrastructure, 
roads linking cities, urban roads, water supply, sewerage, electricity distribution, information 
technology, etc. b. Human capital: Vocational training (demand-led), retraining, language 
training, etc. c. Business facilitation:  Business advisory services, simplification of business 
processes, investments in sites and premises for business (industrial parks, science parks, etc.), 
micro finance, etc.  
 
The World Bank will provide assistance in every step of the Program launch, from regional 
strategy quality assurance, the project identification and selection process, and monitoring and 
evaluation.  The first group of projects would set the standard for the rest of the projects to be 
funded by the Program.  
 
Institutional Arrangements  
 
The proposed project will most likely be managed by the Ministry of Economy and Budget 
Planning (MoEBP), with eventually the creation of a sub-secretariat dealing with regional 
development issues.  We will be clearer about this during the preparation of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will fund the first batch of carefully selected strategic investment projects in any of 
the regions that will comply with the pre-conditions for participation, that is: (i) submission and 
approval of a regional economic development strategy, and (ii) appointment/establishment of a 
project implementation unit (perhaps a regional development agency or SEC) that would 
supervise, monitor and evaluate projects.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As this is a eligibility driven funding operation, where multiple of different types of projects are 
financed, the Bank safeguard policy, especially as regards resettlement and environmental 
impact assessment guidelines will be incorporated in the eligibility criteria (to avoid high 
negative impact projects) as well as operational manual (so appropriate impact assessment will 
be carried out, and appropriate compensation mechanisms will be in place, as appropriate).  
Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguards policies will be assessed as part of the Project 
preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Donoso Clark (ECSSD) 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project sub-components which pose environment and resettlement risk includes under the 
"infrastructure" area, intra
-
regional road construction water and wastewater and under the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
"business facilitation" area, investments in establishment of industrial and science parks.  These 
are most likely to be Category B sub-projects but the subset of likely investments will be refined 
in the next mission(s).  Large industrial parks or new regional roads with new alignments - either 
directly or partially financed by the Ban could mean a Category A rating (or overall FI rating 
with A and B sub-projects) . Thereafter the EA category and approach to meeting safeguard 
requirements will be reviewed and confirmed.  Nevertheless it is likely that a framework EA will 
be needed to screen sub-projects, with a set of candidate management and mitigation methods 
outlined.  The ECA safeguard web site has a number of examples of such frameworks.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Regarding specific safeguard policies, Natural Habitats is noted as TBD and could be 
triggered if economic development in tourism takes places in or near parklands.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Pest management is also noted as TBD since some agricultural projects which deal with this 
matter may be included.  Further preparation will lead to clarification of other policy relevance.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The team noted that under Component B, there are likely to be multiple sub-projects whose 
civil works may involve involuntary land acquisition. Because the zone of impact of the sub-
projects are not known in advance, the borrower will need to prepare a Policy Framework [PF] 
as a condition of appraisal.  
 
The objective of the PF is to ensure that affected people are informed about their options 
and rights, and consulted on and provided effective compensation at full replacement cost for 
losses directly attributable to the project. It is likely that the land take may cause loss of assets 
including land and loss of income sources. Though loss in shelter is less likely, the PF will 
anticipate mitigating measures against loss of shelter as well.  
 
Typically, the PF contains language on resettlement/ compensation principles; process of 
preparing specific land acquisition/resettlement plans; legal framework reviewing the fit between 
KZ laws and Bank policy; methods of valuing assets; eligibility criteria [ details on description 
of loss and likely mitigation measures], organizational arrangements of  delivery of entitlements 
etc,.  
 
Specific Sub-project Land Acquisition [Resettlement] Plans consistent with the PF should 
be submitted to the Bank for approval after specific planning information incomes available.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
TBD.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  6
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TBD.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Yoko Katakura 
03/29/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/29/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards at the PCN stage; "TBDs" will be resolved in a timely fashion to 
ensure clarification of applicable policies and compliance. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
03/29/2007 
Comments:  The team has identified areas that need focus during preparation, setting the stage to fully 
meet safeguard needs. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
