Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2534 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/19/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kazakhstan 
Project ID: P101928 
Project Name: Health Sector Technology Transfer and Institutional Reform 
Task Team Leader: Peyvand Khaleghian 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (50%);Compulsory health finance (20%);Information technology 
(15%);Central government administration (10%);Vocational training (5%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Administrative and civil service reform 
(P);Education for the knowledge economy (S);Other human development (S);Trade 
facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Project Development Objective:   
 
To build long-term institutional capacity in the Ministry of Health and subordinate agencies in 
the implementation of health reforms; and through this to improve the financing and delivery of 
health services in Kazakhstan, strengthen quality assurance systems in the health sector, 
introduce an integrated health information system and strengthen surveillance for sanitary and 
epidemiological threats.  
 
Preliminary Project Outcome Indicators:  
 
Increased capacity of oblast purchasers as measured by timely and complete execution of oblast 
health budgets, and of hospital managers as measured by efficiency/quality measures TBD; 
Establishment of an accreditation system and first-cut accreditation of 30 facilities; Adoption and 
Page  2
uptake of at least 50 CPGs in 5 key clinical specialties and MOH-led training of at least 65 
percent of providers in each of these specialties.  
 
Adoption of revised curriculum and teaching materials in six medical universities and 
international accreditation of at least one of these universities. Improved quality and efficiency of 
care, indicators TBD, for 130 health facilities included in the first wave of health information 
system implementation; and Upgrading of at least 20 key sanitary norms to Codex Alimentarius 
standards and training 80 percent of sanitary inspectors, laboratory technicians and others in the 
implementation of these norms.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A: Modernizing Health Financing, Strengthening Management and Promoting 
Private Sector Involvement in Health Care Delivery.  This component would support reforms in 
the organization and financing of health care.  Four subcomponents are envisaged.  
 
A1. Modernizing the Health Financing System: Benefits, Health Insurance and Payment 
Systems.  This subcomponent would finance technical assistance on the following issues: size, 
scope and cost of the basic benefit package; provider payment methods; co-payment policies; tax 
incentives for out-of-pocket payments; and Voluntary Health insurance, including sample 
legislation and regulatory documents.  
 
A2. Strengthening the Capacity to Plan, Execute and Monitor Health Spending. This 
subcomponent would finance training, study tours and capacity building for central/oblast 
health/finance officials in health financing and management methods.  It would also include a 
functional review and training for control agencies as part of efforts to improve efficiency and 
strengthen the health sector business climate in order to attract private players.  With oblast 
single-payers now managing over 50 percent of the health budget, capacity-building in how to 
allocate resources, manage contracts, monitor performance and implement performance-based 
payment systems for health care providers in other words, how to act as purchasers of health 
services?has become increasingly important.  
 
A3. Strengthening Hospital Management.  This subcomponent would help establish a National 
Health Management Training Center to be headquartered in Astana or Almaty but with satellite 
links to 3-5 collaborating centers across the country.  The objective would be to create 
institutional capacity in Kazakhstan to develop a trained, capable corps of health sector 
managers.  Foreign training and occasional scholarships are not enough for this purpose; what 
Kazakhstan wants, as Hungary and Kyrgyzstan already have, is indigenous capacity to carry out 
continuous health management training in a National Health Management Training Center.  
Activities would include faculty development, curriculum development, study tours and training 
for 5,000 health managers over five years.  
 
A4. Private Sector Involvement and Public-Private Partnerships.  This subcomponent would 
support efforts to promote provider autonomy and private sector involvement in health care 
delivery in Kazakhstan.  It would do this in two ways: first, by providing TA and training on 
legislative, regulatory and institutional reforms to create an enabling environment for provider 
autonomy and private participation; and second, by working with MOH to identify 
facilities/networks where management could be contracted out as a model public-private 
Page  3
partnership and carrying out service profiling, contract specification and payment modeling for 
the chosen facilities/networks.  
 
Component B: Improving Health Care Quality.  This component would finance training, 
institutional development and expert assistance for quality improvement measures focused on 
facilities, practitioners and laboratories.  Four subcomponents are envisaged, several of which 
have already been subject to extensive Bank-GOK dialogue under the JERP.  
 
B1. Accreditation: Modernizing Standards for Health Facilities.  This subcomponent would 
help accelerate ongoing efforts to establish an accreditation system for health facilities in 
Kazakhstan.  It would finance the following activities: reviewing Kazakhstan's current 
accreditation standards and developing a training program and guide book for assessors by an 
internationally recognized accreditation body; establishing a permanent institutional mechanism 
for training of surveyors and quality managers of health care institutions; training 500 surveyors 
and 500 quality managers; printing of standards for all health facilities in Kazakhstan; creating a 
permanent review and upgrading mechanism for adjusting standards on a periodic basis; 
developing a national and subnational package of indicators for monitoring and evaluation; and 
training quality managers in indicators to measure progress in quality improvement programs on 
the level of health care provider's all compliant with internationally accepted standards and 
practices endorsed by the International Society for Quality in Healthcare.  It would also finance 
training, study tours and learning activities for officials and practitioners involved in design and 
implementation of accreditation system reforms.  Results would include a functioning 
accreditation system with standards, materials and staff at international standards; first-cut 
accreditation of 30 facilities at the republican and oblast levels; and 1,000 trained 
surveyors/quality managers.  
 
B2. Upgrading Clinical Practice and Introducing Evidence-Based Medicine.  Medical practice 
in Kazakhstan does not conform to international standards.  MOH has begun rectifying this by 
introducing international-standard clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) and building the capacity 
of Kazakh specialists to review, adapt and disseminate these guidelines. This subcomponent 
would support these activities in two directions.  To build a cadre of local leaders in evidence-
based medicine, it would finance training, much of it overseas, in economics, epidemiology, 
evaluation methods, evidence-based medicine and health technology assessment for high-level 
experts in MOH and academic institutions.  To improve clinical practice among the current stock 
of health care providers, it would finance a massive effort to disseminate, implement and 
evaluate the use of newly-developed CPGs nationwide using cascade training, classroom 
education and distance learning through videoconferencing and IT-supported self-learning 
methods. This would require printing CPG manuals for the entire medical workforce; building 
training capacity for continuous medical education (CME) at the Independent Organization of 
Medical Experts and for experts under national/oblast committees for health care quality 
improvement; establishing distance learning facilities and VC sites in each oblast; and training 
the entire medical workforce in around 50 CPGs per physician.  The scale of the effort is 
unprecedented but necessary if Kazakhstan is serious about upgrading clinical quality to 
international standards without waiting for the current generation of physicians to retire.  
 
Page  4
B3. Modernizing Medical Education: International Standards for Curriculum/Licensing.  While 
the previous subcomponent deals with the stock of physicians, this subcomponent would deal 
with the "flow" by helping modernize Kazakhstan's outdated system of medical education.  This 
would involve  reviewing Kazakhstan's six medical universities vis-a-vis the structure, content, 
pedagogical and faculty capacity requirements of a new curriculum; carrying out a human 
resource assessment to identify appropriate targets for admission and specialization; assessing 
infrastructure and equipment needs in the six Medical Universities; upgrading the structure and 
content of the curriculum to international standards, preferably with international accreditation of 
the universities as an end-point; introducing international best-practices in admission policy, 
teaching methods, teaching materials, testing methods and faculty development; and introducing 
information technologies, computer-based learning methods, advanced learning equipment and 
new textbooks/self-study equipment based on international standards.  Given the size of the 
effort, professional management from a reputed medical university is recommended along with a 
parallel effort to reform the system for licensing/attestation of medical professionals.  
 
B4. Laboratory Quality and Blood Safety.  This subcomponent would finance technical 
assistance and training but not infrastructure or equipment on laboratory quality and blood 
safety.  This would include expert advice on standards and norms, study tours to observe well-
functioning and safely-operating blood banks and measures to harmonize equipment standards 
with those of the country's nascent HMIS.  
 
Component C: Health Information Systems.  This component would focus on technical 
assistance and training in three broad areas: 1. Technology transfer for building information 
management capacity at national and oblast levels by upgrading the skills and clarifying the roles 
of newly-established Republican and Oblast Health Information Centers; 2. Providing training, 
technical assistance and international expertise for the design of HMIS subcomponents for 
patient care, financial management and public health; and 3. Providing international expertise 
and technology transfer for HMIS project management and in-service training of a cadre of 
Kazakhstani specialists in this highly specialized field.  
 
Component D. Trade Competitiveness and WTO Accession.  WTO accession requires 
compliance with food safety standards outlined in the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius.  
Kazakhstan's current standards, most of which were inherited from the Soviet Union, do not all 
comply with these standards.  This component would finance a revision of sanitary standards 
along with large-scale training of sanitary inspectors, accreditation of food safety laboratories 
and introduction of modern inspection practices.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Various locations in Kazakhstan, primarily Astana and Almaty.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguard policies are expected to be triggered.  The project would focus on capacity building 
through training and technical assistance.  No civil works or medical infrastructure investments 
are envisaged, nor will there be work on medical waste issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  5
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/28/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/02/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peyvand Khaleghian 
10/05/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
10/19/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
10/19/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
