Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2610
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P074106 
Project Name:  Western Kenya CDD and Flood Mitigation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Nyambura Githagui 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);Flood protection 
(20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Other social services (20%);General water, 
sanitation and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Other social protection and risk 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
85.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.50 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
7.30
13.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to empower local communities of men and 
women to engage in wealth creating activities, lower the incidence of poverty and reduce 
the vulnerability of the poor to adverse outcomes associated with recurrent flooding. 
Progress towards achieving the project development objective will be monitored via a set 
of indicators including:  
 
.
Number of men and women empowered to participate in decision making and 
community and district levels.  
 
.
Increased levels and sources of income of households in project intervention areas  
 
.
Economic cost per hectare resulting from flooding in the Budalangi flood plain   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Community Driven Development  The CDD component will support 
community-prioritized investment projects to improve livelihoods and build demand and 
capacity for local level development at community and district level.  
Page  2
Subcomponent 1.1 Prioritized Investments and Capacity Building at Community Level 
will finance livelihoods-based micro-projects identified by communities, rather than 
individuals so as to spread the benefits to a larger number of people, and enhance their 
capacities to plan, manage and implement development activities. Given the availability 
of other sources of funding for social infrastructure, project financing will support (a) the 
promotion of livelihoods and income generation activities and (b) the support of 
vulnerable groups.  Each micro-project will incorporate a social monitoring mechanism 
to ensure transparency and accountability.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2.  Local Level Development Support will fund priority investments in 
the each of ten project districts whose implementation and impact are beyond the scope 
or individual communities.  
 
Component 2: Flood Mitigation The flood mitigation component will address four 
aspects in the Nzoia River Basins: 1) Catchment management to address catchment 
degradation which exacerbates flooding; 2) the identification and preparation of mid-
catchment multipurpose structural flood protection options; 3) immediate floodplain 
management activities; and 4) the establishment of a flood early warning system. In the 
Catchment Management subcomponent, following the pilot catchment activities being 
carried out by the Lake Victoria North Water Resources Management Authority, key 
micro-catchments will be identified and prioritized for on and off farm catchment 
investments.  In the Multi-purpose Flood Management subcomponent, long-term 
structural solutions to the flooding, including the construction of substantial multi-
purpose storage and attenuation structures, will be fully investigated. The feasibility 
study will include detailed analysis of the various possible sites and options to develop an 
integrated flood management strategy and identification of optimum multi-purpose flood 
protection works, undertaking of all preparation activities , economic analysis, social and 
environmental impact assessments, safeguard assessments (including resettlement, 
compensation, international waters implications, dam safety and instream-flow 
requirements) and finance packaging necessary to prepare for implementation of 
appropriate options. The feasibility study will also determine long-term social, 
environmental and economic impacts, both positive and negative, and determine 
measures to mitigate negative impacts and ensure the sustainability of flood protection 
and other multi-purpose benefits.   The Floodplain Management subcomponent will 
invest in flood mitigation structures in close collaboration with communities, including 
the rehabilitation and strengthening the existing dikes in the flood plain in order to 
provide protection against average seasonal river flows and floods up to a 10 year return 
period event.  The Flood Early Warning System subcomponent will support the 
collection of information on rainfall and river levels in the catchment, as well as 
information from computer modeling and satellite imagery and establish an effective, 
community based flood early warning system, linking international and national 
information systems with local communities.  Linkages will also be established with the 
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) to explore further investment opportunities in the catchment 
area.  
 
Page  3
Component 3: Implementation Support consists of two subcomponents: Subcomponent 
3.1 Support to Policy Analysis, Advocacy and Local Development will support the 
identification and development of new opportunities for economic growth in the region 
through support to research, market assessments, and advocacy work. Support to a 
comprehensive project wide communication strategy will be resourced under this 
component. Subcomponent 3.2 Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation will fund the 
establishment and running of key coordination mechanisms in the Office of the President 
(OP), Special Programmes.  The project coordination structure mirrors the successful 
Arid Lands Resource Management Project, with a strong emphasis on building capacity 
at local level through the empowerment of the District Steering Groups (DSG) in the ten 
project districts, which will be supported by a district project coordinator (DPC) and a 
small staff who will manage development of annual work programs, fiduciary and 
safeguards management. The M&E system will comprise both an internal monitoring and 
information system and an external impact assessment system.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Kenya has 5 critical catchment ecosystems, known also as Kenyas Water Towers that 
provide most of the water for the major rivers in country. These are: Aberdares, 
Cheranganyi, Mau Complex, Mt. Elgon, and Mt. Kenya ecosystems. Activities that 
impact on the quantity, quality, and timing of water flowing from these catchments have 
a
direct effect on community livelihoods and the performance of major sectors of the 
Kenya economy.  
 
The WKCDD/FM project addresses the Mt. Elgon and parts of the Cheranganyi Water 
Towers.  Both the Nzoia River, which originates on Mt. Elgon, and which partly 
originates from the Cheranganyi Hills, drain into Lake Victoria.  The widespread 
deforestation, poor land use practices, steep slope, river bank cultivation and 
environmental degradation that can be observed in the project area all lead to erosion and 
the loss of valuable soil cover which in turn results in very high sediment loads in streams 
and rivers, which is carried downstream and deposited in reservoirs, lakes, wetlands, and 
coastal areas, and reduces the capacity of river channel so that the river overflows the 
banks forming the delta. They are obviously contributing not only to the poverty of the 
local people but to increased vulnerability to both large devastating periodic floods with a 
national impact (especially the El Nino events) as well as local annual floods. For 
example annual floods displace communities in Budalangi area (Busia District) every 
year while periodic floods reduce agricultural production by over 50% about once every 
three years (World Bank, 2006). Given the scientific evidence, managing these floods 
must be approached through a strategy that is anchored in long-term environmental 
management in the catchments. To ensure the success of this project, environment issues 
will be given the necessary focus through measures such as on-farm agro-forestry 
activities, community-based afforestation and reafforestation programs in order to 
increase forest cover with appropriate multiple use tree species (indigenous wherever 
possible), etc. In addition, management of wetlands, springs, riverbanks and riverine 
areas would be part of the critical interventions that ensure sustained goods and services 
from this ecosystem.   
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul A. Francis (AFTS2) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While the project is conceived and designed to have significant positive environment and 
social impacts, the sub-projects will have potential risks of site-specific adverse 
environmental and social impacts especially in the following areas:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) The project is rated Environmental Assessment 
(EA) Category B in recognition of the: (a) need to support a mixture of structural (e.g., 
dykes, small-dams, etc) and non-structural (e.g., flood early waning systems, wetland 
management, floodplain management, catchment management, land use management, 
zoning, etc.) investments in order to deal with shocks associated with the recurrent 
flooding in the project area; and (b) fact that good management of the environment in this 
catchment is crucial to reducing peoples vulnerability to floods, mitigating floods, 
enhancing communities productive potential, sustaining growth of the local and national 
economy.  To satisfy the environmental safeguards, an ESMF was prepared and disclosed 
on January 10, 2007.. The Bank's Environmental Assessment (EA) policy and procedures 
will be fully followed while bearing in mind that the policy stresses that Environmental 
Assessment should be thought of as a process rather than a specific product. The EA 
process takes into account the natural environment (air, water, and land); human health 
and safety; social aspects (involuntary resettlement, indigenous peoples, and cultural 
property) and transboundary and global environmental aspects.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) Project activities in watershed management may directly or 
indirectly result in the conversion or degradation of natural habitats. The ESMF provided 
for adequate management measures to mitigate adverse impact of any activities in the 
project intervention areas.  
Page  5
Forests (OP 4.36)  - The project will assist the borrower to harness the potential of 
forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable manner, integrate forests effectively into 
sustainable economic development, and protect the vital local and global environmental 
services and values or forest, by supporting community based approaches to forest and 
watershed management. This will be done by financing sub-projects that concern the 
management, protection or restoration of forests. Potential forestry-related environmental 
impacts such as introduction of invasive species, reforestation of critical non-forest 
habitats and alterations of hydrological regimes will be addressed through 
implementation of the ESMF. A sector wide analysis of policy and institutional issues 
and constraints has been carried out. A institution-centered strategic environmental 
assessment [Title: Strategic Environmental Assessment of the Kenya Forest Act, 2005] 
was conducted over a period of nine months. This included situational assessments of the 
policy and institutional context of the forest sector, and the overall SEA identified key 
institutional and policy issues that needed to be addressed and potential steps for 
addressing these.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) - In the area covered by the project, there are a 
number of identified religiously important sites that are considered to be culturally 
significant (e.g. forests), and which could be affected through the variety of expected 
micro-initiatives. Furthermore, small or medium scale infrastructure projects (e.g. water 
storage facilities) could disturb culturally significant sites. Therefore consistent with OP 
4.11, the Physical Cultural Resources is triggered and consequently steps to safeguard 
this issue are integrated into the ESMF.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) - During preparation, it became clear that the projects 
might impact on indigenous peoples rights, lands, livelihoods, and culture. To comply 
with international standards, including the World Bank Operational Policy on Indigenous 
Peoples (OP 4.10), the GOK commissioned the elaboration of an Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework (IPPF).  Under OP 4.10, an IPPF is for community-driven 
development projects, social funds, sector investments, financial intermediary loans and 
other projects which involve the preparation and implementation of annual investment 
programs. The purpose of the project IPPF, which was disclosed on January 10, 2007,  is 
to ensure that the development process fully respects the dignity, human rights, 
economies, and culture of indigenous peoples, and that the projects are able to gain the 
broad community support of affected indigenous populations through free, prior, and 
informed consultations. To that end, the IPPF presents guidelines which will enable the 
project to avert any potentially adverse effects on the indigenous peoples' communities; 
or if avoidance proves not to feasible, to minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such 
negative impacts. An additional goal of the IPPF is to ensure that the indigenous peoples 
receive social and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate, and inclusive in both 
gender and intergeneration terms. The report proposes a specific framework to address 
the needs and rights of indigenous peoples in the WKCDD/FM and NRM Projects. This 
is shown to be necessary to mitigate the risks that the challenges facing indigenous 
peoples are not exacerbated. The two projects will work in 24 districts in Western and 
Central Kenya: As regards the groups which the IPPF is required to address, the report 
Page  6
documents that members of the Sengwer ethnic group are found in a structurally 
subordinate position in four of the project districts, and Ogiek in a further four. In some 
districts, it is not clear whether any populations fall within this category. To address this 
lack of information, the projects provide for comprehensive screening mechanisms to 
identify, inform, and consult the Sengwer, Ogiek, and other indigenous peoples in all 
operational areas of the two projects well in advance of any investment or subproject 
implementation, and to enable them to participate fully in conceiving, applying for and 
managing appropriate CDD projects.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) - Some of the activities under the project, including 
conservation measures and small-scale infrastructure development and improvement, 
may require land acquisition that will lead to the involuntary displacement of people 
and/or their land assets present in the project area.  In addition, the project will assist the 
government through its land policy to develop national guidelines for resettlement.  
 
A
resettlement policy framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed on January 10, 
2007, in anticipation of the possibility that the two projects' activities will require 
additional takings of land or the restriction of resource uses which would impinge on 
people?s incomes .  The RPF therefore, provides safeguards against adverse impacts of 
development activities of both the NRM and WKCDD/FM.  It provides procedures and 
means for adequately compensating for the losses the PAPs may incur, in the case that 
resettlement cannot be avoided or when resource use restrictions are unavoidable. The 
RPF includes guidelines for compensation for land contributed voluntarily for the 
Projects without seeking compensation; as well as land acquired involuntarily.  The 
guiding principle for land acquisition shall be that where land is required for 
implementation of the sub- project activities, the recommended safeguards shall be 
observed to reduce the suffering of the affected community members. The RPF is 
intended to assist all funded projects of category (A-C) on NRM and WKCDD/FM. The 
overall responsibility for implementation of this Framework shall reside with the 
implementing agencies.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50) - While the project has no mandated 
assessment requirements, it will trigger the International Waterways safeguard, owing to 
its financing of the consumptive use of water, such as the construction of small- to 
medium-scale water storage facilities in the upper and middle basin of the Nzoia river, 
which drains into the Lake Victoria, the world's second largest freshwater lake that is 
shared by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda and forms the headwaters of the River Nile. The 
requirements of the safeguard were fully addressed through the notification of the 
commencement of the project sent out by the Ministry of Finance on January 9, 2007 to 
the parties of the Nile Basin Agreement and the adherence to the ESMF.  
 
Other safeguard policies, which would not be directly triggered but will be captured 
through the above mentioned WKCDD/FM project safeguard measures, include;  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) - Pesticide use among beneficiary communities of the 
project is currently very low to non-existent. Because it is likely that the project is not 
Page  7
providing support to the purchase or use of pesticides, this safeguard policy is not 
triggered. However the requirement to screen for pesticide use is included in the 
processes set out in the ESMF.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37) The Safety of Dams OP will not be triggered by the 
WKCDD/FM project, as it will not involve the significant investments, such as the 
construction of large dams, in flood mitigation measures in the Nzoia catchment. 
However, further details concerning dam safety are set out in the ESMF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
potential environmental risk would be that through the success of the project by 
rehabilitating and increasing agricultural production in the watersheds, the influx of 
migrants from other areas would be stimulated. These migrants would increase the 
already high land pressure in the project areas, which could lead to further deforestation 
and degradation. The increased influx of migrants into the fragile watersheds could also 
lead to increased use of steep hills for agricultural production, which could increase 
erosion rates. This is why catchment management activities need to integrate 
conservation activities with the requirements of local farmers and communities to 
undertake sustainable economic activity.  
 
The new forest act envisages not only the establishment of a semi-autonomous forest 
service (which is expected to be self sufficient) but also promotes greater involvement for 
the private sector and communities in the management of plantations and natural forests. 
Together with the anticipated lifting of the existing logging ban, this will result in greater 
pressures on forest resources. It is therefore critical to ensure that any harvesting (while 
not financed by the project) is being done according to management plans based on 
agreed and recognized forest management standards.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
All subproject activities will be subjected to environmental, resettlement, and indigenous 
peoples screening, using a series of protocols and templates developed for CDD activities 
in the Africa Region and local committees described in the project environmental and 
social instruments.  These procedures will allow project managers at central and district 
levels to identify and treat any potential adverse impacts, where needed by calling upon 
subject specialists to modify designs or propose alternatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures being taken to address safeguard issues are given above in the section on 
project environmental and social issues identified.  The Capacity Building and remedial 
measures required for the ESMF, the RPF and the IPPF will be funded by both the NRM 
and the WKCDD/FM Project. A total estimated budget of US$ 11.8 Million, US$ 8.1 
Million in the NRM and US$ 3.7 Million in the WKCDD/FM, has been set aside to cover 
all associated costs for resettlement planning, management and implementation as well as 
Page  8
building the institutional and human resources capacities for managing the ESMF, IPPF 
and RAPs. This includes the funds to be allocated for the preparation of annual 
environmental audits which is in accordance with the National Environmental 
Management and Coordination Act of Kenya as well as the World Bank safeguard Policy 
on Environmental Assessment OP /BP 4.01. The training requirements for the 
implementation of the recommendations of the safeguard documents and for overall 
environmental management have been factored both into the above budget and other part 
of the projects' cost in forest, soil and water management that are inherent in the major 
activities of the projects. With regard to the Multi-purpose Flood Management 
subcomponent, Bank's safeguards policies will be brought into in the exercise of 
identification and preparation of multi-purpose flood protection structures in the mid-
catchment zone of the Nzoia River Basin as a way to contribute to the selection and 
design of structures as well as to understand the long-term issues of impact, impact 
mitigation, and sustainability.  
 
Institutional Arrangements for Implementation of the Safeguard Recommendations: The 
two projects will follow the implementation arrangements tested and found satisfactory 
under the Arid Lands Resource Management Project. As the implementation of 
Resettlement Action Plans, Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) and Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) are critical to ensuring sustainable management and 
undisturbed implementation of all the other keys components of the two projects, clarity 
on the institutional arrangements for purposes of carrying of the prescribed actions as 
well as monitoring their out comes is crucial. The project will work with the 
implementing agencies to ensure that the competent authorities are assigned the 
responsibility of carrying out such actions and most importantly ensuring ownership and 
the capacity to mainstream them as part of the core business.  
 
The following is the key remedial measures to be taken by the GOK required for the 
ESMF, the RPF and the IPPF.  
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): The unified ESMF 
prepared for the WKCDD/FM Project and the complimentary NRM Project will allow 
the implementing agencies to identify, assess and mitigate potential negative 
environmental and social impacts of sub projects, and to ensure that proper mitigation 
and possibly the preparation of appropriately costed EAs and Mitigation and 
Management Plans as well as Resettlement Actions Plans (RAPs) where necessary. The 
ESMF presents guidelines and procedures consistent with the Environmental 
Management and Coordination Act of Kenya and the World Bank Policy on 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01.  
 
The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for sub-projects 
which will enable the water service agencies, the forest services, and local communities 
to simultaneously identify potential environmental and social impacts of sub projects and 
to address them through the incorporation of the relevant mitigation and management 
measures. To effectively ensure the minimization or elimination of such negative 
impacts, the ESMF encourages the inclusion of mitigation impacts at the design of sub-
Page  9
projects prior to implementation. Both the WKCDD/FM and the NRM Projects directly 
address environmental and natural resources management issues and poverty reduction, 
and are likely to deliver significant positive environmental and social benefits. Both 
projects will address ongoing problems of environmental destruction and associated 
deepening poverty. Specifically, the two projects will address: (i) forest destruction due 
to encroachment and the resulting loss of water, non-timber forest products, timber, and 
cultural values, and (ii) mitigation through watershed and catchment management and 
flood plain management. While the proposed interventions are anticipated to have 
significant positive impacts on the environment and on the livelihood of the affected 
communities, some of the individual projects that the WKCDD/FM and the NRM 
Projects will be funding may involve some environmental and social risk. The ESMF lays 
out measures to screen and mitigate impacts that may arise during project 
implementation, including the following:  
 
.
Guidance on preparation of comprehensive checklists of potential environmental and 
social impacts and their sources;  
 
.
Systematic procedures for participatory screening of sub project sites and activities and 
the environmental and social considerations;  
 
.
A
step by step approach for forecasting the main potential environmental and social 
impacts of the planned project activities;  
 
.
A
typical environmental management planning process for addressing negative 
externalities in the course of project implementation;  
 
.
A
monitoring system for implementation of mitigation measures; and  
 
.
An outline of recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning 
and monitoring of project activities.  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): In accordance with World Bank social 
safeguard policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12, which has been triggered by 
both the NRM Project and the WKCDD/FM& Project, the GOK is required to prepare a 
social safeguards instrument.  Since the sub projects are not determined in advance, the 
appropriate instrument is the RPF, which will be employed in conjunction with the ESMF 
to ensure that social impacts due to sub-project activities are appropriately addressed. The 
RPF document outlines the principles and procedures to be followed in the event that a 
sub-project leads to land acquisition and/or the loss of livelihoods. The projects will 
ensure that the Framework is publicly disseminated and that the program implementers 
have the requisite skills and knowledge and, where necessary, they have received 
appropriate training to implement the RPF as indicated in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  
 
The District Councils/authorities shall take responsibility for implementation of the RPF 
at respective local authorities, with assistance from other line local offices of the above 
mentioned Government ministries. Should the environmental and social screening results 
indicate that any of the planned sub-projects will lead to land acquisition or loss in 
economic activity or livelihood, the local authorities will apply the principles and 
procedures for compensation as outlined in the RPF. Implementation of the RPF shall 
require a number of steps including:  
Page  10
.
A
full understanding of the project components, particularly those requiring land 
acquisition  
 
.
Determination of land ownership  
 
.
Screening of the project sites and activities  
 
.
Property and asset valuation  
 
.
Preparation and approval of resettlement plans  
 
.
Implementation and monitoring of the resettlement plans  
 
.
Effective redress of complaints and grievances  
 
.
Public consultation and participation  
 
These steps will ensure that the projects are satisfactorily and efficiently implemented to 
effectively address any adverse social, economic and environmental impacts so that 
Project Affected Persons are fairly treated on land acquisition and resettlement. It is, 
however, noted that, while no policy directly equivalent to the Bank's social safeguard 
policies or expressly devoted to safeguarding social issues may exist, the rights of 
citizens and residents of Kenya are nevertheless laid out in the country's constitution and 
further elaborated in various laws and statutes all of which seek to ensure fair play in 
administration of public affairs and conflict whether over land or other natural resources.   
When specific planning information becomes available and the land areas are identified, 
subproject resettlement / compensation plans will be subsequently prepared consistent 
with the RPF and will be submitted to the Bank for approval before any land acquisition, 
resettlement or any other negative impact on livelihood occurs.  
 
Apart from the earlier evictions which took place before the two projects were identified 
and for which data is scarce, it is important to note that the number of PAPs that will 
require resettlement and /or compensation is not yet known. For this reason, it is not 
possible to prepare RAPs at this stage. The NRM Project has however taken it upon itself 
to assist the Government to address the resettlement issues in the projects area of 
influence. To achieve this important objective, the project will have to first carry out a 
comprehensive and participatory survey to map out the issues before any RAP is drawn 
up and implemented. The indicative budget provided by the project includes a provision 
to ensure that resettlement is integrated into the participatory forest management to be 
developed in these areas.  
 
The Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF): The NRM Project will address key 
issues regarding indigenous peoples and other forest dependent communities in the 
projects area of influence. It will attempt to harmonize the forest Policy with the draft 
Lands Policy, implement a participatory forest management, support the elaboration of a 
comprehensive resettlement policy and improve in the operational areas the livelihoods 
of the populations which have been evicted. The Project will ensure that:  
 
.
present and past settlements, land use areas and cultural sites of indigenous peoples are 
comprehensively documented;  
 
.
the indigenous peoples are well represented in all forest and resettlement related 
decision making bodies and processes;  
 
.
a
comprehensive strategy to improve the livelihoods of evicted indigenous peoples is 
elaborated in an open minded and fully participatory options assessment;  
Page  11
.
this  strategy is implemented in a comprehensive and timely manner; and  
 
.
the indigenous peoples are enabled to benefit from participatory forest management 
and reforestation.  
 
The WKCDD/FM Project will fund a two-level screening process to identify possible 
adverse effects on IPs: In primary screening, all groups which are in a structural 
subordinate position to the dominating groups and the state will be identified in all 
operational areas (the 10 districts of the CDD component and the three micro-catchments 
likely to be located within 6 additional districts). The secondary screening will consist of 
a
detailed social assessment undertaken for each of these indigenous communities and 
fulfill the operational requirements of OP 4.10. To implement this strategy, the project 
will (a) assist the indigenous peoples to create an elected Indigenous Peoples? Screening 
Structure (IPSS) in all districts where indigenous peoples use or claim land and/or 
resources, and (b) empower these IPSS to document, in free, prior and informed 
consultations, the indigenous peoples position on all funding requests, which might 
impinge upon their land or resources (as will have been identified in the social 
assessment stage of screening). As the WKCDD/FM will not work in gazetted and 
protected forests, NRM Project will address forest related IP issues in the WKCDD/FM 
operational areas. For subprojects which do not in the first instance gain broad support 
from the affected indigenous peoples, the District Steering Group (DSG) (which decides 
on the funding of subprojects) and the IPSS will search for mutually acceptable solutions. 
Indigenous Peoples Plans can be prepared to assist and reflect transparent decision-
making in the case of controversial subprojects, and will also be elaborated for large scale 
infrastructures (dams etc.), if the screening suggests that rights, livelihoods, and culture 
of the indigenous peoples might be affected. Taken together, the measures described 
above would ensure that negative impacts are avoided.  
 
The projects will apply four mechanisms to ensure that indigenous peoples receive 
cultural appropriate benefits:  (a) support and capacity building will be provided to IP 
communities through the IPSS to assist community planning and applications for 
resources for priority sub-projects;  (b) IP communities will be given priority for 
subproject identification and funding: (c) IP communities will be allowed the option of 
making the required community sub-project contribution in kind (i.e. through labor or the 
supply of local materials); and (d) IP representatives will be invited to sit in relevant 
decision-making bodies at district and catchment level. [e.g. DSG]  
 
The GOK is fully aware that, given their close association with land, forests, water, wild 
life and other natural resources, the physical relocation of indigenous peoples or other 
measures which reduce their access to livelihoods-related activities has complex 
implications and may entail significant adverse impacts. For these important reasons, the 
recommended options analysis will explore all possible options in the most participatory 
manner possible.  
 
Finally, in compliance with the safeguard policy OP 7.50, the notification document has 
been issued to the riparian states of the White Nile, and will also be sent to the Nile Basin 
Council of Ministers and will be presented at the next Council annual meeting in 
March/April 2007.   
Page  12
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations have been carried out extensively with a wide range of stakeholders in 
Western Kenya and Central Province, and with a range of stakeholders at the central / 
national level for the ESMF, the RPF and the IPPF. In preparation of ESMF and RPF, 
consultation has been undertaken during (i) policy formation of the policy and legal 
reforms that the project will support, (ii) design studies that have contributed to the 
preparation of the projects, and (iii) associated with World Bank-led preparation 
missions.  
 
The consulting team undertook a field visit to the project intervention areas in Western 
Province, Nyanza Province and Central Province and meet with District Officers, CBO 
representatives and other stakeholders including the local communities. Please refer to 
the Annexes A, B and D of the ESMF report for further detail in the stakeholder 
consultation process.  
 
Similar meetings and consultation programs have been organized for the preparation of 
IPPF. To apply the well thought through inclusive approach of indigenous and vulnerable 
groups and ensure that all parties are involved in the process but most importantly to 
ensure ownership of the IP processes, the GoK organized a workshop to discuss and 
debate the findings of their consultant on IP issues and to arrive at an agreed upon way 
forward for the implementation of the recommendations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/09/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/09/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  13
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
N/A 
Page  14
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nyambura Githagui 
01/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
01/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Paul A. Francis 
01/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/10/2007 
Comments:   
