37888

offer. Upon successfulcompletion of the project and related certification of the outputs by an independent
program audit consultant (PAC), a subsidy reflecting 40% of total capital expenditure will be provided to
the CWP to prepay a part of the loan from the K-Rep Bank. All participating CWPs will also be eligible
for OBA subsidy for availing external services of a 'Project Manager' to ensure good project management
and delivery of the agreed outputs as well as post-implementationsupport.


"Outputs" are defined as (i) increase in access through individual connections and (ii) improvement of
operating efficiency as measured by revenue collection through user charges. The subsidy amount has
been determined on the basis of an assessment of overall household affordability using average rural
household expenditure in Kenya. The assessment suggests that 40% subsidy (for capital expenditure) is
required to ensure affordable household bills. The remaining loan will be repaid by each CWP through
operational surpluses. This arrangement will ensure injection of discipline in the financing (due diligence
by K-Rep bank) and operations of the CWP.



D. Project location and salient physical characteristicsrelevantto the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The OBA Pilot in Kenya will provide partial subsidiesto about 20 CWPs from within the AWSB area of
jurisdiction which includes the districts of Kiambu, Kajiado, Machakos, Makueni and Thika. Sectionsof
the project districts - for example Kitengelaand Ngong (Kajiado),Athi River and Kangundo (Machakos),
Ruiru and Juja (Thika) are experiencingrapid growth triggeredby spill-overpopulation from the city of
Nairobi. Demand for essential services and infixstructureis growing in tandem with the increase in
population. Makueni district is more rural, and populated by communitiesless dependent upon
livelihoodscentered upon Nairobi.

Climate in the low lying OBA Pilot Project districts of Makueni, Kajiado and Thika is generally semi-
arid but changes to semi-humidwithin the high elevationareas of Kangundo (Machakos),Ngong
(Kajiado), Limuru (Kiambu) and the Aberdare slopes of Thika Districts where mixed farming for both
subsistence and sale is the economicmainstay. With population growth,the demand for residential, trade
and institutional facilities is on the increase which, in addition to intensificationof farminghas created a
huge demand in supply of safe and affordable water. Water supply is generally inadequate within these
districts. The project area is also characterizedby some sub-areasthat have very good groundwater
potential (for borehole drilling or where there are high yield springs).



E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for SafeguardPolicies:

The final recipients of the grant are the community-managedwater projects. They will receive assistance
from independent consultants for preparing their loan applicationsas well as an application to receive a
service provider status through a Service Provision Agreement (SPA) with the AWSB. The consultants
will review the technical proposals and prepare the 'Project Reports' to be submittedto National
EnvironmentalManagement Agency (NEMA) as part of the process of obtaining an EIA License. The
consultantteam that will support the community water project will include a 'Lead Expert' registered
with NEMA.

The consultants will also work with the communityprojects to ensure that the ESMF provisions in the
Environmentaland Social ManagementFramework (ESMF) are followed for each sub-project.No
resettlement is anticipated in these sub-projects.However, each sub-projectwill be screened as per the

provisions in the ESMF to ensure that necessary mitigationmeasures are undertakento avoid any
nep~itiveimpacts associatedwith land issues linked to the sub-projectconstructionactivities.

F. Environmental and Social SafeguardsSpecialistson the Team:

SerigneOmar Fye and Kristine Schwebach.

11. SAFEGUARD POLICIESTHAT MIGHT APPLY
-
                                                                                                      I
Safeguard Po~IcIesTriggered (pleareexplain why)                       Yes           No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
Because there will be someconstruction, there may be adverse impacts. However, these are expected to
be minor, localized, and readily managed. An Environnlend and Social management Framework
(ESMF) will be prepared to guide the planning, design, review and approval of civil works.
Natural Habitats (OPBP 4.04)                                                         X

Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                 X

Pest Management (OP4.09)                                                             X

PhysicalCultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                              X

IndigenousPeoples (OP/BP4.10)                                                        X

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X       I
involuntary resettlementis not mtnticipated. However, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared
to define compensation rules and procedures.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                          X

Projects on International Waterways(OP/BP 7.50)                                      X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                              X




 111. SAFEGUARDPREPARATION PLAN

 A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
     would be prepared:
     N/A

 B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
     ISDS: August 2006



 C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.

    The specific studies and their timing1should be specifiedin the PAD-stage ISDS:

    Environmentaland Social ManagementFramework (ESMF) Report: August 2006
    Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) Report: August 2006.



IV. APPROVALS




1Reminder: The Bank's DisclosurePolicy requiresthat safeguard-related documentsbe disclosedbefore appraisal(i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country,at publicly accessiblelocationsand in a form and languagethat are accessibleto potentially affected
persons.

