Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/23/2006 
Report No.:  AC2370
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P100762 
Project Name:  Kenya Arid Lands Resource Management Project Emergency Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Christine E. Cornelius 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 3, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Animal production 
(30%);Other social services (30%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Participation and civic engagement (S);Other 
environment and natural resources management (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original objective of the project was to enhance food security and reduce livelihood 
vulnerability in drought prone and marginalized communities in 21 arid and semiarid 
districts.  We propose a slight modification to the objectives, to take into account actual 
activities and impact of the program thus far.  The newly worded objective would be 
"reduced livelihood vulnerability, enhanced food security, and improved access to basic 
services in 28 drought prone arid and semi arid districts in Kenya".   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional loan would help finance the costs associated with: (a) scaling up 
both geographically and substantively the successful drought management and long term 
livelihood activities of the Arid Lands project in existing project districts; (b) the 
reimbursement of eligible and audited non-food expenditures associated with the severe 
drought which has affected the arid and semiarid districts of Kenya over the last year; and 
(c) the scale up of the drought contingency fund which is operating under the current 
credit and has been depleted due to the extended nature of the drought.  
 
Page  2
Incremental activities to be financed through additional funds are as follows:  
 
?
Long Term Livelihood Interventions (US$ 25 million).  There is a need to scale 
up activities aimed at improving livelihoods in the drought prone districts.These would 
include additional funding for: (a) drought preparedness and natural resource 
management activities (US$ 10.0 million), including new and improved water supplies, 
natural resource management activities (range and fodder improvement, ecotourism, 
honey, aloe, gum and resin collection, hay production, livestock product value addition), 
other livelihood related infrastructure investments such as irrigation, and other income 
diversification strategies such as investing in women groups; (b) expansion of drought 
management and the early warning system to five additional drought prone districts in 
coast province (Taita Taveta, Lamu, Kilifi, Malindi and Kwale) which were excluded 
from phase two due to resource constraints, and to Meru North, which is drought prone 
and is surrounded by areas covered by Arid Lands (US$ 7 million); (c) scaling up 
community driven development and support to local development in the eleven arid 
districts where demand and capacity to implement exceed existing credit availability 
(US$ 5.2 million); and (d) the cost of extending the project by one year, to allow time for 
incremental investments to take place has also been factored into the three project 
components (US$ 2.8 million).  
 
?
Replenishing the Drought Contingency Fund (US$ 15 million).  This component 
also supports risk prevention and livelihood improvement, but is released on a contingent 
basis at critical points in the drought cycle.  It finances drought mitigation, response and 
recovery activities based on district drought contingency plans developed and endorsed 
by all stakeholders at district level.  This category has been exhausted due to the 
persistent drought situation in many districts since 2003 when this phase of the project 
started.  Following the Bank and Ministry of Finance endorsement to allow the project to 
reallocate Kshs. 89 million this fiscal year for the current drought, emergency funding for 
drought expenditures has continued,.  This funding has allowed the project to fill gaps in 
the nutrition-related response to the high levels of child malnutrition in many districts 
(where NGO/UNICEF support is lacking), livestock interventions (to keep remaining 
animals alive and begin restocking), maintain emergency water supply, and fill other 
immediate and urgent needs and gaps in the current levels of emergency support, which 
are continuously identified and met by the district-based multi-sectoral teams.  During the 
budget speech of June 15, 2006, government has further reinforced its support for the 
drought contingency funding mechanism by announcing an additional GOK contribution 
of Kshs. 500 million for next fiscal year.  The intention is to institutionalize a mechanism 
to which other donors and GOK can contribute, which will fund district drought 
contingency plans, triggered by a clear signals given by the existing and quite robust 
drought early warning system functioning in the 27 most vulnerable districts.  The 
additional financing will fund expenditures such as purchase of livestock during early 
stages of the drought, investments in strategic drought preparedness water supplies for 
humans and animals, repair of critical access roads, and strategic human and animal 
health interventions.  
 
?
Reimbursement of Incremental (pro-poor) Drought Related Expenditures incurred 
by GOK (US$ 20 million)  This financing is necessary to ameliorate the negative impact 
of an additional US$ 85 million the GOK must borrow from the domestic market to cover 
its drought-related expenditures.  The additional financing would cover reimbursement 
Page  3
for up to US$ 20 million of drought-related non-food expenditures incurred after January 
1, 2006.  Treasury has carried out a preliminary assessment through their internal auditors 
of these expenditures made by the ministries of Water, Livestock, Agriculture, Health, 
and Education.  The non-food activities proposed to be financed under this additional 
financing proposal fall squarely within the existing project objectives and description.  
Activities identified to date include water tankering, support to rapid response teams to 
respond to water supply breakdowns, emergency livestock offtake, animal disease 
control, purchase and distribution of seed for food crops, incremental costs due to waiver 
of school fees for secondary schools in drought affected areas, human disease 
management, and therapeutic and supplemental feeding for the sick and malnourished.  
The team has pre-screened the list of expenditures, and the internal auditors have carried 
out a physical verification to confirm their eligibility.  
 
Description of ongoing project.  
 
The existing project has three components: 1) Drought Preparedness and Management; 
2)Community-Driven Development and 3) Local Community Development Support 
Services . The second and third components will be implemented in the eleven arid 
districts of Kenya which were included in the first phase project. The first component has 
been expanded to ten semi-arid districts which suffer regular acute food insecurity related 
to drought, and the additional financing will expand the first component to a further five 
districts.  
 
-
Component I: Drought Preparedness and Management The Drought Preparedness 
and Management Component aims to mitigate the risk posed by drought and other factors 
and to reduce the vulnerability of the population in areas which are characterized by 
frequent acute food insecurity related to drought. The component will promote an 
effective drought cycle management system which has the objective of minimizing the 
need for emergency intervention and enhancing response mechanisms to acute drought 
emergencies. The system is based on three pillars :  
 
1.
An effective institutional and decision-making framework at community, district and 
national level to coordinate and support drought monitoring, mitigation, response and 
recovery  
 
2.
Timely availability of reliable drought status information to aid decision-making at all 
levels; and  
 
3.
Capacity to plan and implement interventions in a timely,effective and efficient 
manner,including the timely availability of funding to finance mitigation and response 
interventions.  
 
-
Component II: Community-Driven Development The Community-Driven 
Development (CDD) component will foster development capacity at the community level 
and below to empower communities to take greater charge of their own development 
agenda and take responsibility for the development choices made. The component 
activities will build upon the significant capacity created during the first phase and 
strengthen existing institutions as well as expanding to other communities in the same 
districts to achieve full coverage and to build up new CDD implementation capacity. The 
Page  4
component will strengthen decentralized and participatory planning and implementation 
procedures at the community level to finance a variety of community priority 
investments. Community micro-projects identified in the CAPs and eligible for project 
financing will fall into three broad categories:  
 
1.
Social Infrastructure and Service Delivery: projects which produce benefits for the 
whole community or a large section of the community. Likely priorities will be in water 
development,  
 
animal and human health, and education provision.  
 
2.
Safety nets: mechanisms targeted and managed by the community to support and 
protect the most vulnerable community members (including marginalized groups, the 
elderly and orphans). These may include restocking and shelter projects.  
 
3.
Productive activities: projects which generate income or other direct benefits to the 
participants. The projects may be implemented by a sub-section of the community, but 
original grants must be repaid into a community-based and managed revolving fund.  
These may include support to animal and other trading activities, production of goods 
such as housing materials for sale, or value adding activities such as grain or rice mills.  
 
A
30%
community contribution will be required across the board for project or CAP 
approval.  The component will finance capacity building of communities and their 
management committees in leadership skills, financial management and procurement; of 
project and MET staff to support  
 
community development processes; visits and study tours to enable the exchange of 
experiences and lessons amongst communities and support staff; and the implementation 
of the approved micro-projects and CAPs. In particular, MET staff will be sufficiently 
trained to assist communities in preparing environmentally and socially sustainable 
project plans and designs.  
 
-
Component III: Local Community Development Support Services The Local 
Community Development Support Services Component aims to establish effective 
systems, structures and services at the district and national level to support local 
development and to create an enabling environment where private and community 
initiatives can flourish. The component activities will address development priorities 
which cut across different communities, and sometimes even across districts, and are 
therefore not likely to be presented as community priorities for funding within the CDD 
component. Two cross-cutting themes will receive particular attention: conflict resolution 
and natural resources management. The project will promote the strengthening of conflict 
resolution mechanisms and strategies initiated during the first phase project, building 
upon traditional as well as new institutions and authorities to reduce insecurity amongst 
the population in the arid lands and increase the opportunities for successful economic 
activities. With respect to natural resource management, the project will promote 
improved natural resource management strategies and planning frameworks at the district 
level, which should guide project and partner intervention, recognizing competing claims 
and continuously increasing competition for natural resources in the arid lands. In 
addition, specific investments will address acute or chronic degradation of natural 
resources and the range.The project will also strengthen the delivery of services which 
are fundamental to support local development initiatives. Interventions will include 
Page  5
capacity building of technical advisory and support service providers in human health, 
animal health and production and crop development.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All three components would continue to be implemented in the arid districts of Kenya 
(Turkana, North Baringo, Samburu, Isiolo, Marasbit, Moyale, Mandera, Wajir, Garissa, 
Ijara and Tana River. These district sare populated almost entirely by pastoral 
communities, with the exception of some riverine communities along the Tana and Dawa 
rivers.  
 
Only one component, the natural resource and drought management component, was 
expanded to ten semiarid districts in the second phase. These districts were chosen due to 
their agro-ecological characteristics (rainfall, and vegetation types of zones 5-7) and 
levels of food insecurity (measured by qualification as WFP emergency food distribution 
districts in the 2001 drought assessment). These districts are Narok,Transmara, Kajiado, 
Makueni, Kitui, Mwingi, Tharaka, Mbeere, Laikipia and West Pokot. Several divisions of 
Nyeri which qualify were included, and managed from Laikipia. The population of these 
districts practice agropastoralism and dryland agriculture.  
 
Additional financing will be used to expand the natural resource and drought 
management component to six semiarid districts which were excluded from the second 
phase due to financial constraints. These are Meru North, Taita Taveta, Lamu, Malindi, 
Kwale and Kilifi. Project activities in the coastal districts will focus on the dry inland 
divisions away from the coast.  
 
Two internationally designated protected areas, Mt. Kulal Biosphere Reserve in 
Marsabit District and Amboseli Biosphere Reserve in Kajiado district , are in the project 
area. Nationally protected areas include Arawale National Reserve in Garissa District; 
Malka Mari National Park in Mandera District; Bisanadi, Rahole, North Kitui National 
Reserves and Kora and Meru National Parks, and Tana River Primate Reserve in 
Kitui/Tana River Districts; Samburu, Buffalo Springs and Shaba National Reserves in 
Samburu and Isiolo Districts; South Turkana, Nasolot, and Central Island National 
Reserves in Turkana District; Sibiloi National Park and Marsabit National Reserve in 
Marsabit District and Masai Mara National Reserve in Narok District.  
 
In the six new districts, protected areas include Tsavo East and Tsavo West national 
parks in Taita Taveta, Boni and Dodori National Reserves in Lamu, and Shimba Hills 
National Reserve in Kwale.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Dan R. Aronson (AFTU1) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Under component one, the project establishes (or improves) in all project districts, 
planning and management mechanisms at the local level which result in communities 
having increased resilience to drought.  Funds are managed at the local level for 
preparedness and initial drought response, as well as continuous monitoring of household 
and environmental welfare indicators. This has an overall beneficial effect through 
reduced conflict, and better understanding of the natural resource base. There are, 
however, minimal risks associated with physical investments designed for drought 
preparedness and drought response, hence a environmental screening and appraisal 
process is used to assess these subprojects and to recommend mitigation measures to 
address them during implementation.  
 
In eleven project districts, investments at the community level support priority needs 
under component two, in accordance with project guidelines (technical and 
environmental). These are be small in scale (less than US$ 10,000) and geographically 
dispersed. In addition, technical support services related to community needs are 
strengthened under component three, with no potential impact on the environment. It is 
not anticipated that the activities funded through the scaling up of the project will have 
any significant large scale or reversible negative impacts, particularly if mitigation 
measures recommended in the EMP are implemented, and the screening process is used 
effectively during subproject identification and appraisal.  
 
Other Safeguards:  
 
Natural Habitats. The project area encompasses many natural habitats, mentioned 
above, which are protected by law. The project does and will operate in areas which 
include or border upon these areas, and other areas which qualify as natural habitats 
under OP 4.36.  The EMP provides measures in the screening process to identify the 
potential for impacts on natural habitats.  
 
Page  7
_
Forestry. Forests, though not a common feature of the project area, do provide 
protection along permanent and seasonal rivers. The EMP provides measures in the 
screening process to identify the potential for impacts on forests which require a formal 
environmental review. The project through the drought management component, and 
through enhanced participatory mechanisms, raises awareness and empowers 
communities to increase protection of water sources  
 
Pest Management. The project could conceivably, through promotion of rainfed or 
irrigated farming, indirectly involve the use of pesticides, although this has not been the 
case thusfar. In addition, it is conceivable that project funds would be used for animal 
pesticides, either directly or indirectly. The EMP provides measures in the screening 
process to identify the potential for impacts, and if triggered then an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan will be required to ensure compliance with the World Bank's policy.  
 
Cultural Property. Unlike many areas in the highlands, there are few areas in pastoral 
areas of Kenya that constitute cultural property in the sense described in OP11.03. Where 
they might occur, microprojects would be unlikely to involve excavation or inundation. 
Furthermore, the project activities will be carried out only in areas selected by the local 
citizens in the pastoral zones, who would give great importance to safeguarding their 
cultural property. Therefore, this safeguard policy is highly unlikely to be applicable.  
 
Indigenous Peoples. The project is implemented mainly with pastoral peoples who form 
the dominant society in districts. They will be the beneficiaries of the project 
investment,therefore they cannot be regarded as "indigenous peoples" in World Bank 
terms, i.e. social groups distinct from the dominant society that are vulnerable to being 
disadvantaged by the project. However, there are several groups of forest dwelling people 
in the project expansion areas (the Ogiek and Dorobo of Narok and Laikipia).  These 
districts are implementing only the drought mitigation and management component, 
which focuses on risks to mostly to pastoral and agropastoral livelihoods.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement. The project does not cause or promote involuntary 
resettlement. As a demand driven project, decisions about movement or settlement will 
be made by the pastoral groups themselves, either as a normal part of the dynamics of 
pastoral households or as a decision of the clan or subclan in the process of their own 
development planning. Furthermore, given the extensive low-value land available to 
pastoral communities, any small parcels used for the construction of micro-projects (such 
as schools or health posts) are not likely to impose a significant cost to any community 
members.  Therefore this safeguard policy is not triggered.  
 
Safety of Dams. This project will not finance large investments aimed at dam 
construction and is in accordance with this safeguard policy.  
 
Projects in International Waters. This project does not foresee any extensive use of 
irrigation water or practices which would pollute water sources, and therefore this policy 
is not triggered.  
 
Page  8
Projects in Disputed Areas. This project does not foresee any possible activities in 
disputed areas and is in accordance with this safeguard policy.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the size of the project area and the dispersed nature of the physical investments 
made under the project, there is likely to be little negative cumulative impact. However 
monitoring the impact on the local environment from initial microproject construction is 
included to learn how to avoid or mitigate localized impacts so that measures can be 
integrated into subsequent activities.  The project is likely to have positive cumulative 
impact. The current phase has already demonstrated that improved planning of mitigation 
and response to drought has resulted in more sustainable management of the natural 
resource base. Decisions about water points and other investments at the district level 
(which are not necessarily financed by this project) are seen by the local decision makers 
through the lens of a commonly developed natural resource plan, both at community and 
district level. The project components thus present a mutually supportive system of 
decision making which promotes sustainable development.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The location of certain small scale activities might have strategic impacts which will 
require more detailed assessment. Water source development in particular is assessed for 
its strategic impact particularly in terms of their location in relation to wet season grazing 
areas, mobility of communities and soil erosion. The EMF identifies types of projects that 
may cause strategic impacts, and ways to ensure that these are taken into account in 
subproject preparation, and approval, through screening tools and technical support to 
community project development.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The first environmental audit identified several challenges and opportunities including 
low technical capacity in the districts, inadequate sensitization of local community groups 
on environmentally sound development, and inadequate funding for NRM activities. The 
borrower has responded by developing an environmental mitigation and monitoring plan 
in every district, detailing how to effectively address the social and environmental 
safeguard issues raised.   The plans offer training schedules for various stakeholders 
participating in the implementation of the project activities.  
 
District Environment Officers from NEMA are key to the successful implementation of 
the EMF, and are being supported by the project to enhance awareness raising, 
undertaking environmental review of sub-projects and conducting effective supervision, 
monitoring and evaluation as well as deriving lessons learned for future applications; they 
are members of the district project teams (to ensure effective integration of environmental 
and social safeguards during project preparation and implementation) The project is 
fostering collaboration among agencies since environmental issues are being captured 
Page  9
within multi-sector activities (not stand-alone environment activities) managed by multi-
sector teams at the district level.  
 
The additional funding will earmark resources to address the issue of adequate funding 
of the natural resource sub-component.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Various stakeholders were involved in conceptualizing the design of the current phase.  
Workshops at the national and local levels were held where various stakeholders 
participated. The project Social Assessment carried out in depth stakeholder analysis and 
provides a participatory plan that will show various entry points for stakeholders at all 
levels.  
 
ALRMP has already developed and introduced an effective participatory approach to 
service delivery based on a good understanding of pastoralist communities. Community 
targeting through PRAs that enables communities to articulate their problems, needs, 
priorities and help in mapping necessary course of action has been effective. The PRAs 
has also been an effective tool for community empowerment. During the preparation of 
the current phase, the PRA methodology was examined further in the light of the new 
project as it extends to other areas, and the need to cover more communities within the 
existing project area. The Mobile Extension Team (MET) concept was further 
strengthened under the current phase, whereby teams work with community members to 
equip them with skills for prioritizing and designing projects geared to meeting their 
needs. Community Development committees that already exist and are continuously 
strengthened so that they are able to take more responsibility in community priority 
setting and management of their own programs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/03/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/09/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  10
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
No 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  11
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Christine E. Cornelius 
06/23/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
06/23/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Dan R. Aronson 
06/23/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
06/23/2006 
Comments:   
