Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC2608
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P095050 
Project Name:  Kenya - Natural Resource Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christine E. Cornelius 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (50%);Flood protection (30%);Irrigation and drainage (20%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Water resource management 
(S);Participation and civic engagement (S);Other social protection and risk management 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
69.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.80 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
2.10
8.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the project are to enhance the institutional capacity to manage water 
and forest resources; reduce the incidence and severity of water shocks in river 
catchments; and improve the livelihoods of communities participating in the co-
management of water and forests.  Achievements under the project will be measured by 
indicators tracking changes in organizations and their performance, in the health of the 
natural resource base, and in welfare of participating communities.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component One, Water Resource Management and Irrigation.  
 
In Subcomponent 1.1 Water Resource Management, support will be provided to the 
Water Resource Management Authority (WRMA), its 7 Regional Offices and 25 sub-
regional offices to ensure that the WRMA undertake essential river and groundwater 
monitoring which in turn will enable it to administer and control the use of water by users 
and begin to reverse the widespread degradation of catchments. Funds for consultation 
and institutional strengthening are also provided. Targeted support will be provided to 
Page  2
catchment area of the Upper Tana River basin, particularly the Aberdares, due to its great 
strategic importance to the national economy.  Activities will include strengthening of the 
information base, improving decision making to include water users, training and 
sensitization of farmers to improve land-use and water conservation methods.  The 
WRMA will target microcatchment hotspots in catchment area of the upper Tana River 
west of the hydroelectric dams and invest one million dollars per year in catchment 
protection activities such as erosion control and terracing, small to medium water storage 
infrastructure and the rehabilitation of existing structures as well as improvement of on-
farm agronomic practices. At the local level implementation will be undertaken by the 
Water Resources Users Associations (WRUAs).  The regional WRMA will work closely 
with the Kenya Forest Service (KFS) to ensure synergies with their work in the gazetted 
forest and with neighboring communities.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2 Consolidation of Irrigation Reforms and Investments.  This 
subcomponent will contribute to sustainable irrigation development through the 
consolidation of reforms of NIB and development of irrigation in the downstream part of 
Nzoia basin and in other existing NIB schemes.  Achieving these objectives will involve 
further restructuring of the NIB along the lines that have been identified and in 
accordance with the Irrigation Policy, and strengthening the role of farmers in scheme 
management. Upon adoption of the Irrigation Policy, the project will also support 
preparation of an Irrigation Strategy and Business Plan, and an Irrigation Act. Once the 
reforms are agreed and approved, the project will support the necessary realignment of 
the key institutions in the sector, including transforming NIB into an irrigation services 
provider and financing targeted investments in the modernization of public irrigation 
schemes. Achievement of the agreed institutional reform agenda satisfactory to IDA 
would trigger investments in irrigation. Five schemes have been proposed for 
rehabilitation, including Mwea, the largest public irrigation scheme in Kenya, Ahero, 
Bunyala, West Kano and Perkerra. In addition, one new scheme (Bunyala/Budalangi, 
3,500ha) will be developed.  
 
Component Two: Management of Forest Resources. Activities planned under 
Subcomponent 2.1 Forest Sector Institutional Reforms will assist the GoK with the 
reforms necessary to transform the Forest Department (FD) to a semi-autonomous Kenya 
Forest Service (KFS) at national level.  The assistance will support formulation and 
implementation of a strategic plan for KFS for enabling socially and environmentally 
sound implementation of the Act and improving revenue capture while increasing 
transparency, accountability and integrity with special emphasis on the improvement of 
the information base for improved development and management of forest plantations 
and better protection and management of indigenous forests. To address the lack of 
reliable data on forest resources, the project will conduct a phased Forest Resources 
Assessment of all forest resources, including a rapid assessment of forests and a more 
detailed inventory of plantations, indigenous forests and farm forests.  Resources will 
also be used for necessary investments in training, equipment and other infrastructure at 
different levels with emphasis on the district level, and technical assistance and training 
for FD staff likely to be made redundant to offer options for private sector employment 
and entrepreneurship.  
Page  3
Under Subcomponent 2.2 Enabling Community Participation and Benefit Sharing, 
assistance will be provided to identify and prioritize an array of partnership models to 
implement the legislative framework and improve benefit sharing based on the subsidiary 
legislation of the Forests Act as a critical guidance for decision-making, management 
responsibilities and benefit-sharing. While not excluding upfront other areas, during 
project preparation it was agreed to initially focus on Kakamega, Mt. Elgon, the 
Aberdares and Upper Tana. Bank financing of this subcomponent will emphasize 
sustainable and participatory forest management. Encroachment of certain forest areas 
and the process for reclaiming these areas has aggravated the already tense relationship 
between encroachers and the GoK, and made enforcement challenging.  To address this 
situation, financing will be provided to formulate and implement a coherent and 
transparent framework to mitigate current and future conflicts over land, customary rights 
and rights of indigenous people. Given the controversies over evictions from Kenya's 
forests, evictions will be stopped until a framework for handling forest land and forest 
rights conflicts can be agreed, and a policy is adopted, acceptable to the GOK and the 
World Bank, which provides as far as possible for the rights of customary and traditional 
rights-holders.  
 
Subcomponent 2.3 Community and Private Sector Investment in Commercial Forestry 
will provide assistance to strengthen institutional support services for the creation of an 
enabling environment for community and private sector involvement in development and 
management of production forests with the aim to revitalize Kenyas forest industries and 
ensure closer integration between forest products manufacturing, harvesting and forest 
management objectives as well as to generate increased rural incomes. Bank financing 
will assist establishing and operationalizing a KFS Investment Center, ensuring 
transparent systems for concession allocation, valuation and tendering are in place, and 
developing capacity in KFS to motivate and manage private investment in sustainable 
forest management.  
 
Component Three Livelihood-based Multisectoral Microcatchment Management 
Investments in the Upper Tana Catchment. Using a Community Driven Development 
(CDD) approach, proposals will be sought from communities in the catchment to invest 
in livelihood enhancing microprojects which support the natural resource base.  For 
example, opportunities to establish afforestation schemes in the watersheds, development 
of private sector/community partnerships for timber, fuelwood and pulp production, 
production and sale of seedlings, introduction of productivity-enhancing techniques of 
agro-forestry or conservation farming, and other investments in on farm agriculture 
development will be considered. Once proposals are selected, targeted engagement with 
communities, employing capacity building techniques and technical training will be used 
to support the communities in implementation of their microprojects.  
 
Component Four Management and Monitoring and Evaluation will provide the 
resources necessary for effective management and monitoring of the project.  
Management of the tasks undertaken by the two line ministries will be mainstreamed 
within the ministries.  The ministries will, however, be strengthened in the financial 
Page  4
management and procurement functions in order to manage the requirements of IDA 
credit management.  Funds will also be made available for the development and 
implementation of a communications strategy.   In addition, an overarching framework 
for monitoring and evaluation will be necessary.  To accomplish the management of 
monitoring and evaluation, each ministry will have a M&E expert assigned.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The key area targeted by the NRM project is the water catchment area of the upper Tana 
River in the South-east Aberdares, one of the 5 critical catchment ecosystems known also 
as Kenyas Water Towers, which provide most of the water for the major rivers in 
country. Specifically, the project activities will cover the area west of the major 
hydroelectric dams, including the districts of Kirinyaga, Muranga, Maragwa, Thika, and 
Nyeri.  
 
Geographically the Tana Catchment Area extends from the crests of Mt. Kenya, the 
Aberdares Ranges and the Nyambene Hills in the north extending southwards to the 
Indian Ocean. It is bounded by the Yatta Plateau to the west and the Kenya - Somali 
border to the east. The Catchment Area covers an area of 126,000 km2, with an estimated 
population of five and half million people who include agriculturalist living on the upper 
parts of the region and the pastoralists living on the lower parts of the region. Tana River, 
Kenyas largest river, supplies water to the hydroelectoric dams, and its catchment is the 
main source of Nairobis main water and electricity supply. The Tana catchment is of 
great strategic importance to the economy of Kenya, it provides Nairobis water which is 
the heart of the countrys economy and it provides hydro-power for KenGen without 
which the economy could not be sustained. This target area provides 90% of Nairobi 
water supply and 65% of all water which flows into the Tana River. Tana Catchment 
Area also boasts several protected and gazetted areas which include four National Parks 
and eight Game Reserves. The major ones being the Aberdares Forest, Mt. Kenya Forest, 
Meru National Park, and Tsavo East National Park.  
 
The catchment area the Upper Tana River basin, particularly the Aberdares, have 
undergone intensive environmental degradation resulting in the siltation of rivers, 
reservoirs and irrigation canals, which in turn exacerbates flooding in the lower parts of 
the basin. Degradation has been caused by encroachment into forests, cultivation on steep 
hillsides and river banks and the use of poor farming methods as people look for arable 
land for food production to feed the increasing population. Thus, proper management and 
conservation of the catchment areas is a key strategic requirement for Kenyas economic 
growth. Because of the widespread nature of the problem it is necessary to target initial 
strategic catchments both to reduce the consequences of degradation and to use these 
activities as pilots to determine the most effective methodologies for achieving integrated 
sustainable catchment management.   
 
In addition, the NRM project will support the Western Kenya Community Driven 
Development and Flood Mitigation (WKCDD/FM) project activities in Western 
Province, particularly where they relate to water resources and forestry management, 
Page  5
including Mt. Elgon, Kakamega and the lower catchment area of Nzoia River in Busia 
and Siaya Districts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul A. Francis (AFTS2) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Asssessment (OP 4.01) The project triggers the Environmental 
Assessment safeguard, and is classified as a Category B project. To satisfy the 
environmental safeguards, an ESMF was prepared and was disclosed on January 10, 
2007. The project is Category B as the investments to be financed will be of a small or 
medium-sized nature. The EA process takes into account the natural environment (air, 
water, and land); human health and safety; social aspects (involuntary resettlement, 
indigenous peoples, and cultural property) and transboundary and global environmental 
aspects.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04)The project triggers OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats). The NRM 
project activities directly concern natural habitats, and may include sub-projects that 
carry direct risks of the conversion or degradation of natural habitats (e.g. irrigation).  
 
Forests (OP 4.36) The project is consistent with OP 4.36, since it assists the GOK to 
harness the potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable manner, integrate 
forests effectively into sustainable economic development, and protect the vital local and 
global environmental services and values of forests, by supporting community based 
approaches to forest and watershed management. This will be done by bringing about 
changes in the management, protection and utilization of natural forests and plantations, 
and directly concerns forest policy and legislation. Potential forestry-related 
environmental impacts such as introduction of invasive species, reforestation of critical 
non-forest habitats and alterations to hydrological regimes will be addressed through 
Page  6
implementation of the ESMF. A sector wide analysis of policy and institutional issues 
and constraints has been carried out. A institution-centered strategic environmental 
assessment [Title: Strategic Environmental Assessment of the Kenya Forest Act, 2005] 
was conducted over a period of nine months. This included situational assessments of the 
policy and institutional context of the forest sector, and the overall SEA identified key 
institutional and policy issues that needed to be addressed and potential steps for 
addressing these.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) In the area covered by the NRM project, there 
are a number of identified religiously important sites that are considered to be culturally 
significant (e.g. forests), and which could be affected through the variety of expected 
micro-initiatives. Furthermore, small or medium large scale infrastructure projects (e.g. 
small dams)could disturb culturally significant sites. Therefore consistent with OP 4.11, 
the Physical Cultural Resources is triggered and consequently steps to safeguard this 
issue are integrated into the ESMF.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) During preparation, it became clear that the projects 
might impact on indigenous peoples rights, lands, livelihoods, and culture. To comply 
with international standards, including the World Banks Operational Policy on 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10), the GOK has commissioned the elaboration of  an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).  Under OP 4.10, an IPPF is for 
community-driven development projects, social funds, sector investments, financial 
intermediary loans and other projects which involve the preparation and implementation 
of annual investment programs. The purpose of this project IPPF is to ensure that the 
development process fully respects the dignity, human rights, economies, and culture of 
indigenous peoples, and that the projects are able to gain the broad community support of 
affected indigenous populations through free, prior, and informed consultations. To that 
end, the IPPF presents guidelines which will enable the project to avert any potentially 
adverse effects on the indigenous peoples' communities; or if avoidance proves not to 
feasible, to minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such negative impacts. An additional 
goal of the IPPF is to ensure that the indigenous peoples receive social and economic 
benefits that are culturally appropriate, and inclusive in both gender and intergeneration 
terms. The report, which was disclosed on January 10, 2007, proposes a specific 
framework to address the needs and rights of indigenous peoples in the WKCDD/FM and 
NRM Projects. This is shown to be necessary to mitigate the risks that the challenges 
facing indigenous peoples are not exacerbated. The two projects will work in 24 districts 
in Western and Central Kenya: As regards the groups which the IPPF is required to 
address, the report documents that members of the Sengwer ethnic group are found in a 
structurally subordinate position in four of the project districts, and Ogiek in a further 
four. In some districts, it is not clear whether any populations fall within this category. To 
address this lack of information, the projects provide for comprehensive screening 
mechanisms to identify, inform, and consult the Sengwer, Ogiek, and other indigenous 
peoples in all operational areas of the two projects well in advance of any investment or 
subproject implementation, and to enable them to participate fully in conceiving, 
applying for and managing appropriate CDD projects.  
 
Page  7
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) Some of the anticipated activities under the project, 
including conservation measures and small-scale infrastructure development and 
improvement for catchent management, development of new irrigation schemes in the 
Nzoia basin and rehabilitation of existing schemes, and implementation of a strategy 
under the forest management component to mitigate current and future conflict over land 
in Kakamega, Mt. Elgon, the Aberdares and Upper Tana, may require land acquisition 
that will lead to the involuntary displacement of people and/or their land assets present in 
the project area. In addition, the project will assist the government through its land policy 
to develop national guidelines for resettlement.  
 
A
resettlement policy framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed on January 10, 
2007 in anticipation of the possibility that the two projects' activities will require 
additional takings of land or the restriction of resource uses which would impinge on 
people?s incomes. The RPF therefore, provides safeguards against adverse impacts of 
development activities of both the NRM and WKCDD/FM.  It provides procedures and 
means for adequately compensating for the losses the PAPs may incur, in the case that 
resettlement cannot be avoided or when resource use restrictions are unavoidable. The 
RPF includes guidelines for compensation for land contributed voluntarily for the 
Projects without seeking compensation; as well as land acquired involuntarily.  The 
guiding principle for land acquisition shall be that where land is required for 
implementation of the sub- project activities, the recommended safeguards shall be 
observed to reduce the suffering of the affected community members.  Specific RAPs 
will be developed whenever any of the project intervention areas will involve such 
displacement. No investment will be accepted for financing under the Bank's support to 
the project until there is an acceptable resettlement plan. The RPF is intended to assist all 
funded projects of category (A-C) on NRM and WKCDD/FM. The overall responsibility 
for implementation of this Framework shall reside with the implementing agencies.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50).  While the project has no mandated 
assessment requirements, it would still fall within the OP 7.50 policy and require 
International Waterways Notification as the sub-projects will include the consumptive 
use of water, such as the investment in irrigation storage in the lower basin of the Nzoia 
river, which drains into the Lake Victoria, the world's second largest freshwater lake that 
is shared by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda and forms the headwaters of the River Nile. 
The requirements of the safeguard were fully addressed through the notification of the 
commencement of the project sent out by the Ministry of Finance to the parties to the 
Nile Basin Agreement on January 9, 2007.  
 
Other safeguard policies, which would not be directly triggered but will be captured 
through the above mentioned project safeguard measures include:  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) Pesticide use among beneficiary communities of the project 
is currently very low to non-existent. Because it is likely that the project is not providing 
support to the purchase or use of pesticides, this safeguard policy is not triggered. 
However the requirement to screen for pesticide use is included in the processes set out in 
the ESMF.  
Page  8
Safety of Dams (OP4.37) The project is not anticipating the construction of large dams 
as defined in the safeguard policy. The NRM project will operate in the Tana catchment 
that encompasses a dam, but effects dam operation or risks to the NRM project from this 
dam are negligible. However, further details concerning dam safety are set out in the 
ESMF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
potential environmental risk would be that through the success of the project by 
rehabilitating and increasing agricultural production in the watersheds, the influx of 
migrants from other areas would be stimulated. These migrants would increase the 
already high land pressure in the project areas areas, which could lead to further 
deforestation and degradation. The increased influx of migrants into the fragile 
watersheds could also lead to increased use of steep hills for agricultural production, 
which could increase erosion rates. This is why catchment management activities need to 
integrate conservation activities with the requirements of local farmers and communities 
to undertake sustainable economic activity.  
 
The new forest act envisages not only the establishment of a semi-autonomous forest 
service (which is expected to be self sufficient) but also promotes greater involvement for 
the private sector and communities in the managment of plantations and natural forests. 
Together with the anticipated lifting of the existing logging ban, this will result in greater 
pressures on forest resources.  It is therefore critical to ensure that any harvesing (while 
not financed by the project) is being done according to management plans based on 
agreed and recognized forest management standards.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
All subproject activities will be subjected to environmental, resettlement, and indigenous 
peoples screening, using a series of protocols and templates developed for CDD activities 
in the Africa Region and local committees described in the project environmental and 
social instruments.  These procedures will allow project managers at central and district 
levels to identify and treat any potential adverse impacts, where needed by calling upon 
subject specialists to modify designs or propose alternatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures being taken to address safeguard issues are given above in the section on 
project environmental and social issues identified.  The Capacity Building and remedial 
measures required for the ESMF, the RPF and the IPPF will be funded by both the NRM 
and the WKCDD/FM Project. A total estimated budget of US$ 11.8 Million, US$ 8.1 
Million in the NRM and US$ 3.7 Million in the WKCDD/FM, has been set aside to cover 
all associated costs for resettlement planning, management and implementation as well as 
building the institutional and human resources capacities for managing the ESMF, IPPF 
and RAPs. This includes the funds to be allocated for the preparation of annual 
Page  9
environmental audits which is in accordance with the National Environmental 
Management and Coordination Act of Kenya as well as the World Bank safeguard Policy 
on Environmental Assessment OP /BP 4.01. The training requirements for the 
implementation of the recommendations of the safeguard documents and for overall 
environmental management have been factored both into the above budget and other part 
of the projects' cost in forest, soil and water management that are inherent in the major 
activities of the projects.  
 
Institutional Arrangements for Implementation of the Safeguard Recommendations: The 
two projects will follow the implementation arrangements tested and found satisfactory 
under the Arid Lands Resource Management Project. As the implementation of 
Resettlement Action Plans, Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) and Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) are critical to ensuring sustainable management and 
undisturbed implementation of all the other keys components of the two projects, clarity 
on the institutional arrangements for purposes of carrying of the prescribed actions as 
well as monitoring their out comes is crucial. The project will work with the 
implementing agencies to ensure that the competent authorities are assigned the 
responsibility of carrying out such actions and most importantly ensuring ownership and 
the capacity to mainstream them as part of the core business.  
 
The following is the key remedial measures to be taken by the GOK required for the 
ESMF, the RPF and the IPPF.  
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): The unified ESMF 
prepared for the WKCDD/FM Project and the complimentary NRM Project will allow 
the implementing agencies to identify, assess and mitigate potential negative 
environmental and social impacts of sub projects, and to ensure that proper mitigation 
and possibly the preparation of appropriately costed EAs and Mitigation and 
Management Plans as well as Resettlement Actions Plans (RAPs) where necessary. The 
ESMF presents guidelines and procedures consistent with the Environmental 
Management and Coordination Act of Kenya and the World Bank Policy on 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01.  
 
The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for sub-projects 
which will enable the water service agencies, the forest services, and local communities 
to simultaneously identify potential environmental and social impacts of sub projects and 
to address them through the incorporation of the relevant mitigation and management 
measures. To effectively ensure the minimization or elimination of such negative 
impacts, the ESMF encourages the inclusion of mitigation impacts at the design of sub-
projects prior to implementation. Both the WKCDD/FM and the NRM Projects directly 
address environmental and natural resources management issues and poverty reduction, 
and are likely to deliver significant positive environmental and social benefits. Both 
projects will address ongoing problems of environmental destruction and associated 
deepening poverty. Specifically, the two projects will address: (i) forest destruction due 
to encroachment and the resulting loss of water, non-timber forest products, timber, and 
cultural values, and (ii) mitigation through watershed and catchment management and 
Page  10
flood plain management. While the proposed interventions are anticipated to have 
significant positive impacts on the environment and on the livelihood of the affected 
communities, some of the individual projects that the WKCDD/FM and the NRM 
Projects will be funding may involve some environmental and social risk. The ESMF lays 
out measures to screen and mitigate impacts that may arise during project 
implementation, including the following:  
 
.
Guidance on preparation of comprehensive checklists of potential environmental and 
social impacts and their sources;  
 
Systematic procedures for participatory screening of sub project sites and activities and 
the environmental and social considerations;  
 
.
A
step by step approach for forecasting the main potential environmental and social 
impacts of the planned project activities;  
 
.
A
typical environmental management planning process for addressing negative 
externalities in the course of project implementation;  
 
.
A
monitoring system for implementation of mitigation measures; and  
 
.
An outline of recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning 
and monitoring of project activities.  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): In accordance with World Bank social 
safeguard policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12, which has been triggered by 
both the NRM Project and the WKCDD/FM Project, the GOK is required to prepare a 
social safeguards instrument.  Since the sub projects are not determined in advance, the 
appropriate instrument is the RPF, which will be employed in conjunction with the ESMF 
to ensure that social impacts due to sub-project activities are appropriately addressed. The 
RPF document outlines the principles and procedures to be followed in the event that a 
sub-project leads to land acquisition and/or the loss of livelihoods. The projects will 
ensure that the Framework is publicly disseminated and that the program implementers 
have the requisite skills and knowledge and, where necessary, they have received 
appropriate training to implement the RPF as indicated in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  
 
The District Councils/authorities shall take responsibility for implementation of the RPF 
at respective local authorities, with assistance from other line local offices of the above 
mentioned Government ministries. Should the environmental and social screening results 
indicate that any of the planned sub-projects will lead to land acquisition or loss in 
economic activity or livelihood, the local authorities will apply the principles and 
procedures for compensation as outlined in the RPF. Implementation of the RPF shall 
require a number of steps including:  
 
.
A
full understanding of the project components, particularly those requiring land 
acquisition  
 
.
Determination of land ownership  
 
.
Screening of the project sites and activities  
 
.
Property and asset valuation  
 
.
Preparation and approval of resettlement plans  
 
.
Implementation and monitoring of the resettlement plans  
 
.
Effective redress of complaints and grievances  
Page  11
.
Public consultation and participation  
 
These steps will ensure that the projects are satisfactorily and efficiently implemented to 
effectively address any adverse social, economic and environmental impacts so that 
Project Affected Persons are fairly treated on land acquisition and resettlement. It is, 
however, noted that, while no policy directly equivalent to the Bank's social safeguard 
policies or expressly devoted to safeguarding social issues may exist, the rights of 
citizens and residents of Kenya are nevertheless laid out in the country's constitution and 
further elaborated in various laws and statutes all of which seek to ensure fair play in 
administration of public affairs and conflict whether over land or other natural resources.   
When specific planning information becomes available and the land areas are identified, 
subproject resettlement / compensation plans will be subsequently prepared consistent 
with the RPF and will be submitted to the Bank for approval before any land acquisition, 
resettlement or any other negative impact on livelihood occurs.  
 
Apart from the earlier evictions which took place before the two projects were identified 
and for which data is scarce, it is important to note that the number of PAPs that will 
require resettlement and /or compensation is not yet known. For this reason, it is not 
possible to prepare RAPs at this stage. The NRM Project has however taken it upon itself 
to assist the Government to address the resettlement issues in the projects area of 
influence. To achieve this important objective, the project will have to first carry out a 
comprehensive and participatory survey to map out the issues before any RAP is drawn 
up and implemented. The indicative budget provided by the project includes a provision 
to ensure that resettlement is integrated into the participatory forest management to be 
developed in these areas.  
 
The Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF): The NRM Project will address key 
issues regarding indigenous peoples and other forest dependent communities in the 
projects area of influence. It will attempt to harmonize the forest Policy with the draft 
Lands Policy, implement a participatory forest management, support the elaboration of a 
comprehensive resettlement policy and improve in the operational areas the livelihoods 
of the populations which have been evicted. The Project will ensure that:  
 
.
present and past settlements, land use areas and cultural sites of indigenous peoples are 
comprehensively documented;  
 
.
the indigenous peoples are well represented in all forest and resettlement related 
decision making bodies and processes;  
 
.
a
comprehensive strategy to improve the livelihoods of evicted indigenous peoples is 
elaborated in an open minded and fully participatory options assessment;  
 
.
this  strategy is implemented in a comprehensive and timely manner; and  
 
.
the indigenous peoples are enabled to benefit from participatory forest management 
and reforestation.  
 
The projects will apply four mechanisms to ensure that indigenous peoples receive 
cultural appropriate benefits:  (a) support and capacity building will be provided to IP 
communities through the IPSS to assist community planning and applications for 
resources for priority sub-projects;  (b) IP communities will be given priority for 
Page  12
subproject identification and funding: (c) IP communities will be allowed the option of 
making the required community sub-project contribution in kind (i.e. through labor or the 
supply of local materials); and (d) IP representatives will be invited to sit in relevant 
decision-making bodies at district and catchment level. [e.g. DSG]  
 
The GOK is fully aware that, given their close association with land, forests, water, wild 
life and other natural resources, the physical relocation of indigenous peoples or other 
measures which reduce their access to livelihoods-related activities has complex 
implications and may entail significant adverse impacts. For these important reasons, the 
recommended options analysis will explore all possible options in the most participatory 
manner possible.  
 
Finally, in compliance with the safeguard policy OP 7.50, the notification document has 
bee issued to the riparian states of the White Nile, and will also be sent to the Nile Basin 
Council of Ministers and will be presented at the next Council annual meeting in 
March/April 2007.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations have been carried out extensively with a wide range of stakeholders in 
Western Kenya and Central Province, and with a range of stakeholders at the central / 
national level for the ESMF, the RPF and the IPPF. In preparation of ESMF and RPF, 
consultation has been undertaken during (i) policy formation of the policy and legal 
reforms that the project will support, (ii) design studies that have contributed to the 
preparation of the projects, and (iii) associated with World Bank-led preparation 
missions.  
 
The consulting team undertook a field visit to the project intervention areas in Western 
Province, Nyanza Province and Central Province and meet with District Officers, CBO 
representatives and other stakeholders including the local communities. Please refer to 
the Annexes A, B and D of the ESMF report for further detail in the stakeholder 
consultation process.  
 
Similar meetings and consultation programs have been organized for the preparation of 
IPPF. To apply the well thought through inclusive approach of indigenous and vulnerable 
groups and ensure that all parties are involved in the process but most importantly to 
ensure ownership of the IP processes, the GoK organized a workshop to discuss and 
debate the findings of their consultant on IP issues and to arrive at an agreed upon way 
forward for the implementation of the recommendations. Please refer to the Annexes 2, 3, 
4
and 5 of the IPPF report for further detail in the stakeholder consultation process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/09/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Page  13
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/09/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  14
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  15
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Christine E. Cornelius 
01/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
01/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Paul A. Francis 
01/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/10/2007 
Comments:   
