Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2570 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P091979 
Project Name: Kenya: Adaptation to Climate Change in Arid Lands 
Task Team Leader: Christine E. Cornelius 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the KACCAL project is to assist Kenya in adapting to expected changes in 
climatic conditions that otherwise threaten the sustainability of rural livelihoods in its arid and 
semi-arid lands. Based on an evaluation of the sustainability of livelihood activities, the project 
will focus on i) reducing the near-term vulnerability to current climate variability and trends in 
conjunction with the Arid Lands Resource Management Project (ALRMP), and on ii) 
strengthening the medium to long-term ability to address climate change impacts related to 
increased climatic variability and higher temperature, associated with changes of magnitude and 
frequency of extremes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The GEF supported project will focus on at least five districts under the ALRMP and will have 
the following four components. The components focus on building a comprehensive climate risk 
management approach by connecting activities at the local, sub-national and national level and 
engaging a broad range of stakeholder groups.  
Page  2
Component 1: Improve national coordination of information and action for management of 
climatic risk (Total cost: USD 8.1 million; SCCF Increment: USD 0.8 million; IDA baseline: 
USD 6.5 million; Local: USD 0.8 million) 
 
Institutional efforts focused on disaster risk management and climate change are still largely 
fragmented.  This component focuses on strengthening capacities among institutions jointly to 
understand and respond to current and future climate risks. 
 
Component 2: Integrate a long-term climate-risk perspective into local/district planning and 
investments and support to engage private sector for climate risk reduction (Total cost: USD 
15.05 million; SCCF Increment: USD 1.75 million; IDA baseline: USD 12.2 million: Local: 
USD 1.1 million) 
 
This component focuses on incorporating a long-term perspective into local level (district and 
community) planning processes, identifying implications for public and private sector 
investments, and assessing opportunities for economic diversification to reduce vulnerabilities to 
climate risks over time. The goal is to provide local and district level governments with the tools 
and knowledge to facilitate a shift from unsustainable activities towards those that are less 
vulnerable to climate risks.  
 
Component 3: Support Community Driven initiatives to enhance long-term livelihoods 
strategies (Total cost: USD 21.11 million; SCCF Increment: USD 3.51 million; IDA baseline: 
USD 17.3 million; Local: USD 2.02 million) 
 
KACCAL will enhance the ALRMP?s CDD approach to foster appropriate climate risk 
management strategies and investments at the community level. These will focus on activities 
that address impacts related to expected higher temperature as well as increased variability and 
intensity of droughts and precipitation. The component activities will be concentrated in the 4-5 
pilot districts. 
 
Component 4: Program management, technical assistance, project and impact monitoring and 
evaluation, and regional knowledge sharing (Total cost: USD 6.2 million; SCCF Increment: USD 
1.4 million; IDA baseline: USD 4.0 million) 
 
This component will provide support to enhance the ALRMP secretariat to support the 
implementation of the additional KACCAL mandate and activities. It will involve building 
capacity at the secretariat level on climate risk related issues enabling it to develop project 
management processes that capture the information flows and allow targeted responses. Given, 
the weaknesses in capacity in climate change related technical issues, the secretariat will act as a 
hub through which technical assistance can be channeled appropriately. It will also be 
responsible for the monitoring of KACCAL project processes and performance (i.e. both project 
outputs and impact monitoring) and evaluation of implementation. The ARLMP-KACCAL 
secretariat will be responsible for ensuring appropriate documentation and reporting of lessons 
learned to facilitate replicability and scaling-up, within the ASALs as well as in other climate-
affected areas in the region and beyond. It will also contribute to regional knowledge learning 
and sharing activities that build on a base of adaptation related experiences. 
 
The project will acheive this by strengthening institutional and technical capacity to manage 
current and future climate risks across scales, by specifically including the risks of climate 
Page  3
change into the local and national strategies and activities that affect sustainable livelihood in 
ASALs and by supporting innovative initiatives to diversify and improve long-term livelihoods 
by engaging local communities and the private sector. The project will take the following 
approach:  
 
1. At the local level, emphasis is placed on reducing the existing adaptation deficit revealed by 
current climate hazards that frequently translate into disasters. This is to be achieved by 
strengthening efforts to make early warning and seasonal climate forecasts accessible to 
vulnerable stakeholders in ASALs, while also strengthening their capacity to act upon 
information through improvement of agricultural extension services and training in natural 
resource management.  
 
2. At the governance and institutional level, the project focuses on strengthening the link 
between disaster risk management and climate change to ensure that development and 
operational planning, policy processes, and incentive systems address existing vulnerabilities, 
but also account for important climatic changes to avoid processes, which are maladaptive in 
medium to long-term. In this context, efforts will focus on supporting emerging development of 
partnerships and information sharing mechanisms, which bring together technical, development 
and policy perspectives and are essential for establishing a continuous economic framework for 
disaster and climate risk reduction.  
 
3. While public sector support is important for strengthening climate risk management within 
development processes, the project recognizes that long-term sustainability can only be achieved 
through the inclusion of the private sector. It is also noted that the additional burden of climate 
change will make some livelihoods unsustainable. Hence, the project also focuses on 
opportunities for economic diversification to initiate a process of providing Kenya?s rural 
population with alternative livelihood perspectives. The CDD component will help strengthen 
the long-term perspective towards reducing climate related risk in investment choices at the 
community level, and facilitate and support micro-projects oriented towards mitigating that risk. 
The projects will also examine the viability of insurance and micro-credit schemes for buffering 
rural livelihoods against climatic shocks, while also linking such schemes to incentives for 
vulnerability reduction in the near to medium term.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is focused on livelihoods in Arid and Semi-Arid Lands of Kenya. Activities at the 
community level will be carried out in five districts, representing a cross-section of 
environmental and livelihood characteristics. The list of districts and detailed project location 
will be based on the outcomes of the preparatory activities, which include Mwingi, Garissa, 
Turkana, Malindi, and Marsabit.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower's institutional capacity for implementing safeguard policies is high. The KACCAL 
project will follow the institutional and implementation arrangements that have been put in place 
for the ALRMP II project. These arrangements have proved highly successful for the ALRMP 
project. Overall project coordiantion of the KACCAL will remain with the PCU established 
under ALRMP in the Office of the President, and effective coordination mechanisms to the 
Page  4
district and community level.  At the national level, a staff member has been appointed within 
the ALRMP PMU with a specific responsibility for addressing environmental issues. Also at the 
national level, the full-time environmental officer has been hired to provide technical 
backstopping on all aspects of environmental mitigation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is expected to be a Category B project. The Environmental Assessment and 
Management Framework prepared for the ALRMP II (covers KACCAL districts) determined 
that there will not be any potential large-scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts 
associated with potential micro-projects. However, implementation of the project could lead to 
adverse environmental impacts that are localized in nature. The ALRMP II has prepared an EMF 
that will help identify potential environmental issues and proposes mitigation measures, 
including training and monitoring measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The policy could be triggered given the likelihood that project activities could border or 
operate in natural habitats or protected areas. The EMF that has been prepared will help identify 
any potential impacts on natural habitats and proposes mitigation measures. Additionally, 
ALRMP II has prepared a baseline NRM and ecological survey of the area as well as a national 
ASAL NRM strategy which covers the KACCAL districts. The EIA/EMF will be revised to 
include results from these studies.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Potential project activities including small-scale infrastructure could induce pressure on 
forest resources.  The EMF that has been prepared provides measures in the screening process to 
identify impacts on forests and forest resources. Moreover, through highly participatory 
mechanisms built into the CDD design, the project will raise awareness and empower 
communities to increase protection of forests and other resources.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Project activities such as rain-fed or irrigated farming could directly or indirectly increase the 
use of pesticides. To mitigate against pesticide use, the screening and review mechanism 
included in the EMF will identify such potential micro-projects. These micro-projects will 
require the preparation a brief IPM Plan or a PMP, which will ensure that the micro-project will 
not result in pesticide use or introduction.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
It is highly unlikely that this policy will be triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  5
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/26/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Assessment and Management Framework, prepared for the ALRMP will 
be revised as appropriate and disclosed prior to appraisal. During the preparation of ALRMP, 
a
social analysis (SA) was carried out, and a summary will be attached to the PAD.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Christine E. Cornelius 
09/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
09/27/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
