Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2487 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/10/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P096367 
Project Name: WATER AND SANITATION SERVICE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Fook Chuan Eng 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (80%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the project are to: (a) increase access to reliable, affordable and 
sustainable water supply and sanitation services; and (b) to improve the water and wastewater 
services in the areas served by Athi Water Services Board (AWSB), Lake Victoria North Water 
Services Board (LVNWSB) and Coast Water Services Board (CWSB).  This will be achieved by 
(i) rehabilitating selected existing water production, transmission, storage and distribution 
facilities and wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities, (ii) expanding piped water 
supply services to under-served areas (including urban slums) through a balanced program 
including the involvement of communities in decision making and extension of primary and 
secondary distribution pipes where required, and (iii) refining and strengthening the institutional 
structure, emphasizing on increasing accountability and transparency of the institutional and 
governance and management framework.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1:  Rehabilitation and Extension of Water Supply Facilities.  Support the 
rehabilitation of existing water supply systems including transmission pipelines, water treatment 
works, storage, water distribution networks, boreholes; construction of water treatment works in 
selected small towns; and extension of water distribution networks and metering.  This 
Page  2
component is focused on improving and expanding reliable, sustainable and affordable safe 
water supply to consumers.  
 
Component 2:  Rehabilitation and Extension of Wastewater and Sanitation Facilities.  Support 
the rehabilitation of sewerage networks and sewage treatment facilities; extension of existing 
networks; construction of sewerage systems in selected small towns (of less than 2,500m3/d 
each); on-plot sanitation; and hygiene campaigns. This component is focused on improving 
treatment and disposal of wastewater.  The rehabilitation of deteriorated wastewater treatment 
and construction of facilities would result in overall environmental benefits.  
 
Component 3:  Institutional Strengthening Program.  Support (i) selected equipment and 
activities aimed at strengthening the commercial, financial and technical operations of AWSB, 
CWSB and LVNWSB and their water services providers; (ii) technical assistance for monitoring 
and evaluation, engineering, financial, legal, assets valuation, audits, informal settlements WSS 
program, communications, environmental monitoring, and independent assessments of the 
institutional framework; (iii) programs to increase oversight and transparency of service 
delivery; and (iv) training and capacity building.  This component is focused on strengthening 
the service delivery framework, governance and transparency, and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Investment proposals are currently being developed by AWSB, LVNWSB and CWSB from 
which a specific set of priority investments could be selected for financing.Preliminary estimates 
are for development partners to contribute US$190m of which donor partners Agence Fran?aise 
de D?veloppement (AFD) and Kreditanstalt f?r Wiederaufbau (KfW) would contribute about 
$35m each, leaving about $120m for Bank financing (unless other development partners, such as 
the Japanese development agencies, come into the picture).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nairobi City and surrounding districts (AWSB area), Mombasa and Coastal Region (CWSB 
area), and Nzoia Region (LVNWSB area).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Environmental Management and Co-ordination Act 1999, is the legislation that governs EIA 
studies. The law has made provisions for the establishment of the National Environment 
Management Authority (NEMA), which has the statutory mandate to supervise and co-ordinate 
all environmental activities. The capacity of NEMA is growing but remain inadequate for 
management of environmental issues in all sectors.  While there are specific operational staffs 
with experience in these aspects (including managing large infrastructure projects and issues 
related to environmental mitigation plans and compensation issues), the institutions themselves 
are relatively new.  The capacity at AWSB, LVNWSB and CWSB are varied.  There is therefore 
limited institutional capacity at the water services boards and providers to effectively address and 
mitigate environmental and social safeguards issues.  The proposed project will support measure 
that will strengthen the Borrower?s capacity to identify and assess potential adverse 
environmental and social impacts and implement appropriate mitigation measures.  These will 
include capacity building measures tailored as necessary to the various sector institutions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) Policy will be triggered by the proposed 
project due to its focus on rehabilitation, construction and extension of water supply and 
sanitation systems. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared to identify, assess and mitigate likely negative environmental and social impacts of the  
project. The ESMF will be disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Involuntary Resettlement (Op/BP 4.12) Policy will be triggered by the proposed project 
because project activities such as rehabilitation, construction and extension of water supply and 
sanitation facilities can result in temporary or permanent loss of land, crops, and other means of 
income generation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to handle such 
unforeseen circumstances. The RPF document will be disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
(1) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): November 1, 2006 - April 
1, 2007  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
(2) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): November 1, 2006 - April 1, 2007  
 
These documents will be prepared , reviewed and approved by the Bank and the Borrower 
and disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop and in country prior to project Appraisal  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fook Chuan Eng 
10/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/11/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
10/11/2006 
Comments:   
