Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1548 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/13/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P095050 
Project Name: Kenya - Natural Resource Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Christine E. Cornelius 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 12, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (80%);Flood protection (20%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Water resource management 
(S);Participation and civic engagement (S);Other social protection and risk management 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
10.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project are to enhance the institutional capacity to manage water and forest 
resources; reduce the incidence and severity of water shocks in the Aberdares catchment in 
particular; and improve the livelihoods of communities participating in the co-management of 
water and forests.  Achievements under the project will be measured by indicators tracking 
changes in organizations and their performance, in the health of the natural resource base, and in 
welfare of participating communities (including in the latter indicator frequency and severity of 
shocks).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project has four components: Management of Water Resources, Management of Forest 
Resources, Assistance to Communities, and Management and M&E.  The first two components 
support the legal and institutional reforms contained in recent legislation, as well as investments 
in the two catchment areas.  The third component provides assistance to communities 
Page  2
participating in management of the resources.  The fourth provides managerial oversight and 
monitoring and evaluation for the project.  
 
Component One 
–
Water Resource Management (US$ 25 million):  
 
Legal and Institutional Strengthening, and Identification of Priority Investments (Estimated cost 
US$5m):  Technical assistance will be engaged to contribute to realignment of existing laws, 
policy, and regulations following upon promulgation of the 2002 Water Act, specifically to 
ensure the effective functioning of the Water Resource Management Authorities.  Pre-feasibility 
studies will also be undertaken for priority investments in the South-east Aberdares and South-
west Mt Kenya catchments (which are key to the water supply to Nairobi and hydropower 
generation). The legal and institutional activities will also support work to be carried out under 
the Western Kenya CDD and Flood Mitigation Project.  
 
Catchment Investments (Estimated cost US$10m):  The focus will be on management of the 
upper Tana River in the South-east Aberdares and South-west Mt Kenya catchments, 
strengthening of the information base, decision making, and enforcement of allocations, and 
investment in new small to medium size storage infrastructure and the rehabilitation of existing 
structures.  
 
Irrigation Reform (Estimated cost US$10m): Agriculture accounts for close to 65 percent of all 
consumptive water use in Kenya.  At the national level support will be provided for 
comprehensive reforms of the management, policy and legislative framework of Kenya’s 
irrigation and drainage sector including institutional restructuring and a review of the role and 
functions of the National Irrigation Board (NIB) and of public irrigation schemes. Capacity 
strengthening to improve efficient management of private and smallholder schemes is required. 
Limited investments in the two catchment areas would be made towards the rehabilitation of 
schemes affected by the reforms.  
 
Component Two:  Management of Forest Resources (USD 20 million): With the recent passage 
of the Forest Bill, The Ministry of Environment and Natural Resource Management will require 
assistance in creating the regulatory and institutional framework for implementing the Act.  To 
complement the work of water resource management in the critical watersheds, key investments 
in forests will be undertaken.  Attention to land rights will be delimited by requirements for 
management of forests.  Foremost among the needs will be:  
 
Forest Sector Institutional Reforms.  (Estimated cost US$ 5m) There is a need to support 
institutions to be established under the new legislation, including an autonomous Kenya Forest 
Service (KFS).  Priority activities include the development of transparent processes for 
concessioning of plantation forests which engage both private companies and the local 
communities in plantation management, the development of a forest product independent 
certification scheme, and completion of the forest inventory.  
 
Indigenous Forest Protection  (Estimated cost US$ 8m) Development of approaches to address 
protection of indigenous forests, including identifying and evaluating promising community 
based activities to be scaled up under component three.  In addition, opportunities for 
mobilization of carbon finance will be assessed.  
Page  3
Revitalizing Forest Industries  (Estimated cost US$ 7m) There is an urgent need for 
clarification of the rules for forest concessioning, and the constructive mobilization of private 
investment.  Early action should be taken to shift the emphasis for plantation management from 
government to local communities and private sector industry.  This will include development of 
local community forest association/forest industry partnership based approaches for sustainable 
management of existing plantation and farm forestry.  This approach is aimed at creating 
economic opportunities for low income rural communities through long term partnerships 
between industry, communities and small holder cash crop tree farmers.  
 
Component Three: Assistance to Communities for Co-management (USD 10 million): As the 
roles of and opportunities for communities in implementation of components one and two above 
are identified, these will be packaged for implementation by communities using a CDD 
approach.  For example, use of carbon finance to establish afforestation schemes in the 
watersheds, development of private sector/community partnerships for timber, fuelwood and 
pulp production, for employment on labor intensive public works, production and sale of 
seedlings, employment on reforestation projects, introduction of productivity-enhancing 
techniques of agro-forestry or conservation farming, etc.  The approach will be one of targeted 
engagement with communities employing techniques of mobilization and capacity building used 
under CDD, but with a menu limited to the activities needed to accomplish the objectives of the 
forestry and water agendas.  As much as will be feasible, this component will utilize the district-
based arrangements being developed for the Western Kenya CDD and Flood Mitigation Project, 
which are modeled on the district disbursement and monitoring system successfully used by the 
Arid Lands Resource Management Project.  Similar arrangements in the Aberdares catchment 
would be developed, maximizing NGO/CBO partnerships.  This would provide an efficient, 
multisectoral delivery mechanism for community based interventions in any given district.  
 
Component Four:  Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (USD 5 million): Management 
of the tasks undertaken by the line ministries will be mainstreamed within the ministries.  The 
ministries will not, however, be in a strong position to manage component three, since much of 
this activity will take place at the district level.  In addition, an overarching framework for 
monitoring and evaluation will be necessary.  To accomplish the management and monitoring 
and evaluation, additional resources will be made available to the team within the Office of the 
President that is managing the Western Kenya CDD and Flood Control Project. This team will 
expand their implementation efforts at the district level to include communities in the middle and 
upper catchments undertaking microprojects in forestry and water management.  The two 
projects (Western Kenya CDD and NRM) will have a merged set of indicators for monitoring 
and evaluation capturing both the changing status of the natural resources (water, forests, and 
biodiversity) and the welfare of participating communities.  A steering committee comprised of 
PS’s from the President’s Office, Ministry of Water, and Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources will meet twice annually upon the occasion of the implementation support missions to 
review progress and agree on needed actions.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Western Kenya and Aberdares   
 
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
For local implementation, the unit within OP which manages the Arid Lands project will be 
coordinating district and community investments.  They have been successfully implementing an 
ESMF for ALRMP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Since the exact locations of proposed activities has not been identified at this stage and as the 
proposed approach for community investments is CDD, much like that of the WKCDD, the 
safeguard instrument used will be the ESMF, which will be developed during preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Since the project activities cover two catchments including the Aberdares and the Lake 
Victoria catchment areas, this policy is triggered. The ESMF will address issues pertaining to 
this policy.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
This policy is triggered because the project seeks to address policy issues and investments in 
the use and management of forests. The ESMF will address issues pertaining to this policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The ESMF will identify and address those issues, related to this policy, that arise.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An IPP will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project addresses two key sectors, water and forests, that is likely to have an impact on 
the pattern of use by the communities.  A Resettlement Policy Framework will be developed in 
order to address any related issues.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The preparation will identify the nature and scope of capital investments in irrigation and 
water infrastructure. This policy will be evaluated and, if triggered, will be addressed prior to 
appraisal.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The preparation will identify the water sector activities and impacts, if any, on international 
water agreements and international waterways. This policy will be evaluated and, if triggered, 
will be addressed prior to appraisal.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/13/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF will address those safeguard policies that have been triggered. It will also include 
guidance, relevant to those policies that may be triggered during preparation (currently 
TBD), on the identification of such issues, their screening and addressing within the ESMF 
implementation process. The ESMF and the RPF will be disclosed (or redisclosed, if 
prepared jointly with WKCDD) to the public, through the Infoshop, prior to appraisal.  
 
Safeguards work will be identified during the October 2005 preparation mission, and 
dovetailed with the WKCDD work.  It was agreed that the safeguards work of this operation 
and the WKCDD operation should be done jointly. The acting regional safeguards 
coordinator and the sector manager agreed after the PCN meeting that this project and its 
sister project, the WKCDD and flood mitigation project could be transferred as a category B 
project to the sector manager for safeguards clearances. This was confirmed in a memo from 
the regional safeguards coordinator dated May 19, 2005. However, due to a re-assessment 
that the indigenous peoples safeguard would be triggered for this project due to overarching 
resettlement policy issues in the forest sector which may impact on indigenous peoples, we 
recommend that the two projects not be transferred.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Christine E. Cornelius 
01/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/12/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
