Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/28/2007 
Report No.:  AC1729
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P088600 
Project Name:  Agricultural Productivity and Sustainable Land management 
Task Team Leader:  Andrew Mwihia Karanja 
GEF Focal Area: Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 27, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 25, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Learning and 
Innovation Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.06 
 
Bank-Netherlands Partnership Program 
0.10 
 Local 
Communities 
0.40 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IDA Fund 
51.49 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.02
54.07 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
KAPSLMP development objective is to facilitate agricultural producers in the targeted 
operational areas to adopt environmentally-sound land management practices without 
reducing their incomes.  
 
The global environment objective of the proposed project is to reduce and mitigate land 
degradation in the targeted operational areas and to contribute to maintenance of critical 
ecosystem functions and structures.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project has four components:  
 
(a) 
Building capacity for SLM:  This component recognizes the critical need for 
capacity at multiple levels for the implementation of the objectives of the project and 
seeks to address these gaps.  It will target communities and service providers for training 
Page  2
and capacity enhancement as well as help build a broader awareness of the potential and 
impact of SLM.  
 
(b) 
(Investments in community SLM micro-projects:  This component will support 
community micro-projects.  The micro-projects to be supported will be identified within 
the micro-catchment plans developed by communities to address land degradation and/or 
provide alternate means of livelihoods using a Community Driven Development (CDD) 
approach.  
 
(c) 
Strengthening the enabling policy and institutional environment for SLM:  This 
component will strengthen the enabling environment necessary for mainstreaming 
sustainable land management approaches through the policy and institutional landscape.  
It will seek to address gaps in the policy framework, provide support for institutional 
capacity for cross-sectoral integrated planning of and monitoring SLM interventions.  It 
will also support improved coordination between agencies.  Importantly, it will facilitate 
the evolution towards a national SLM program by developing a programmatic approach 
in the short-term. This component will also pilot the implementation of Payments for 
Environmental Services (PES) mechanism in watershed of the rivers that supply water to 
the Sasumua Water Treatment Plant operated by the Nairobi Water and Sewerage 
Company.  The main outputs of PES pilot willbe (i) a functioning PES program in the 
catchments serving the Sasumua Reservoir, with payments and recurring costs financed 
by the Nairobi Water and Sewerage Company; (ii) lessons for the implementation of PES 
programs in Kenya and other African countries, and a specific replication strategy for 
Kenya.  
 
(d) 
Coordination, monitoring and evaluation of project activities:  The 
implementation period for the proposed project is six years.  This component will support 
project coordination and implementation at the national, district and grassroots level, both 
through institutional structures created under the KAPP and those adapted or created 
under the project as necessary.  The project coordination organ will include competitively 
selected personnel with the required skill-mix (SLM/NRM, community and social 
development, Environmental management, etc).  This component will also coordinate the 
activities related to project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) as well as impact 
assessment.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Initially, five catchments/operational areas (Ops) were selected but two catchments 
(Tugen Hills and Yala) were dropped during the Bank?s Quality Enhancement Review 
(QER) meeting that was held at the World Bank in June 2007. This decision was based 
on the need to concentrate the project activities on a few areas for maximum impact. 
Furthermore, the two dropped catchments are covered by other on-going Bank supported 
projects; Western Kenya Community Driven Development &Flood Mitigation Project 
(WKCCD/FM), Western Kenya Integrated Ecosystem Management Project (WKIEMP), 
as well as the proposed Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project (LVEMP II). 
The KAPSLM project now covers the following three catchments/OPs: Cherangani, 
Kikuyu-Kinale and Taita-Taveta  
 
.
Page  3
The three OPs are of high ecological and bio-physical importance and they face high 
erosion and land degradation hazards that are closely linked to high poverty prevalence. 
Apart from their bio-physical and ecological importance, these OPs were selected to 
maximize overlap with KAPP operational areas. The OPs cover a total of 11 
administrative districts, half of which are KAPP operational districts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01): This Policy is applicable given the project?s 
emphasis on agricultural productivity and sustainable land management, spanning three 
watersheds. The project?s objective is the adoption of SLM practices and technologies to 
mitigate land degradation and achieve greater productivity of crops, trees and livestock; 
and to adopt sustainable alternative livelihood options to diversify and increase income, 
and reduce the pressure on the natural resources.  Any potential adverse environmental 
impacts on environmentally important areas or on human populations are limited, and can 
be mitigated.  The borrower has prepared an ESMF to ensure that all environmental 
issues are considered during project planning, implementation and monitoring. All sub-
project will be given an environment category. If a subproject is of category A in nature, 
a
separate EA will need to be prepared and disclosed, before subproject implementation. 
The screening process will also identify if any subprojects will need EMPs. Format for 
both EA and EMP are included in the ESMF. The subproject cannot be finally approved 
and funded until the EA/EMP is approved and disclosed. The micro-project screening 
criteria and intuitional arrangements through district environment committee (DEC) was 
agreed upon as part of ESMF..  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04):  The effective management and reversal of degradation of 
natural habitats through soil and water conservation techniques will lead to conservation 
of natural habitats and biodiversity.  Pressure on natural habitats will be decreased 
Page  4
through improved on-farm and off-farm biodiversity and agro-biodiversity.  The project 
will not be implemented in any protected area, but will target a number of critical natural 
habitats (wetlands, forest and grassland fragments) for biodiversity conservation.  The 
project will focus on conservation strategies and hence there will be no degradation or 
conversion of natural habitats.  Other project activities are not expected to negatively 
impact critical habitats directly or indirectly.  The ESMF provides communities and 
extension teams with the appropriate checklist tools, resource sheets and planning 
methods to identify any potential impacts of subprojects on natural habitats, reserves, or 
protected areas, and to develop appropriate mitigation measures to minimize or avoid 
damage, or compensate for it.  Those activities that are not addressed by the ESMF and 
that may have impacts on natural habitats will be identified using the screening and 
review procedures as outlined in chapter 6 of the ESMF.  
 
Forests (OP 4.36): This policy is triggered by the project. With the recent passage of the 
Forest Act, Kenya is advocating a major shift away from exclusive government 
conservation and management of forest resources. The Act emphasizes co-management 
by local communities and private sector for the protection and sustainable use of forests. 
The Kenya NRM Project (P095050) that was approved by the Board during March 2007 
will help operationalize the Act, through the Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources (MENR) and Kenya Forest Service (KFS). This will be done by providing 
assistance in creating regulatory and institutional framework and targeted support to 
implement the Act. Potential forestry-related environmental impacts such as introduction 
of invasive species and impacts from micro-projects such as farm forestry or 
agroforestry, small scale woodlots and tree nurseries, apiculture, etc. in the KAPSLM 
project, will be addressed through implementation of the ESMF. Relevant training is also 
included in the training program for the various stakeholders and included in the overall 
project cost tables.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09):  Pesticide use among communities in the project areas is 
low to non-existent.  However, some subprojects such as establishment of tree nurseries; 
establishment of fenced pastures to restore natural vegetation; agroforestry for soil 
fertility replenishment and improved crop production; and, introduction of improved 
fallows, may include the use of some fertilizers and pesticides.  Hence the Pest 
Management Policy is triggered.  The requirement to screen for pesticide use is included 
in the screening checklist process as outlined in chapter 6.  Additionally, the borrower has 
prepared a brief Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPM) which will be implemented 
during the project.  The project also includes specialized training in IPM as well as 
pesticides/insecticides container management. Depending on the nature of the subproject, 
the screening process will identify the need for the preparation of a separate Pest 
Management Plan (PMP). Such a PMP should be prepared and disclosed before the 
subproject is approved and funded. Relevant training is also included in the training 
program for the various stakeholders and included in the overall project cost tables  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10):  There are two tribal groups in the project areas that 
according to OP 4.10 would be characterized as Indigenous Peoples and thus the policy is 
triggered. These groups in the Cherangani Hills and the Kinale-Kikuyu catchments are 
marginalised and social discriminated peoples in their respective areas. These indigenous 
peoples face similar problems whether they are hunter-gatherers or semi-pastoralists. 
Page  5
During project preparation it became clear that the project might impact on indigenous 
peoples? rights, lands, livelihoods and culture. Given the community driven nature of 
KAPSLM project, it is not clear now which micro-project will impact the groups, 
therefore GoK prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). If through 
the screening process a micro-project has been identified to have Indigenous Peoples 
present in, or to have collective attachment to, the micro-project area, then the IPPF must 
be referred to and individual Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) prepared and disclosed. The 
IPPF outlines the relevant steps required in order to ensure that appropriate measures are 
put in place to safeguard the rights of affected communities.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37): The policy is not triggered by project activities.  It is planned 
that the Payment for Environmental Services (PES) pilot will be implemented in the 
watershed of rivers (Chania and Kiburu) that supply water to the Sasumua Water 
Treatment Plant operated by Nairobi Water and Sewerage Company.  The Project will 
establish appropriate institutional arrangements to mediate transactions between service 
users (farmers in the watershed) and providers (NWSC), at acceptable transaction costs. 
The Project is facilitating the contract process between NWSC and the voluntary land 
users which will enable them to make appropriate land use changes that will reduce 
sedimentation in the reservoir. The project will finance: (i) technical studies to identify 
sedimentation problems in the Sasumua Reservoir and contamination problems in the two 
rivers; (ii) socio-economic evaluation of upstream areas to identify the specific land users 
who manage the land from which sedimentation problems originate, as well as the 
constraints they face in making land use decisions.  The project will not fund any 
subprojects that will use water from the reservoir. The PES component will enable the 
farmers upstream to practice appropriate land uses that will result in reduced 
sedimentation in the reservoir, thereby increasing sustainability of reservoir with 
associated benefits to water users  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12): The policy is not triggered by project activities. 
Project will not finance any activities that will trigger the policy. Project activities will 
not entail in physical relocation and displacement of people or loss of land and/or other 
assets. The project will not restrict access to livelihood. The alternative livelihoods 
proposed within communities for implementation will also not trigger the policy. The 
screening checklist for subprojects in the ESMF includes relevant questions with regards 
to this policy. If any subproject anticipates land acquisition, or a potential for the policy 
to be triggered, the subproject will not be approved.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11): The policy is not triggered by project activities. 
However, the requirement to screen for physical cultural resources and chance finds is 
included in the process set out in the ESMF.  
 
Safeguard Policies on Projects in International Waterways (OP 7.50) and Projects in 
Disputed Area (OP 7.60) are not triggered by project activities.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Since Indigenous Peoples are part of the project beneficiaries, project activities will 
benefit them and help in improving their livelihoods, while strengthening their capacity 
for self development.  
 
No negative long term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
All subproject activities will be subjected to environmental and social screening, as 
described in the safeguards reports. These procedures will allow subproject review and 
clearance authorities to identify and treat any potential adverse impacts. As necessary, 
some subprojects might require specific environmental management plans (EMP) or pest 
management plans (PMP) to be prepared before implementation of subprojects. All 
subprojects will be given an environment category. If a subproject is of category A in 
nature, a separate EA will need to be prepared and disclosed, before subproject 
implementation. Format for an EA is included in the ESMF.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower has prepared an environmental and social management framework (ESMF), 
integrated pest management (IPM), and indigenous peoples planning framework (IPPF) 
as measures to address safeguard policy issues. Both reports have identified training, 
sensitization requirements and capacity building at various levels.  Additionally, a brief 
IPM matrix is included in the ESMF, which will be used as a guide if there is a need for 
the preparation of a subproject specific Pest Management Plan (PMP).  
 
Institutional Arrangements for Implementation of the Safeguard Recommendations: 
KAPSLM will be implemented through the ministries of Agriculture (MoA) and Ministry 
of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR) with key participation from Ministry of 
Water and Irrigation (MoWI) and other key relevant institutions mainly KARI and 
NEMA.  The project?s institutional and implementation arrangements will be linked to 
the existing arrangement for the ongoing Kenya Agricultural Productivity Project 
(KAPP).  
 
A
KAPSLM Steering Committee linked to the KAPP SC will be formed at the national 
level, and will report to the sector Inter-ministerial Coordination Committee (ICC), which 
consists of the sector Permanent Secretaries.  The KAPSLM-SC will be in charge of the 
work programming for the project, and will be composed of senior staff from the relevant 
departments of MoA, MENR, MOWI, MoLS, MoLFD, KARI, NEMA and the NEPAD 
focal person in Kenya.  Capacity of the existing KAPP Secretariat (KS) will be expanded 
with recruitment of some new expertise, including environmental and social expertise, 
who will be responsible for overall safeguards issues.  
 
Among other roles, the KS will coordinate project activities at the national level and at 
the three catchments, by guiding and overseeing the activities of the Catchment Area 
Coordinators (see below). They will implement a monitoring system that is integral to 
each activity and is effectively linked to planning for periodic adjustments in activities, 
Page  7
when necessary; and will evaluate the project, including community evaluations, to 
ensure effective implementation.  
 
A
Catchment Area Coordinator (CAC), will be appointed for each catchment, who will 
be based in the existing KAPP District Service Unit, DSU; except for the Kikuyu-Kinale 
catchment, which does not fall under the KAPP operational area. Here, the CAC would 
be located in the KS, located at KARI headquarters in Nairobi.  The CAC will monitor 
activities, identify barriers, be a conduit for information, resources and technical 
assistance/capacity building, foster community development of micro-watershed plans, 
design and implementation of micro-projects (including monitoring and safeguards), and 
link with provincial and district development and environment committees and officers 
(DDO, PDO, DEO, PDE) in order to implement broader program activities.  The CAC 
will work closely and be assisted by KAPP DSU Coordinator, the M&E officer and other 
officers in the DSU.  
 
Public and private service providers including CBOs, NGOs, extension teams and 
others, will be trained to work with communities in designing, developing and 
implementing micro-projects that are consistent with the micro-watershed plans and meet 
the criteria set out in the PIP. They will also be trained to use the screening checklist in 
the ESMF to screen micro-project.  Additionally, any micro-projects that have a potential 
to trigger the OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, will not be approved. If a micro-
project requires environmental or social mitigation measures, then an EMP or PMP will 
be prepared and attached along with the proposal before it is submitted for approval. If a 
micro-project is of category A in nature, an EA will be prepared by a NEMA-registered 
independent consultant, which will be approved and disclosed before micro-project 
implementation. The proposal will then be reviewed and cleared by the District 
Environment Committee (DEC), who will conduct field appraisal before approval, as 
necessary. The proposal will then go to KAPSLM-SC for final approval and funding, 
through the KS.  
 
Annual environmental and social progress reports will be undertaken by a NEMA-
registered independent consultant, at the closing of each year of the project. A format for 
this report is included in the ESMF, and consultancy costs are included as part of ESMF 
implementation costs. The annual environmental and social progress reports will be 
shared with the Inter-ministerial Coordination Committee, KAPSLM-Steering 
Committee, NEMA, KARI, World Bank and other relevant government agencies.  
 
The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF): Indigenous peoples are among the 
project beneficiaries in two operational areas, and the project will address issues in its 
area of influence. During the proposed project preparation it was agreed that most of the 
national and policy related issues identified in the IPPF will be supported by the IDA 
supported NRM project. The proposed KAPSLM will only support IPPF activities 
specific to the operational areas. The NRM Project will address key issues regarding IP 
and other forest-dependent communities in Kenya: It will harmonize the forest policy 
with the draft land policy, implement a participatory forest management, support the 
elaboration of a comprehensive resettlement policy and rehabilitate in the operational 
areas (Aberdares, Upper Tana, Kakamega, Mt Elgon as well as the Nandi and Cherengani 
hills) the livelihoods of populations, which have been evicted from forests after the new 
Government was sworn in December 30, 2002.  The project will ensure:  (a) that present 
and past settlements, land use areas and cultural sites of IP are comprehensively 
Page  8
documented; (b) that the IP are well represented in all forest and resettlement related 
decision-making bodies and processes; (c) that a comprehensive strategy to rehabilitate 
the livelihoods of evicted IP is elaborated in an open-minded and fully participatory 
option assessment; and (d) that this strategy is implemented in a comprehensive and 
timely manner and that the IP are enabled to benefit from participatory forest 
management and reforestation. Given the broad-based support of IP under NRM, the 
proposed KAPSLMP will support capacity building to implement the IPPF, participatory 
M&E system and IP inclusion in project activities. The project has set aside US$600, 000 
for IPPF and ESMF related activities.  Once proposals are presented by the indigenous 
communities, the micro-projects will be formulated following the guidelines of OP 4.10 
(Annex B) concerning preparation of IPPs and the cost of their implementation will be 
covered under Components 1 and 2.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Extensive consultations have been carried out during the preparation of the ESMF and 
IPPF, with various stakeholders.  
 
In preparation of the ESMF, the consulting team undertook field visits to the five 
catchments that were initially going to be covered by the project, during November and 
December 2005. They met with District Environment and Social Development Officers, 
youth groups, representatives from Kenya Wildlife Service, Kenya Forest Service, and 
other representatives and stakeholders including local communities. Please refer to annex 
2
and 3 in the ESMF for further details on the field visits and stakeholders consulted.  
 
In preparation of the IPPF, the consultant undertook extensive field visits and consulted 
with several organizations and individuals. Some of the groups consulted included: Ogiek 
Peoples National Assembly, Sengwer Indigenous Development Group, African Union 
Sub-commission on Indigenous People, Indigenous Information Network, Fisherpeoples 
Network. The consultant also contacted several experts on Indigenous Peoples issues in 
Kenya, in several universities both in Africa as well as other consultants. Additionally, 
several workshops were held such as IP workshop and IP Stakeholders meeting during 
January 2006. Please also refer to pages 58 to 70 of the IPPF for a list of peoples and 
organizations consulted; participants at the IPPF workshop; and minutes from the IPPF 
stakeholders workshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  9
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/22/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/30/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/30/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
There is a possibility that some subproject activities could require a separate PMP, during 
implementation. Hence the ESMF includes the format for a PMP, should the need arise. 
Additionally, as a good practice, the ESMF has included a brief IPM matrix that will help 
with the PMP.  Hence the policy is marked as triggered and the disclosure date is the 
same as the disclosure date for the ESFM, as the format for PMP is included in the 
ESMF.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
Page  10
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew Mwihia Karanja 
08/17/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Banumathi Setlur 
08/17/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas 
08/17/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Nyambura Githagui 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/17/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/17/2007 
Comments:   
