Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2810 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P105201 
Project Name: Kenya Economic and Social Empowerment Program (ESEP) 
Task Team Leader: Wim H. Alberts 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 21, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (20%);General education sector (20%);Micro- and SME 
finance (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%);General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other human development (P);Other 
rural development (P);Other urban development (P);Other social development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
140.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to empower vulnerable individuals, households 
and communities to take advantage of enhanced social and economic opportunities. The 
principle outcomes of the Program would be:  
 
(i) 
strengthened  ability of vulnerable households to protect and care for OVCs to utilize the 
essential services;  
 
(ii) 
increased access of poor students to secondary education through utilization of SSBS;  
 
(iii) 
enhanced economic opportunities for vulnerable people in particular urban youth through 
local social investment schemes;  
 
(iv) 
increased capacity of individuals, households and communities to reduce levels of 
vulnerability by effectively managing risks;   
 
(v) 
an increased number of beneficiaries reached and assisted;  
 
(vi) 
an enhanced policy, implementation and monitoring and evaluation framework.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed components are:  
 
(i) Cash transfer program for orphans and vulnerable children (OVCs) to strengthen the ability 
of vulnerable households to protect and care for OVCs and to promote investments in human 
development for this vulnerable group; (ii) Secondary school bursary scheme to target children 
from vulnerable households to ensure increased access to secondary education; (iii) Local 
economic development program to provide enhanced economic opportunities for vulnerable 
groups, in particular urban youth and rural communities. Since poverty and income inequality is 
associated with regional and ethnic divisions in Kenya,  project interventions could also be 
targeted to vulnerable ethnic groups (pastoralists and hunter-gatherer communities).  (iv) Risk 
Management Facility to promote interventions which would enable individuals, households and 
communities to better manage risks and reduce their vulnerability; and (v) Institutional and 
Governance Strengthening/Technical Assistance/Policy Framework which will enhance the 
institutional and policy framework to delivery risk management interventions more effectively.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be national in coverage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Assessment of Borrower institutional capacity for environmental management is carried out in 
all the recommended studies i.e the ESMF, RPF, and IPPF and their recommendations will be 
clearly articulated in the PAD Stage ISDS and relevant sections of the PAD .   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTS1) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Due to the demand-driven nature of the project, particularly Component 3 (Local Economic 
Development Program), an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
On the basis of urban-rural risk vulnerability studies and priorities established thereon, 
project interventions could be targeted to vulnerable ethnic groups (pastoralists and hunter-
gatherer communities) and these groups could have access to project benefits. Given the 
possibility that some of the vulnerable ethnic groups will meet the Bank's criteria for indigenous 
peoples, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) be will prepared and disclosed prior 
to appraisal.  
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Due to the fact that the project is likely  to deal with indigenous peoples' matters, the 
safeguard management responsibility for the project cannot be transferred as this aspect is likely 
to increase the institutional risk.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Due to the demand-driven nature of the project, particularly Component 3 (Local Economic 
Development Program), an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared and 
disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/02/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework, Resettlement Policy Framework and 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be prepared by the Borrower.  The studies are 
expected to commence in early May 2007 and will be disclosed at the InfoShop and in-
country prior to Appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wim H. Alberts 
05/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
05/01/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
