Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/09/2007 
Report No.:  AC3006
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P096367 
Project Name:  WATER AND SANITATION SERVICE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Fook Chuan Eng 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 9, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (80%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.31
9.31 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the project are to: (a) increase access to reliable, 
affordable and sustainable water supply and sanitation services; and (b) to improve the 
water and wastewater services in the areas served by the Athi Water Services Board 
(AWSB), Lake Victoria North Water Services Board (LVNWSB) and Coast Water 
Services Board (CWSB). This will be achieved by (i) rehabilitating selected existing 
water production, transmission, storage and distribution facilities and wastewater 
collection, treatment and disposal facilities, (ii) expanding piped water supply services to 
under-served areas (including urban slums / informal settlements ) through a balanced 
program including the involvement of communities in decision making and extension of 
primary and secondary distribution pipes where required, and (iii) refining and 
strengthening the institutional structure, emphasizing on increasing accountability and 
transparency of the institutional and governance and management framework.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support the sector reform and the associated sector institutional setup 
through water, wastewater and sanitation, and institutional strengthening activities.  The 
water, wastewater and sanitation activities will focus on improving and expanding 
reliable, sustainable and affordable safe water supply and wastewater services to 
Page  2
consumers.  At the same time, the rehabilitation of deteriorated wastewater treatment and 
construction of facilities would result in overall environmental benefits.  Institutional 
strengthening activities will focus on strengthening the service delivery framework, 
governance and transparency, and monitoring and evaluation.  The project?s 
implementation will be carried out by the permanent sector institutions, using as much as 
possible sector reporting and monitoring tools.  As such its components will be designed 
to align with sector implementation, reporting and accountability structures i.e., the 
project would be delineated in the first instance along the lines of autonomous sector 
institutions.  
 
Project Components.  The project would have three major components: (1) support to 
the Athi Water Services Board (including technical assistance support to the Water Sector 
Regulatory Board and the Water Appeals Board), (2) support to the Coast Water Services 
Board, and (3) Support to the Lake Victoria North Water Services Board.  
 
Component 1.  Support to the Athi Water Services Board (including technical assistance 
support to the Water Sector Regulatory Board and the Water Appeals Board) ? approx. 
US$48m.  This will include:  
 
(a)  
the rehabilitation of existing water supply systems including transmission 
pipelines, water treatment works, storage, water distribution networks, boreholes; 
construction of water treatment works in selected small towns, and extension of water 
distribution networks and metering,  
 
(b)  
the rehabilitation of sewerage networks and sewage treatment facilities, and 
extension of existing networks,  
 
(c)  
supporting selected equipment and activities aimed at strengthening the 
commercial, financial and technical operations at AWSB and water services providers, 
technical assistance for M&E, engineering, financial, legal, assets valuation, audits, 
informal settlements WSS program, communications, environmental and safeguards, and 
independent assessments of the institutional framework; programs to increase oversight 
and transparency of service delivery; and training and capacity building,  
 
(d)  
supporting the operationalization and strengthening of the Water Sector 
Regulatory Board (WSRB) and the Water Appeals Board (WAB).  
 
Component 2.  Support to the Coast Water Services Board ? approx. US$41m.  This will 
include:  
 
(a)  
the rehabilitation of existing water supply systems including transmission 
pipelines, water treatment works, storage, water distribution networks, boreholes; 
construction of water treatment works in selected small towns, and extension of water 
distribution networks and metering,  
 
Page  3
(b)  
the rehabilitation of sewerage networks and sewage treatment facilities, and 
extension of existing networks,  
 
(c)  
supporting selected equipment and activities aimed at strengthening the 
commercial, financial and technical operations at CWSB and water services providers, 
technical assistance for M&E, engineering, financial, legal, assets valuation, audits, 
informal settlements WSS program, communications, environmental and safeguards, and 
independent assessments of the institutional framework; programs to increase oversight 
and transparency of service delivery; and training and capacity building.  
 
Component 3.  Support to the Lake Victoria North Water Services Board. ? approx. 
US$31m.  This will include:  
 
(a)  
the rehabilitation of existing water supply systems including transmission 
pipelines, water treatment works, storage, water distribution networks, boreholes; 
construction of water treatment works in selected small towns, and extension of water 
distribution networks and metering,  
 
(b)  
the rehabilitation of sewerage networks and sewage treatment facilities, and 
extension of existing networks, the construction of sewerage systems in selected small 
towns (of less than 2,500m3/d each); on-plot sanitation; and hygiene campaigns.  
 
(c)  
supporting selected equipment and activities aimed at strengthening the 
commercial, financial and technical operations at LVNWSB and water services 
providers, technical assistance for M&E, engineering, financial, legal, assets valuation, 
audits, informal settlements WSS program, communications, environmental and 
safeguards, and independent assessments of the institutional framework; programs to 
increase oversight and transparency of service delivery; and training and capacity 
building.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project covers the jurisdictional area for water and sewerage service provision of the 
Athi Water Services Board (AWSB), Coast Water Services Board (CWSB) and Lake 
Victoria North Water Services Board (LVNWSB):  
 
Athi Water Services Board (AWSB): Kajiado, Machakos, Kiambu, Thika, Makueni and 
Nairobi districts.  
 
Coast Water Services Board (CWSB): Kilifi, Kwale, Lamu, Mombasa, Taita/Taveta, 
Tana River and Bura districts.  
 
Lake Victoria North Water Services Board (LVNWSB): Bungoma, Busia, Kakamega, 
Vihiga, Mt. Elgon, Lugari/Malava, Teso, Butere/Mumias, Uasin Gishu, Nandi North, 
Trans Nzoia and Marakwet districts.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is conceived and designed to have significant positive environment and social 
impacts.  The proposed project was reviewed and screened at concept note stage and 
designated as Category B which is appropriate and consistent with the provisions of the 
Bank's Safeguards Policy on Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 as the project 
involves the rehabilitation and extension of water supply facilities, the rehabilitation and 
extension of waste water facilities; the rehabilitation of sewerage and sewage facilities 
and institutional strengthening.  The construction of water treatment works in selected 
small towns, the extension of water distribution networks and metering, the rehabilitation 
of deteriorated wastewater treatment and construction of facilities would result in overall 
environmental benefits.  The activities may however lead to land acquisition and thus the 
need for the preparation of a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  The outlined 
activities led to the projects triggering other safeguard policies including the Policies on 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and the Indigenous Peoples (IP) Policy (OP/BP 
4.10). While the policy on IP was not triggered at the concept stage, the team recognized 
the importance during project pre-appraisal and made two major adjustments to meet 
Bank requirements namely: that the project will no longer be transferred as recommended 
at the concept stage and that (OP 4.10) on Indigenous Peoples will be marked as triggered 
and the due diligence requirements to be met. Only Component 3, LVNWSB, will be 
subject to the IP policy as no indigenous peoples are in AWSB or CWSB regions.  The 
pre-appraisal mission also identified that the International Waterways Policy (OP/BP 
7.50) is triggered and as such a letter of notification will be sent to the White Nile 
riparian states through the Nile Basin Office.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term negative impacts are anticipated as the environmental and social screening 
process will allow for the application of appropriate mitigating measures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project has made deliberate efforts in the design as well as in the prepared safeguard 
instruments i.e., the ESMF, the RPF, and IPPF to ensure minimization of any biophysical 
and/or social impacts particularly as regards the negative impact on human settlements, 
economic activities, land acquisition and the protection of vulnerable groups.  Where 
possible the project will during implementation continue to avoid impacting negatively 
on both the human and biophysical environment and the screening mechanisms outlined 
in the safeguard instruments are meant to ensure this.  Due to the nature of the geographic 
locations in all three project areas of influence, the project design in its analysis of 
alternatives made concerted efforts to minimize these impacts wherever feasible and 
where impossible mitigative measures are clearly outlined in the safeguard instruments.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to identify and assess 
potential impacts under Component 1 (AWSB), Sub-components (a) and (b); Component 
2
(CWSB), Sub-components (a) and (b); and Component 3 (LVNWSB), Sub-components 
(a) and (b);  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address potential social impacts related to 
land acquisition and loss of assets under Component 1 (AWSB), Sub-components (a) and 
(b); Component 2 (CWSB), Sub-components (a) and (b); and Component 3 (LVNWSB), 
Sub-components (a) and (b);  
 
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) to address potential impacts to 
indigenous and vulnerable groups in the Lake Victoria North Water Services Board 
(LVNWSB) area; and  
 
Riparian notification letters have already been sent (on August 2, 2007) to riparian 
countries of anticipated water quantity or quality aspects precipitated by the project.  
 
AWSB, CWSB and LVNWSB will establish environment units appropriately financed 
to ensure quality and proper management and monitoring of service delivery and source 
assurance.  Capacity building and remedial measures required for the ESMF, the RPF and 
the IPPF will be supported through the project.  A total estimated budget of about US$2.0 
million will be set aside for building the institutional and human resources capacities for 
managing the ESMF, IPPF and RPF.  Additionally, about US$4.8 million has been 
provisioned to support associated costs for resettlement planning and implementation.  
This includes the funds to be allocated for the establishment of the respective 
environmental units, their associated laboratories, training and environmental 
Page  6
enhancement programs, workshops, seminars, the procurement of technical assistance for 
a
period of one to two years as well as the preparation of annual environmental and social 
audits which is in accordance with the National Environmental Management and 
Coordination Act of Kenya as well as the World Bank Safeguard Policy on 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).  The service providers' and other stakeholders 
training requirements for the implementation of the recommendations of the safeguard 
documents and for overall environmental management have also been factored into this 
budget.  Consultations and training activities will also be funded to ensure the inclusive 
approach to implementation concerning indigenous and vulnerable groups and to ensure 
ownership of the IP and RPF processes.  As the implementation of Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs), Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) and Environmental Management Plans 
(EMPs) are critical to ensuring sustainable management and smooth implementation of 
the project, clarity on the institutional responsibilities for specific actions as well as 
monitoring their outcomes is crucial.  The project will work with AWSB, CWSB and 
LVNWSB to ensure that the competent authorities are assigned the responsibility of 
carrying out such actions and most importantly ensuring ownership and the capacity to 
mainstream them as part of their core business.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are Ministry of Water and Irrigation, the water services boards 
(AWSB, CWSB and LVNWSB) and their relevant water service providers, as well as 
affected communities.  The ESMF, RPF, and IPPF prepared by the Government of Kenya 
in consultation with relevant stakeholders and reviewed and approved by the World Bank 
(ASPEN) and the Government have already been disclosed in-country and at the Bank's 
InfoShop. As regards the disclosure of the safeguards instruments, the documents have 
been posted on the websites of AWSB, CWSB and LVNWSB, and dissemination 
undertaken through advertisements in local papers.  In addition, the documents have been 
made available at the Bank's information center in Nairobi and Washington, D.C. The 
IPPF preparation included a process of interviews, discussions and consultative meetings 
with affected indigenous communities and civil society organizations and builds upon 
previous IP frameworks prepared for World Bank projects Western Kenya Flood 
Mitigation and Community Driven Development, and Natural Resource Management.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/12/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/12/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/05/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fook Chuan Eng 
10/08/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
10/08/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
10/09/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/09/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
10/09/2007 
Comments:   
