Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3055 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P103973 
Project Name: Nairobi Urban Toll Road-PRG 
Task Team Leader: Anil S. Bhandari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: International financial architecture (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 IDA 
Guarantee 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve traffic efficiency along the Northern Corridor 
(NC) connecting the port of Mombasa to Nairobi, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and DRC,  through 
removal of the main remaining bottlenecks by enabling private investment within a toll-road 
concession along the most congested urban sections of Uhuru Highway in Nairobi.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. 
The concession consists of six road sections along Uhuru Highway (total of 77km), a 
stretch within the Greater Nairobi Area following the alignment of what is referred to as the 
Northern Corridor. The seventh section will be a bypass (29km) as an alternative to the urban 
stretch of 25km in length. Two sections along Uhuru Highway are being rehabilitated/upgraded 
under the NCTIP for a total cost of USD 56.6 million. Works on both sections comprise the 
rehabilitation of the existing 2-lane single carriageways, while one section will also be upgraded 
to a 4-lane dual carriageway. A schematic map can be found in the Project Information 
Document (PID) published in conjunction with this ISDS.  
 
Page  2
2. 
Feasibility Studies were conducted by an internationally recruited Consultant (BKS of 
RSA) and confirmed the project’s commercial viability. Given the assumed traffic levels, 
calculations show that the estimated project costs can be recovered at acceptable toll rates. The 
immediate road-related investments amount to USD 176 million. Additional costs to be covered 
by the concessionaire over the entire life of the 30-year concession will comprise future road-
related improvements, periodic and routine maintenance, construction costs of toll facilities as 
well as their operation and maintenance. The Concessionaire will also be required to develop 
roadside facilities (e.g. parking areas, utilities infrastructure, bus and truck stops, etc.) at key 
locations. This includes social amenities like off-road booths for sale of local produce and 
products, bicycle paths, pedestrian sidewalks and other means to enhance safety and benefit road 
users and roadside communities. All cost  and revenue figures are subject to change and reflect 
the consultant’s analysis and views, which may not be borne out by the actual bid.   (The initial 
cost figures were based on prevailing 2004 unit rates for the region and have been adjusted to 
2007 prices.) 
 
3. 
The draft bidding documents were disseminated and discussed during several pre-bid 
meetings in order to receive feedback from potential bidders and other stakeholders.  
 
4. 
An IDA-PRG is being proposed in support of the Concession. PRGs are designed to 
catalyze private sector participation in infrastructure projects by mitigating political and 
government-related risks, particularly in countries where a sector is in early stages of reform and 
the perceived risk of policy reversals and changes to the regulatory framework is high. Given 
that such risks are perceived to be high in Kenya and the fact that regulatory compliance will be 
critical to the long term sustainability of the concession, IDA would be best equipped to backstop 
these risks through the PRG, because of Bank’s leverage with the GOK (explicit counter-
guarantee, policy dialogue). The provision of the PRG should, therefore, help in reducing 
investors' and lenders “risk-premia”, thereby leading to more sustainable tariff levels.  
 
5. 
The nominal amount of the PRG is expected to be USD 40 million, of which only 25% 
would count towards Kenya’s IDA allocation. The exact scope of its coverage will be 
determined, once the terms have been negotiated with the successful bidder. The indicative term 
sheet is designed to reflect the Agency’s (Ministry of Roads and Public Works)obligations in the 
draft concession agreement and would include coverage for i) Agency periodic payment 
obligations  relating to their non-compliance of the pre-agreed toll framework and Material 
Adverse Government Action (ii) Agency obligations relating to termination payments as a result 
of Expropriation, Material Adverse Government Action and  Political force-majeure events.  In 
addition, IFC and MIGA are expected to be solicited by the concessionaires/ bidders after the 
bidding.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The concession will consist of seven sections, located within downtown Nairobi as well as its 
outskirts. Six sections of the concessions will be along Uhuru Highway, a stretch within the 
Greater Nairobi Area following the alignment of the Northern Corridor. A bypass will be built 
south of the downtown part of Uhuru Highway. A schematic map can be found in the Project 
Information Document (PID) published in conjunction with this ISDS. There will be a tolled 
section of 77.1km following the alignment of the Uhuru Highway and a bypass of 29km length. 
Page  3
Hence, a total of 106.1km of road sections will be affected. The rehabilitation of two sections 
(totalling 33 km)is part of the NCTIP for which the impact of physical interventions has been 
assessed and remedial measures identified.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower is familiar with World Bank Safeguard Policies through various Bank projects. 
Both resettlement and environmental safeguards policies had to comply with Bank Guidelines in 
two recent infrastructure projects, the Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project 
(NCTIP) and the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (EATTFP). For several 
years now, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has seconded 
Environmental Specialists to the Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MOPWH), which is 
entrusted with the implementation of the NCTIP and will also be charged with managing the 
concession. MOPWH had formed an environmental unit for the implementation of various 
projects and the NCTIP is supporting efforts to transform it into a more permanent unit 
sufficiently staffed and budgeted for. The team’s Environmental Specialist will be taking stock 
of the existing institutional set-up and assess its adequacy for the implementation of the proposed 
project. This review may identify the need for institutional adjustment and/or mandate the 
support of external professionals for certain tasks. The same assessment will be carried out with 
respect to the institutional capacity for social & resettlement safeguards.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared by the Borrower under the related 
Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project was reviewed by the team’s Social Safeguards 
Specialist and except for minor changes, it was found appropriate for the application in this 
project. After the incorporation of the changes, the RPF will be re-disclosed. It will form part of 
the concession contract which the Concessionaire will have to adhere to when preparing site-
specific Resettlement Action Plans. All Resettlement Action Plans will have to be implemented 
before construction commences.  
 
The Ministry of Roads and Public Works commissioned an Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) for the Bypass. The EIA was cleared by the National Environmental Management 
Authority (NEMA) and is currently being reviewed by the team’s Environmental Specialists. 
The Bank’s comments will be incorporated by the Borrower before disclosing the EIA. As 
regards the sections along Uhuru Highway, the draft concession agreement stipulates that the 
Concessionaire will have to submit the designs for all civil works along with Environmental 
Impact Assessments meeting NEMA and World Bank requirements and that the EIAs will need 
to be reviewed by the World Bank before construction commences.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The team anticipates impacts on the environment during rehabilitation and/or construction 
works. EIAs will need to be prepared to identify adequate remedial measures that the 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Concessionaire needs to adhere to. Furthermore, the EIAs will also need to address the impact of 
land-use for lane extensions, overpasses, as well as the newly constructed bypass.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The proximity of the Dagoretti Forest at one section of the bypass requires special attention 
in the respective Environmental Impact Assessment.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The proximity of the Dagoretti Forest at one section of the bypass requires special attention 
in the respective Environmental Impact Assessment.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Resettlement may become necessary where extensions of the carriageway are planned as well 
as at the locations dedicated for the construction of toll plazas.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The RPF has been reviewed and the revised version will be completed and disclosed (in-
country and at the Bank’s Infoshop) by end of July 2007. The review of the EIA for the 
bypass will be completed by end of July 2007. The revised EIA, if found adequate, shall be 
completed and disclosed by September 2007. In case more comprehensive changes are 
needed, revision and disclosure shall be completed by December 2007.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Anil S. Bhandari 
06/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alain L. Labeau 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
