Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1534 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/18/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P074106 
Project Name: Western Kenya CDD and Flood Mitigation Project 
Task Team Leader: Nyambura Githagui 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 12, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);General public 
administration sector (20%);General education sector (20%);Other social services 
(20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Other social protection and risk 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
10.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The  project (WKCDD) seeks to empower local communities of men and women to move out of 
poverty, create wealth, and to reduce the frequency and costs of recurrent floods.  
 
The project will invest in building the capacity of multi 
–
purpose community development 
committees which then provide entry points for other programmes to include appropriate and 
effective investments in flood protection and natural resources management. The Project will be 
carried out through the decentralized structures of the local and provincial government to cover 
(provisionally) the eight districts of Western Province (Mt. Elgon, Teso, Vihiga, Bungoma, 
Busia, Butere/Mumias, Kakamega and Lugari) and four districts (Bondo, Siaya, Kisumu and 
Nyando) in Nyanza province. The water resources management components of the project will 
be carried out in cooperation with the Water Resources Management Authority and their 
catchment offices.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The Project will have four components:  
 
i) Community Driven Development  
 
a) Enhancing communities’ abilities to plan, manage and implement prioritized investments at 
the community level: US$ 30 million):  This component will finance micro-projects identified 
and implemented by communities.    Communities will be assisted by teams of Mobile 
Community Advisors (MCAs) including technical personnel from district governments and civil 
society organizations operating in the district.  A district steering group (DSG) will be 
established in all districts and will be supported with project funds, to plan, manage and guide 
participatory development.  The project will additionally pilot development of two new 
institutions at the local level. A Youth Development Support Fund will be established on a pilot 
basis, building on the experience of the Youth JSDF grant. The project will leverage other 
resources to set up a pilot Community Foundation in one district.  
 
b)
Sustainable development investment and planning at the district and higher levels. (US$ 10 
million):  These investments and activities will enhance planning and response mechanisms at 
the district and other levels, and strengthen the capacity for district level entities to facilitate the 
implementation of activities that cut across communities and districts.   It is at the district level 
that community projects will be reviewed and recommended for funding through project funds.   
It is also at this level that multi-sectoral tasks will be agreed upon and implemented in a 
coordinated way.   A district steering group (DSG) will be established in all districts which will 
be supported with project funds to plan and guide participatory development.  Each individual 
district will be provided with resources, managed by the DSG, to support prioritized areas of 
intervention based on annual work plans from the districts.  
 
ii) Multi-purpose flood management investments (US$ 50 million): Key investments are 
expected to include measures to reduce erosion, water storage for flood control and irrigation, 
small hydro-electric power generation, etc.  Lower catchment areas will be assisted to develop an 
early warning system for flood detection and flood protection works. In order to implement an 
integrated flood management strategy, a comprehensive investment plan will be developed, and 
priority elements financed as resources permit, both from the credit and possible co-financing.  
Activities financed under this project will be coordinated fully with those financed by the linked 
NRM project.  The catchment offices of the National Water Resource Management authority 
together with the DSGs will be key institutions guiding the development and implementation of 
the investments, together with the appropriate new institutions in the water sector.  Factors 
exacerbating the intensity and frequency of flooding in the upper catchment areas will be studied 
in order to prepare a strategy for future interventions.  
 
iii) Support to policy analysis, advocacy and local development (US$ 2.0 million): Through 
support to research, market assessments, and advocacy work, this component will support the 
identification and development of new opportunities for economic growth in the region.  
 
iv) Management, monitoring, and evaluation (US$ 8 million): The coordinator and selected 
professionals will oversee financial management and procurement within the Office of the 
President, Special Programs, the governmental entity mandated with disaster management, 
including floods and drought.  The team has initiated the preparation process, and is ready to 
implement the PHRD grant of $750,000 to support preparation.  The monitoring and evaluation 
system supported by project funds will be participatory, and will include report and score cards 
and expenditure tracking, together with statistical surveys of economic, social, and 
environmental indicators.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be carried out through the decentralized structures of the local and provincial 
government, supported by the Water Resources Management Authority, to cover (provisionally) 
the eight districts of Western Province (Mt. Elgon, Teso, Vihiga, Bungoma, Busia, 
Butere/Mumias, Kakamega and Lugari) and four districts (Bondo, Siaya, Kisumu and Nyando) 
in Nyanza province.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project team is the same one that is currently implementing the Arid Lands Resource 
Management project, which is successfully using an excellent environmental management 
framework.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment and an ESMF will be carried out during project preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The EA/ESMF will address issues relevant to this policy.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Any potential activities in the upper catchments that include forests will be screened through 
the EA/ESMF, which  will identify and address issues, related to this policy, that arise.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Potential community investments that include activities, which may trigger this policy will be 
screened through the EA/ESMF process that will identify and address issues, related to this 
policy, that arise.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An IPP will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
An RPF will be developed during project prepration.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The preparation will identify the nature and scope of capital investments in irrigation and 
water infrastructure. This policy will be evaluated and, if triggered, will be addressed prior to 
appraisal.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The preparation will identify the water sector activities and impacts, if any, on international 
water agreements and international waterways. This policy will be evaluated and, if triggered, 
will be addressed prior to appraisal.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Including an EA, an ESMF (for project activities with as yet indeterminate impacts) and a 
RPF, and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. The ESMF and RPF will 
be disclosed to the public through the Infoshop before appraisal.  
 
The borrower has obtained an PHRD grant and will prepare the needed studies before 
appraisal, scheduled for April 2006.  The acting regional safeguards coordinator and the 
sector manager d agreed after the PCN meeting that this project and its sister project, the 
NRM project could be transferred as a category B project to the sector manager for 
safeguards clearances.  This was confirmed in a memo from the regional safeguards 
coordinator dated May 19, 2005.  However, due to a re-assessment that the indigenous 
peoples safeguard would be triggered for the NRM project due to overarching resettlement 
policy issues in the forest sector which may impact on indigenous peoples, we recommend 
that the two projects not be transferred.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nyambura Githagui 
01/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/13/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/13/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
