Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC694
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P085414 
Project Name:  Development of The National Statistical System Project 
Task Team Leader:  Lucas A. Ojiambo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 18, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTP2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (91%);Sub-national government 
administration (6%);Tertiary education (3%) 
Theme:  Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (P);Managing for development 
results (P);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (S);Administrative and civil service 
reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overarching goal of the project is to improve the quality, timeliness, relevance, and 
availability of statistical information in Kenya and to encourage its use.  The project will 
achieve this objective by (a) supporting improvements in the policy, legislative, 
regulatory and institutional framework governing the generation and dissemination of 
statistics (b) supporting the development of statistical infrastructure; (c) encouraging 
statistical cooperation and collaboration between the NSS, research, and academic 
institutions; and (4) upgrading and developing statistical operations and procedures.  This 
project will ensure a steady supply of reliable and timely social and economic statistics 
needed for policy making, monitoring and evaluation of the MDGs and performance 
indicators outlined in the IP-ERS.  The Kenya CAS presented to the Board in June 2004 
identified the importance of building a strong and effective national statistical system 
NSS. The CAS identified strengthening NSS as a key priority for the next four years and 
included the proposed project in the lending program.  The project will also provide key 
indicators to be used in monitoring and evaluation of the Medium Term Expenditure 
Framework (MTEF) Budget.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
i. Lending instrument  
 
The project will be financed with a specific investment loan, under the umbrella of the 
Statistical Capacity Building (STATCAP) Program Adaptable Program Credit.  The 
STATCAP is a facility that aims to improve statistical capacity in a number of countries 
through a sectorwide approach, on the basis of a Statistical Plan prepared and owned by 
the country.  Subsequent loans or credits obtained by borrowers are treated as phases of 
the APL under the STATCAP approach.  STATCAP is designed to enable countries to 
make significant investments in statistical capacity, to improve both efficiency and 
effectiveness in the future and finance the most urgent current statistical activities.  The 
STATCAP project for Kenya will support a medium to long-term investment program, 
with the first phase lasting five years.  If the project substantially achieves its phase 1 
objectives, and if the government requires further financing to implement its longer term 
strategy, a second phase would be possible.  
 
To be eligible for a credit under STATCAP countries must: (a) have prepared a national 
statistical development strategy and Statistical Plan; (b) have demonstrated strong 
national commitment and leadership; (c) be willing to comply with good statistical 
practice; (d) have participated in global development and monitoring activities; and (e) 
have established arrangements for the sustainable operation of the statistical system.  
Countries must also have complied with criteria applying to assistance in general, such as 
being creditworthy and having an agreed PRSP.  
 
Kenya has satisfied the eligibility criteria for STATCAP.  The Government's 
commitment to the development of an NSS was demonstrated in the Cabinet's 
endorsement of the SP and the draft Statistics Bill in December 2003.  The country is 
participating in the GDDS and its metadata has already been placed on the IMF Website.  
Its willingness to participate in other global monitoring activities is outlined in Annex 1.  
 
ii. Project development objective and key indicators.  
 
The project's development objective is to create an efficient and effective national 
statistical system to provide reliable, timely, and accurate data in line with international 
good practice and frameworks and needs of users.  The specific objectives of the 
proposed project are to support the government's efforts to:  
 
(a)  Develop a robust, coordinated, effective, and demand driven national statistical 
system and provide services that are accountable to multiple users.  
 
(b)  Produce impartial, credible, consistent and accessible statistical data and 
information in a timely and cost-effective manner.   
 
(c)  Encourage data producers to build partnerships with data users such as research and 
academic institutions with a view to building a sustainable data and information sharing 
system.  
Page  3
(d)  Create synergy through the establishment of both vertical and horizontal linkages 
among data producers in the country.  
 
(e)  Harness new developments in information and communication technology to 
improve the methods of data collection, processing, packaging and dissemination to 
users.  
 
The project will consolidate and compliment the efforts previously undertaken by the 
Kenya government and bilateral and multilateral organizations and support actions that 
are specified in the Strategic Plan.  
 
Key performance indicators include:  
 
(a)  Satisfaction of users of statistical information increases compared with a baseline.  
 
(b)  Significant progress is made in establishing a robust annual process of monitoring 
the IP-ERS.  
 
(c)  Use of statistical information clearly increases through, for example, reference to 
statistics in government's sector plans.  
 
Kenya's statistical system increasingly conforms to the standard of the IMF's GDDS, 
with regular updating and publication of the GDDS metadata in line with its 
recommendations.  
 
iii. Project components  
 
The project comprises six components: (a) organizational development (b) human 
resource development; (c) development of statistical infrastructure; (d) data development; 
(e) physical infrastructure and equipment; and (f) project management.  A brief 
description of each of the components is presented below.   To ensure participation and 
collaboration of the line ministries and agencies within the NSS, the SMP has been 
designed to include the development and strengthening of statistical units of producers of 
official statistics outside the CBS.  
 
(a)  
Organizational Development.  This component will ensure that institutional 
capacity supports the formulation, coordination, and implementation of appropriate 
statistical policies and programs geared to the needs of the Kenyan economy.  It will 
support the development of an organizational culture that reflects modern principles of 
management that is results oriented and focuses on teamwork, and that optimize the use 
of human resources, networking and communication throughout the organization.  The 
component will support development of new statistical legislation and regulations.  
Expected outputs include new statistical legislation and regulations that promote the 
effective production and use of data while guaranteeing the confidentiality of individual 
records.  It will also support measures to strengthen mechanisms for coordination of 
statistical activities between line ministries and between the center and the districts.  
Finally, it will support establishment of mechanisms for dialogue among data producers, 
users (including research and academic institutions), and respondents (providers).  
 
Page  4
(b)  
Human Resource Development.  This component will support training and 
education to strengthen professional skills of producers, suppliers and users of data.  The 
staff of CBS, line ministries, departments, agencies and others will be trained to use new 
statistics standards and methodologies and to employ new managerial skills.  This will 
require that comprehensive training is undertaken, not on an ad hoc and intermittent basis 
as is currently the case, but on an ongoing and strategic basis.  
 
This component will also support measures to strengthen ties between the CBS and a 
selected university to improve the learning and teaching of applied statistics and to 
reduce duplication of data collection by CBS, other NSS agencies and research institutes.  
As a first step, CBS and a university will jointly develop a syllabus for the teaching of 
applied statistics at the college and university levels.  
 
(c) 
Development of Statistical Infrastructure.  This component will provide the 
necessary infrastructure including computer processing equipment and software to 
strengthen data collection, processing and analysis.  It will also support the compilation 
and maintenance of (a) an updated central business register of establishments; (b) a 
sampling frame for household based censuses and surveys; (c) compendiums of concepts, 
definitions and methodologies for application in statistical analysis; and (d) economic and 
social classifications.  This will require all statistical and regulatory agencies to agree to 
cooperate and make joint efforts to build compatible statistical infrastructure.  
 
(d) 
Data Development.  This component will finance the adaptation by the main 
statistical agencies of internationally accepted standards and methodologies in data 
collection, compilation and validation.  It will also support the further development of 
sectoral statistics on issues such as demography, civil registration, health, education, 
poverty and living standards, national accounts, employment, judicial actions, agriculture, 
tourism and transportation.  
 
Information will be collected through both surveys and censuses and routine data 
systems (also known as administrative data sources, because most are part of the 
government's administration).  The program of surveys and censuses has been prioritized 
according to the already existing data gaps, the need to monitor the achievement of the 
national goals and the availability of funds to finance the proposed activities, most of 
which will be provided by development partners.  Routine data systems (including 
coordination and integration) will be strengthened in the ministries of planning, 
education, health, transport and communication; departments of judiciary, police, prisons, 
probation, and civil registration; and the Kenya Revenue Authority and the Central Bank 
of Kenya.  It is anticipated that the improved routine data systems will provide regular 
information on economic output, school enrolments, vaccination coverage and the like 
that can be used to understand trends in economic growth, poverty, and human 
development.  
 
This component will also support measures to raise awareness of statistics among 
potential users and the development of a data dissemination policy that will facilitate 
access of users to data.  This will include support for development of procedures and 
Page  5
presentations that reflect not only international standards and best practices, but also the 
continuous feedback from decision makers, analysts and researchers.  
 
Finally, this component will support the development by the CBS of project 
performance agreements (PPA) to be signed between the CBS and individual line 
ministries, departments and other agencies that produce and disseminate official statistics.  
 
(e)   
Physical Infrastructure and Equipment.  This component will provide computers 
and networking equipment, vehicles, survey equipment and accessories and office 
furniture and supplies for CBS and line ministries.  This will require the commitment of 
government to provide flexibility on the choice and use of technology and equipment for 
statistical purposes.  
 
(f) Project Management.  This component will finance project management and 
monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the project.  It will finance technical 
assistance, expertise, consultant services, operating costs, logistical support and 
equipment needed to operate the project transition support unit (TSU), to be housed 
within the CBS.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented all over the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project involves no civil works, land acquisition, construction, or any potential 
environmental or social impact.  But we expect the project to provide quality and timely 
Page  6
statistical data and information that will lead to better planning and well informed 
decision-making for experts working on environmental and social activities in Kenya.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will provide improved statistics relating to environment and social trends in 
all parts of the country.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The statistics produced during the project implementation period will be released to the 
public through the media and in key CBS publications such as the "Economic Survey" 
and the "Statistical Abstract" and other specific survey reports.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Page  7
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lucas A. Ojiambo 
08/29/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathie L. Krumm 
08/29/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, 
should project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, 
consult ASPEN. 
