Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC2283
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P096181 
Project Name:  Energy Sector Cleanup and Land Reclamation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Frank Van Woerden 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 26, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (70%);Power (30%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Other social development 
(P);Pollution management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.13 
 Financing 
Gap 
2.71
5.84 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The obj
ectives of the Bank’s support for the energy and mining development strategy are 
to work in concert with other donors to boost Kosovo’s long-term development, enhance 
the electricity supply, improve its badly-polluted environment and provide cleaner air and 
water for the population. By building local capacity, it would enable the PISG to attract, 
in a transparent manner, qualified world-class strategic investors into building new 
capacity for lignite thermal power generation conforming to high standards of 
environmental and social sustainability.  
 
The main project objective is to build local capacity of mine operators in 
environmentally sound waste management practices and demonstrate approaches to 
clean-up and land reclamation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project aims at supporting the Government of Kosovo in its efforts to 
enhance the country’s long-term power development and electricity supply while 
improving the environment for the population through promoting high standards of 
environmental and social sustainability.  
Page  2
The project will address environmental legacy issues related to open dumping of ashes 
on land and the inadequate storage of hazardous waste; free land for community 
development purposes currently taken by overburden material and ash heaps and initiate 
structural operations in KEK for continued clean-up and environmentally good practice 
mining operations.  
 
The project size is about is US$11.34 million of which (i) US$ 5.5 million is IDA 
funding, (ii) US$ 3.1 millio
n
is the recipient’s contribution and (iii) US$ 2.71 
million(TBD). The project has an almost five year implementation period and includes 
the following four components:  
 
Component A. Preparation of the Mirash Open Pit Mine for Ash and Waste 
Management: (US$2.1 million: US$1.2 million IDA; US$0.9 million KEK). The Mirash  
Open Pit Mine preparation activities for sustainable collection of ash and overburden 
materials removed from the Kosovo A ash facility storage would include: (i) geological 
and hydrogeological investigations and analyses; (ii) installation of a simple base liner 
(overburden clay/ash mix) including affiliated preparatory works; (iii) inclusion of 
drainage and mine water management system, and (iv) adaptation of the Kosovo A 
Thermal Power Plant direct ash disposal system.  
 
Component B. Relocation of Kosovo A Ash Dumps into Mirash Open Pit Mine (US$ 
5.64 million: US$2.85 million .IDA; US$1.08 million KEK; US$1.71 TBD) This 
component will develop the full removal of ash and overburden materials existing in the 
Kosovo A storage facility, which will be transported to the engineered disposal sites in 
Mirash Open Pit Mine, dumped and properly backfilled.  
 
Component C. Reclamation of Overburden Dump Areas (US$2.7 million: US$0.55 
million IDA; US$1.15 million KEK; US$1 million TBD): This component will invest in 
reclaiming about 6.5 km2 of land through reshaping and re-cultivating the overburden 
dump areas in the South Field and locations west of the Bardh mine.  Overall the 
reclaimed land should represent in the future an area suitable for purposes such as 
agriculture, new housing developments or recreation.  
 
Component D. Project Management (US$0.9 million: US$0.9 million IDA) The project 
will provide support to KEK to implement the project.  It will include support for: (i) 
overall project management and technical assistance in such areas as detailed design, 
construction supervision, procurement and financial management; and (ii) monitoring and 
evaluation of project impacts including implementation of environmental management 
plan for construction activities carried out under the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the heavily industrialized Obiliq area where the 
power stations Kosovo A and B are located and where most lignite mining operations 
take place. The proposed clean-up and reclamation activities aim at reducing the impact 
Page  3
of pollution on the local population and surrounding environment generated by the past 
and current lignite mining and power generation operations in the Obiliq zone. The 
project will build on the local capacity of environmental officials to allow the PISG to 
attract qualified investors to enhance the capacity for lignite thermal power generation in 
the country in conformity with best international practices for environment and social 
sustainability.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The CLRP has been classified as Category A, triggering OP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment). The Environmental Assessment (EA)  for the project identifies and 
analysizes the potential environmental impacts. An Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) has been developed as part of the EA preparation and recommends mitigation 
measures to mininmize the environmental impacts of the operations proposed under the 
project.  
 
The project will deal with the dry ash dump connected to the lignited fired power plant. 
Since this dump does not include an ash impoundment dam, the safety of dams policy is 
not triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The investments proposed are intended to contribute to solving the environmental 
problems related to open dumping of ashes on land and the improper storage of 
hazardous waste generated during the lignite mining and power operations in the project 
area, which affects the health of the local population and harms the natural resources.  
Overall, the Project is expected to have positive environmental impacts on the project 
Page  4
area that will lead to: (i) re-direction of ongoing ash production and transport of dumped 
ashes into a sustainable engineered site of an existing open lignite mine pit; (ii) 
reclamation of land from areas where overburden materials has been dumped in the past; 
and (iii) increasing the living standards of the population in the project area by reducing 
their exposure to air, land and water-based pollution generated by ash transport and 
disposal. No significant indirect or long-term environmental impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No social safeguard policy is triggered by the Project. In the course of 2007, a Strategic 
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to ensure that people are not adversely 
impacted by sector development will be prepared in parallel to the preparation of the 
Sibovc Development Plan. The SESA to be prepared in conformity with the EU SEA 
Directive (2001/42/EC),  the Bank's and Kosovo requirements and would develop a 
framework for the assessment, consultation and regulation of follow-on investments to 
mitigate any potentially negative consequences of interventions proposed under the plan 
and support the government in managing the social impacts of power generation and 
mining activities, especially land acquisition, expropriation and any necessary 
resettlement. The draft Sibovc Development Plan and the environmental and social report 
of the SESA will jointly be presented to stakeholders to give the public the opportunity to 
express its opinions before administrative adoption of the Plan.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient has prepared and disclosed the draft preliminary Environmental Impact 
Assessment and EMP in the local language thus meeting the country’s law andBank’s 
requirements. In addition, prior to the launch of the Project's civil works, KEK will 
prepare a detailed feasibility-stage EIA and corresponding EMPs.  
 
Project implementation is designated to Korporata Energjetike e KosovÃƒÂ«s Sh. 
a.(Kosovo Energy Corporation J.S.C.)(KEK) - the organization currently responsible for 
mining operations and power generation in the project area. KEK has well qualified 
environmental management staff thus the Recipient’s capacity to plan andimplement 
safeguard measures is considered adequate.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key project stakeholders include the communities in the project site, KEK and 
representatives of the Ministry of Energy and Mining; and Ministry of Environment and 
Forest Protection.  
 
The scope of the Environmental Assessment was initially discussed in a consultation 
workshop in the Obiliq/Kastriot municipality on March 10, 2006. The draft preliminary 
EIA report was presented in the local language in a public hearing in the same 
municipality on April 20, 2006. Following discussions in the country, the draft 
preliminary EIA was submitted to the Infoshop on April 25, 2006. This meets the Bank’s 
disclosure requirements and allows the Project to be appraised.The final EA report is 
Page  5
expected to be received officially by the Bank once all comments raised during the final 
public consultation as well as other critical related data have been addressed in a final 
revised report. The revised final draft will also be disclosed in country and in the 
Infoshop. The detailed feasibility-stage EIA and EMPs will also reflect consultations with 
the stakeholders and also be disclosed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/25/2006  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N\A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
04/26/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
04/25/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
04/25/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/26/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for negotiations on safeguards. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
04/26/2006 
Comments:  Approved 
