Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3107 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/23/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kosovo 
Project ID: P108080 
Project Name: Kosovo, Financial Sector TA 
Task Team Leader: Sophie Sirtaine 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Banking (70%);Micro- and SME finance (15%);Non-compulsory pensions, 
insurance and contractual savings (15%) 
Theme: Standards and financial reporting (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objectives of the proposed project are to enhance Kosovo's financial system stability 
and its contribution to economic growth adn poverty reduction. The project will contribute 
towards greater financial sector stability by supporting (i) stronger prudential regulation and 
supervision by the Central Bank Authorities of Kosovo (CBAK) for banks, microfinance 
institutions (MFIs), insurance companies and private pension funds, and (ii) the institutional 
strengthening of CBAK. Kosovo's financial sector's contribution to economic growth and povery 
reduction will be enhanced by widening access to finance through the strengthening of the 
microfinance industry.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will be based on four main areas of activities:  
 
1.
Improving the financial sector infrastructure: Activities in this area will aim to strengthen 
the institutional and financial sustainability of CBAK within the legal framework being currently 
prepared by the authorities for CBAK.  
Page  2
2. 
Strengthening prudential regulation and supervision: Activities in this area will help 
strengthen the regulation and supervision of banks, insurance companies, private pension funds, 
and other NBFIs.  
 
3
Improving access to finance: Activities in this area will aim to strengthen the MFI 
industry to achieve sustainability and expand outreach.  
 
4.
Improving financial institutions' institutional and technical capacity: Activities in this 
area will help develop specialized trainings for small banks and MFIs through their associations.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will take place in the capital city, Pristina, where the financial authorities and the 
headquarters of financial institutions are located.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguards are anticipated to be triggered.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/18/2007 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
NA   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sophie Sirtaine 
09/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/17/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
10/17/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
