Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/23/2006 
Report No.:  AC2199
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P097635 
Project Name:  Lignite Power Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Varadarajan Atur 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 9, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (40%);Power (30%);Mining and other 
extractive (30%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(S);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
EC: EU - European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR) 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the LPTAP are: (a) to help PISG strengthen enabling policy, legal and 
regulatory frameworks conducive to new investments in the energy sector; and (b) to 
assist PISG in attracting qualified private investors into building new capacity for lignite 
thermal power generation guided by high standards of environmental and social 
sustainability.  
 
The LPTAP objective will be attained through: (a) developing and strengthening the 
enabling policy, legal and regulatory frameworks in the energy sector, including 
mitigating environmental impacts and developing a framework for expropriation and 
resettlement; (b) developing an institutional structure and capacity for implementing the 
broader sector strategy, including mobilizing financing and dealing with FDI in the 
energy sector; and (c) technical consultancies for seeking qualified strategic investors in 
the proposed independent power plant (IPP) and mine.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of four components, which are summarized below:  
Page  2
Component 1:  Sector Policy, Legal, Regulatory and Safeguards Advice  
 
This component will comprise the following two subcomponents:  
 
(i)  Subcomponent 1- Sector Policy, Legal and Regulatory Advice:  This TA would 
primarily build on the IPA-Norton Rose diagnostics report on policy, legal and regulatory 
frameworks and focus on preparing the key legislation, including any required 
amendments, that will facilitate the IPP transaction.  In the first phase the consultants will 
identify the gaps and define the necessary actions to improve the investment 
environment.  In the second phase the consultants will work closely with the transaction 
advisors (under component 4, below) and with relevant ministries to develop and help 
adopt the final legislative and regulatory framework that will serve as a practical guide 
for expropriation and involuntary resettlement activities in Kosovo, and drafting 
legislation and regulations needed to assure that future expropriation and resettlement 
programs meet international standards. This will include the preparation of a 
Resettlement Policy Framework consistent with World Bank OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement as well as draft legislation on land expropriation and resettlement.  
 
(ii)  Subcomponent 2- Safeguards Framework: This subcomponent would provide TA 
for the preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) specific 
to energy sector development.  The SESA would identify environmental and social issues 
of projected developments in the power generation and related lignite mining sectors. The 
SESA would be the overarching environmental and social assessment of sector 
developments prior to the specific EIAs and other analyses that will be prepared for the 
decision making on individual investments.  The SESA will be instrumental to outline the 
needs for institutional strengthening and capacity building to assess, monitor and regulate 
the environmental impacts of mining and power generation.  This could include the 
preparation of legislation, regulations, monitoring systems and institutional changes that 
are necessary to fill any gaps.  The SESA will provide inputs to the development of the 
Resettlement Policy Framework under Subcomponent 1. This component will provide 
support for the development of the terms of reference for Environmental Impact 
Assessment, Social Assessment and the Resettlement Action Plan.  The subcomponent 
would also prepare an environmental baseline monitoring toolkit and collect field data.  
 
Component 2:  Technical Studies  
 
This component will comprise of the following three subcomponents:  
 
(i)  Subcomponent 1- New Sibovc (North) Mine Site Assessment: The purpose of the 
Sibovc (North) Mine Site Assessment is to evaluate alternative scenarios for mining 
within the northern part of the Sibovc lignite basin.  Scenarios may be as few as one, and 
no more than four (including variants on one or more central scenarios).  The New 
Sibovc (North) Mine Site Assessment is a pre-feasibility analysis to support an 
internationally competitive tender process for mine and plant development.   The analysis 
is not intended to support investment decisions nor provide a bankable feasibility 
analysis.  Principal considerations will include optimizing mine development in 
consideration of lignite quantity/quality relationships and pro forma cash flow analysis to 
Page  3
determine commercial viability.   Central to the analysis is the need to construct a 3D 
block model that will permit, at minimum, twenty five years of mine development 
planning with a production sufficient to supply lignite to a power plant of approximately 
600 megawatts, operating within an efficiency range of 42 
–
44%.  
 
(ii)  Subcomponent 2- New Power Plant Market, Siting and Feasibility Study, and 
Transmission System Assessment Study.  The market assessment will examine the local 
(Kosovo) and regional (ECSEE) electricity markets, potential off-take opportunities, the 
adequacy of the transmission system and identify most appropriate unit and plant size 
options. The power plant siting study will review previous studies performed for the new 
mine and power plants, and evaluate necessary siting factors in order to determine the 
preferred site for the power plant taking into account the environmental and social 
aspects. The feasibility study will provide adequate information to prospective investors 
to help their due diligence and preparation of bids efficiently. Hence, the feasibility study 
will analyze technologies for the lignite power plant, and optimize the power plant design 
at the selected site including supercritical technologies and circulating fluidized bed 
combustion (CFB) technology. The feasibility study will develop concept design of the 
major mechanical, electrical, instrumentation & control equipment and related systems, 
and civil works. It will develop operation management, environmental and licensing 
requirements and implementation schedule, and perform site specific and economic and 
financial analysis. The study will develop a work plan for the plant construction and 
identification of the risks associated to its development. The transmission system 
assessment study will determine the requirements for interconnecting the new power 
plant to the transmission system, includingdetailed conceptual designs and cost estimates.  
 
(iii)  Subcomponent 3- Renewable Energy Options: Technical assistance to help PISG 
develop policies and strategies to promote renewable energy and energy efficiency in 
Kosovo.  
 
Component 3: Capacity Building  
 
Sector administration is currently shared between (i) UNMIK, on behalf of Kosovo, as a 
signatory of the Athens Memorandum of December 2003 (which established ECSEE), 
and as a signatory to the ECSEE treaty of October 2005, and (ii) PISG, which passed the 
Law on Energy, the Law on Electricity and the Law on the Energy Regulator in mid-
2004, and which has established the Ministry of Energy and Mining (MEM) for policy 
making.  Many other ministries are also in their infancy, including the Ministry of 
Environment and Spatial Planning (MESP).  
 
This TA component would support capacity-building for the key ministries and agencies 
(including MEM and MESP), for inter-ministerial coordination, and for the Projects 
Office, the implementing entity for the Project.  The TA would also assist MEM, MESP 
and PISG to develop a communications and outreach strategy and improve public 
consultations.  In addition to TA, office equipment and vehicles, incremental operating 
costs would be provided to the implementing entity.  
 
Component 4:  Transaction Advisor  
Page  4
Building on the previous components, this TA would support the PISG in carrying out 
the transaction process to the financial close of the proposed IPP.  The transaction advisor 
would structure the procurement based on market soundings and would take into 
consideration, among other things, the requirements defined under the SESA. In the first 
phase, investors would be short-listed based on responses to a RFQ, and a detailed RFP 
would be prepared along with a bid evaluation methodology and a financial model. In the 
second phase the preferred bidder would be selected through a competitive 
bidding/evaluation process and, finally the transaction advisors would assist through to 
financial close of the proposed IPP.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will provide technical assistance to Kosovo. The SESA will be executed in 
parallel with the preparation of the Sibovc Development Plan (SDP). The SDP is a 
regional sector development plan that will ratify projected developments in existing and 
new lignite mining and power generation activities in the Sibovc-Obiliq area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The LPTAP provides technical assistance for the preparation of follow-on investments 
and will not finance any investments in power generation or in related lignite mining.  No 
negative impact is expected from the implementation of the proposed LPTAP.  The 
power plant and mine sites will only be determined during project implementation (under 
the project’s technical consultancies); however, the project is intended to facilitate the 
government’s ability to attract investments that would trigger the World Bank’s 
environmental and social safeguard policies if these investments were to be financed by 
the World Bank directly.  Because the follow-on investments after execution of the 
Page  5
LPTAP are expected to have significant impacts on the environment, the project is 
classified as Category B.  
 
The proposed Project will help strengthen the legal and institutional frameworks for 
regulating the environmental and social impact of mining and power projects, including 
resettlement, and also build capacity in the relevant ministries to implement, monitor and 
enforce the regulations.  Environmental and Social Assessment ToRs and Resettlement 
Action Plan ToRs for the lignite mine and power plant would be developed by 
consultants before launching the tendering process for the IPP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Kosovo’s energy sector development is now at the strategy and policies development 
stage. In parallel with the implementation of the LPTAP, for the Sibovc-Obiliq area, the 
planning stage for new investments will unfold. The potential social and environmental 
implications of the physical future investments which will follow after the planning stage 
and implementation of the LPTAP, will be discussed in the Strategic Environmental and 
Social Assessment (SESA). The SESA is being executed as part of the preparation of the 
Regional Sector (Sibovc) Development Plan. Assistance to PISG in the preparation of the 
SESA is part of the project component 1.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No relevant treatment of alternatives is imposed at this stage. They will be analyzed 
during implementation under preparation of the Sibovc Development Plan and the SESA.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of Project preparation, the PISG has prepared the Environmental and Social 
Safeguards Framework (ESSF) to address environment, potential land acquisition and 
other safeguard issues in the process of planning and other preparations for future 
investments in the lignite mining and power generation sectors. The ESSF meets with the 
requirements of Kosovar laws, EU Environmental Directives and Bank's operation 
policies on EA and involuntary resettlement.  
 
The ESSF sets out procedures to be followed during implementation of the LPTAP for 
energy sector development. A schematic that presents the sector development stages and 
the application of safeguard tools supported by the LPTAP is part of the ISDS.  
 
The ESSF includes the draft TORs for the Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SESA), and the approach to receiving public input on the TOR so that the 
actual SESA can be prepared and vetted with the public in time to be included in the 
tendering process.  The SEAA will address the environmental impacts and procedures of 
the regional sector (Sibovc) Development Plan (SDP). MEM will initiate the preparation 
of the SDP in cooperation with MESP and the participation of local authorities. The 
SESA will analyze, assess and environmental and social impacts of the most relevant 
Page  6
development scenarios of regional sector development for the SDP and include 
consultation rounds at the start of this process to present and discuss the SESA results 
and the draft SDP.  
 
The ESSF presents the standards for identifying, assessing and regulating environmental 
and social issues and includes procedures for public consultations in the decision-making 
process. The ESSF identifies procedures such as EIA, Social Assessment and 
Resettlement Action Plans for the site specific investments in the energy sector that may 
follow the technical assistance stage and the preparation of terms of reference for the 
application of these safeguard instruments.  
 
The ESSF includes a narrative description of the approach to be used for developing the 
legal and institutional framework for land expropriation and resettlement, including the  
preparation the “Resettlement Framework Plan” .  
 
While there have been recent efforts to develop an effective institutional structure for 
environmental regulation, including defining the most important actors, their roles and 
supporting legislation, the structure is still very weak.  Environmental legislation and 
standards are partially in place, but need further development to deal with the challenges 
of new initiatives. Current mining practice in the area does not incorporate planning for 
post-operation land reclamation such as the separation of top soil and other overburden 
material to facilitate reclamation as agricultural land. Similarly, the institutional capacity 
for managing land expropriation and resettlement is weak, and the project will develop 
the legal and institutional framework for managing land expropriation and resettlement 
and will support capacity-building.  
 
It is part of the LPTAP’s main objectives to assist the PSIG in strengthening capacity 
for safeguard policies and component 1 of the project is designed to enable regulatory 
capacity building and strengthen environmental and resettlement regulations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the Project are the Ministry of Energy and Mining, the Ministry of 
Environment and Spatial Planning and the Municipality of Obiliq/Kastriot. Municipalities 
that could be affected by future investments are Fushe Kosove and Prishtina.  
 
A
consultation workshop was conducted in February 2006 with the key stakeholders, 
other institutions and environmental and other NGOs at the Technical University of 
Prishtina to present and discuss the LPTAP and the ESSF.  
 
As detailed in the ESSF, the Bank's procedures for consultation and disclosure will be 
followed during implementation.  
 
The Project Office will monitor project execution of the TA components to ensure that 
all requirements and specifications are met and environmental considerations are 
incorporated according to the ESSF.  
Page  7
The Project envisions a highly participatory process in the formulation of the SESA and 
the Sibovc Development Plan   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  8
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Varadarajan Atur 
03/14/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
03/20/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
03/20/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/20/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter D. Thomson 
03/21/2006 
Comments:  Approved 
