Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2964 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kosovo 
Project ID: P105870 
Project Name: Kosovo Energy Sector Clean-up of Gasification Site 
Task Team Leader: Frank Van Woerden 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (70%);Mining and other extractive (30%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop.  1.12
1.12 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The specific purpose of the additional financing is to assist KEK, the Kosovar Energy Company 
and beneficiary, to contain and clean up hazardous substances present at the abandoned 
gasification plant site of the Kosovo A Thermal Power Plant and mitigate an urgent risk to public 
health and the environment.  The additional financing does not require any changes to the 
development objectives of the original Energy Sector Clean-up and Land Reclamation Project 
(CLRP) which are to: (a) address environmental legacy issues related to open dumping of ashes 
on land and enable KEK to free land for community development purposes taken by overburden 
material; (b) enable KEK to remove Kosovo A Ash Dump: and (c) initiate structural operations 
in KEK for continued clean-up and environmentally good practice mining operations.  The 
hazardous chemicals clean-up will be incorporated as Component E into the original Project and 
will contribute to development objective (c).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional financing project includes clean-up activity that was envisaged during 
the preparation of the original Kosovo Energy Sector Clean-up and Land Reclamation Project 
(CLRP) and proposed as a component, but could not be included in the project during appraisal 
Page  2
due to insufficient funds at the time. The proposed additional grant will provide resources to 
assist the beneficiary to contain, remove and dispose of hazardous substances present at the 
abandoned gasification plant site of the Kosovo A Thermal Power Plant.  
 
Using international good practice, the activity will focus on the containment, removal, 
packaging, and export from site for incineration or reprocessing, of about 17,500 m3 of the 
following chemicals:  
 
&#61656; 
Concentrated phenol  
 
&#61656; 
Mixtures of phenol and water  
 
&#61656; Tars 
 
 
&#61656; 
Oily compounds including waste oil  
 
&#61656; Ammonia 
 
 
&#61656; Benzene 
 
 
&#61656; Methanol 
 
 
The scope of proposed clean-up works and the allocated budgets have been identified through a 
feasibility study and basic design developed during the preparation of the ongoing CLRP. As 
part of implementation and before commencement of these works, detailed site investigations 
and chemicals sampling will be conducted and a detailed design will be prepared. For the design 
and budget of the activities under the Additional Funding, it is assumed that all chemicals need 
repackaging and export from the site to fully licensed and internationally reputable processors of 
these waste materials (e.g. waste incinerators, licensed cement industries). Final decisions 
concerning containment, repackaging and disposal procedures will be subject to a detailed 
sampling and site investigations program and detailed design.  
 
The budget for the proposed removal of these hazardous chemicals is US$ 6.12 million and 
consists of the following:  
 
&#61656; 
US$ 5.0 million from additional IDA funding; and  
 
&#61656; 
US$ 1.12 million from the Dutch Government (this is the balance of their Euro 
3.0 million (USD 3.83 million) grant after funding the initial project financing gap of US$ 2.71 
million).  The funds would cover the cost of preparation, implementation and management of the 
clean-up activities most of which will be civil works. Additionally, the funds will support the 
beneficiary to prepare plans for further clean-up activities at the gasification site after the 
removal of the most hazardous substances.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The clean-up activities under the Additional Financing will be implemented at the former 
gasification plant situated immediately adjacent to the Kosovo A thermal power plant (Kosovo 
A) in the heavily industrialized Obiliq area where the power stations Kosovo A and B are located 
and where most current mining operations take place.  
 
The former gasification plant site covers an area of roughly 100 ha. Numerous structures such 
as buildings, production installations, chemicals storage tanks, conveyors, piping ducts are 
located on the heavily contaminated site. Production has been stopped about 15 years ago, 
without any measures to rehabilitate facilities and remove chemicals.  As a consequence tanks 
Page  3
and other equipment are deteriorating with the increasing risk of release of hazardous chemicals 
to the underground and nearby waterways.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Recipient conducted the EIA, prepared and disclosed the EIA and EMP for the ongoing 
Project (CLRP) in the local language thus meeting the Kosovo?s legislative and Bank's 
requirements. The existing EIA includes an assessment of potential impacts of the chemical 
containment and removal activity proposed to be funded under this Additional Financing. The 
proposed activities will be implemented by KEK which has well qualified environmental 
management staff. The KEK Environmental Department and the PMU established under CLRP 
will closely supervise the execution of the works related to removal of hazardous chemicals from 
the gasification plant site and that the project EMP will be properly and timely implemented.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed component though designed to mitigate negative environmental impacts and 
improve the environmental situation at the gasification site, retains the Category A rating of the 
CLRP, in line with the World Bank?s Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), and in 
particular since the clean-up activities under the component involve the handling of chemicals 
that are hazardous for the environment.  The option of removing the hazardous chemicals stored 
on the gasification site was included in the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the 
CLRP and therefore the existing EIA (disseminated and publicly discussed in March 2006) will 
continue to be applied for the Additional Financing Project. Furthermore, the existing 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) recommends safety measures for handling of hazardous 
materials and monitoring responsibilities that should be undertaken during the civil works of the 
proposed cleanup activities. As a result a new Environmental Assessment is not required as part 
of this additional financing procedure.  
 
Overall the proposed AF Project is expected to have important and positive environmental 
impacts on the project area as it eliminates the high risk of release of the chemicals into the 
environment. The major findings from the existing EA indicate that negative impacts could only 
be expected during the repackaging and removal of the chemicals if spills would occur or if the 
tanks are emptied in an unsafe manner.  The necessary design measures and operational practices 
to ensure proper handling of the chemicals will be incorporated in the detail design of the works 
and in the bidding documents. In parallel, the existing Environmental Assessment and 
environmental monitoring plan (EMP) will be updated to include the additional details of the 
design work and presented to stakeholders in public consultations. The updated EMP will also be 
incorporated in the chemicals removal procedures and contractor bidding documents.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/04/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
new environmental impact assessment specifically for this AF Project will not be 
conducted. The existing Environmental Assessment and environmental monitoring plan 
(EMP) for the CLRP will be updated during project implementation and prior to the start of 
the works to include the additional details of the design work and be presented to 
stakeholders in public consultations. The updated EMP will also be incorporated in the 
chemicals removal procedures and contractor bidding documents.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
