Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/08/2007 
Report No.:  AC2976
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P105870 
Project Name:  Kosovo Energy Sector Clean-up of Gasification Site 
Task Team Leader:  Frank Van Woerden 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (70%);Mining and other extractive (30%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop.  1.12
1.12 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The specific purpose of the additional financing is to assist KEK, the Kosovar Energy 
Company and beneficiary, to contain and clean up hazardous substances present at the 
abandoned gasification plant site of the Kosovo A Thermal Power Plant and mitigate an 
urgent risk to public health and the environment.  The additional financing does not 
require any changes to the development objectives of the original Energy Sector Clean-up 
and Land Reclamation Project (CLRP) which are to: (a) address environmental legacy 
issues related to open dumping of ashes on land and enable KEK to free land for 
community development purposes taken by overburden material; (b) enable KEK to 
remove Kosovo A Ash Dump: and (c) initiate structural operations in KEK for continued 
clean-up and environmentally good practice mining operations.  The hazardous chemicals 
clean-up will be incorporated as Component E into the original Project and will 
contribute to development objective (c).   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional financing project includes clean-up activity that was envisaged 
during the preparation of the original Kosovo Energy Sector Clean-up and Land 
Reclamation Project (CLRP) and proposed as a component, but could not be included in 
the project during appraisal due to insufficient funds at the time. The proposed additional 
Page  2
grant will provide resources to assist the beneficiary to contain, remove and dispose of 
hazardous substances present at the abandoned gasification plant site of the Kosovo A 
Thermal Power Plant.  
 
Using international good practice, the activity will focus on the containment, removal, 
packaging, and export from site for incineration or reprocessing, of about 17,500 m3 of 
the following chemicals:  
 
&#61656; 
Concentrated phenol  
 
&#61656; 
Mixtures of phenol and water  
 
&#61656; Tars 
 
 
&#61656; 
Oily compounds including waste oil  
 
&#61656; Ammonia 
 
 
&#61656; Benzene 
 
 
&#61656; Methanol 
 
 
The scope of proposed clean-up works and the allocated budgets have been identified 
through a feasibility study and basic design developed during the preparation of the 
ongoing CLRP. As part of implementation and before commencement of these works, 
detailed site investigations and chemicals sampling will be conducted and a detailed 
design will be prepared. For the design and budget of the activities under the Additional 
Funding, it is assumed that all chemicals need repackaging and export from the site to 
fully licensed and internationally reputable processors of these waste materials (e.g. 
waste incinerators, licensed cement industries). Final decisions concerning containment, 
repackaging and disposal procedures will be subject to a detailed sampling and site 
investigations program and detailed design.  
 
The budget for the proposed removal of these hazardous chemicals is US$ 6.12 million 
and consists of the following:  
 
&#61656; 
US$ 5.0 million from additional IDA funding; and  
 
&#61656; 
US$ 1.12 million from the Dutch Government (this is the balance of their 
Euro 3.0 million (USD 3.83 million) grant after funding the initial project financing gap 
of US$ 2.71 million).  The funds would cover the cost of preparation, implementation 
and management of the clean-up activities most of which will be civil works. 
Additionally, the funds will support the beneficiary to prepare plans for further clean-up 
activities at the gasification site after the removal of the most hazardous substances.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The clean-up activities under the Additional Financing will be implemented at the former 
gasification plant situated immediately adjacent to the Kosovo A thermal power plant 
(Kosovo A) in the heavily industrialized Obiliq area where the power stations Kosovo A 
and B are located and where most current mining operations take place.  
 
The former gasification plant site covers an area of roughly 100 ha. Numerous structures 
such as buildings, production installations, chemicals storage tanks, conveyors, piping 
ducts are located on the heavily contaminated site. Production has been stopped about 15 
Page  3
years ago, without any measures to rehabilitate facilities and remove chemicals.  As a 
consequence tanks and other equipment are deteriorating with the increasing risk of 
release of hazardous chemicals to the underground and nearby waterways.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed component though designed to mitigate negative environmental impacts 
and improve the environmental situation at the gasification site, retains the Category A 
rating of the CLRP, in line with the World Bank's Policy on Environmental Assessment 
(OP 4.01), and in particular since the clean-up activities under the component involve the 
handling of chemicals that are hazardous for the environment.  The option of removing 
the hazardous chemicals stored on the gasification site was included in the Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) for the CLRP and therefore the existing EIA (disseminated and 
publicly discussed in March 2006) will continue to be applied for the Additional 
Financing Project. Furthermore, the existing Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
recommends safety measures for handling of hazardous materials and monitoring 
responsibilities that should be undertaken during the civil works of the proposed cleanup 
activities. As a result a new Environmental Assessment is not required as part of this 
additional financing procedure.  
 
Overall, the proposed Additional Financing is expected to have important and positive 
environmental impacts on the project area as it eliminates the high risk of release of the 
chemicals into the environment. The major findings from the existing EA indicate that 
negative impacts could only be expected during the repackaging and removal of the 
chemicals if spills would occur or if the tanks are emptied in an unsafe manner.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The gasification site is highly contaminated and removal of the most hazardous materials 
stored on site is considered the highest priority action to reduce risks of further 
environmental contamination. Under Project implementation the detailed site 
investigations will be used to prepare a site plan for further containment, clean-up and 
remediation activities to be undertaken by the beneficiery. It is therefore expected that the 
Project will have additional possitive long-term impacts to improve the environmental 
risks at the gasification site.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Under normal conditions adverse impacts do not occur from Project implementation. 
Only accidental spills of hazardous materials could have negative impacts and will be 
avoided or mitigated throught safety measures and supervision.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The necessary safeguarding measures and operational practices to ensure proper handling 
of the chemicals will be incorporated in the detail design of the works and in the bidding 
documents. In parallel, the existing Environmental Assessment and environmental 
monitoring plan (EMP) will be updated to include the additional details of the design 
work and presented to stakeholders in public consultations. The updated EMP will also 
be incorporated in the chemicals removal procedures and contractor bidding documents.  
 
The Recipient conducted the EIA, prepared and disclosed the EIA and EMP for the 
ongoing Project (CLRP) in the local language thus meeting the Kosovo's legislative and 
Bank's requirements. The existing EIA includes an assessment of potential impacts of the 
chemical containment and removal activity proposed to be funded under this Additional 
Financing. The proposed activities will be implemented by KEK which has well qualified 
environmental management staff. The KEK Environmental Department and the PMU 
established under CLRP will closely supervise the execution of the works related to 
removal of hazardous chemicals from the gasification plant site and that the project EMP 
will be properly and timely implemented.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key project stakeholders include the communities near the project site, KEK and 
representatives of the Ministry of Energy and Mining; and Ministry of Environment and 
Physical Planning.  
 
The scope of the Environmental Assessment was initially discussed in a consultation 
workshop in the Obiliq/Kastriot municipality on March 10, 2006. The EIA report was 
presented in the local language in a public hearing in the same municipality on April 20, 
2006. Following discussions in the country, the EIA was submitted to the Infoshop on 
April 25, 2006. This meets the Bank?s disclosure requirements and allows the Additional 
Financing Activities to be appraised.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/25/2006  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
05/06/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
05/07/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
05/03/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
05/07/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
 
Comments:   
