Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC2580
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P102165 
Project Name:  Avian Influenza Preparedness Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ibrahim Hackaj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to strengthen the government of Kosovo's capacity 
to prevent the spread of avian influenza among poultry, to prevent the transmission of 
avian influenza from birds to other animals and humans, and to prepare for a potential 
pandemic of avian influenza transmissible between humans.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1. Public Awareness and Information (US$ 283,500) will help develop and 
implement a communications policy to inform the public, particularly those more likely 
to be exposed to HPAI, about the threat of HPAI and how they can minimize the risk of 
transmission and spread of disease, through supporting a) Risk Communication, and b) 
Communication for Behavior Change.  
 
Component 2. Animal Health (US$ 1,573,300) will support a national program to 
develop and implement short and long term HPAI prevention, containment, and control 
and eradication activities in animals, through a) Enhancing HPAI Prevention and 
Preparedness Capability; b) Strengthening Disease Control Capacities, and Improving 
Surveillance, Diagnostic Capacities and Applied Research; and c) Strengthening HPAI 
Page  2
Control Programs and Outbreak Containment Programs, including financing of a 
Compensation Fund for culled livestock.  
 
Component 3. Human Health (US$ 968,500) will support a national program to develop 
and implement short and long term prevention of an outbreak of HPAI among humans 
and reduce the impact of a pandemic virus, by: a) Enhancing Coordination and Program 
Planning; b) Strengthening the National Public Surveillance System; and c) 
Strengthening Health Care Response Capacity.  
 
Component 4.  Project Implementation and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 210,700) 
will support and complement the capacity of the Project Team for effective 
implementation and management of the project, through: a) Providing Support to the 
Project Team; and b) supporting Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) capacity.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented across the territory.  Some activities will be targeted 
geographically where public health laboratories and other facilities exist (for 
strengthening human disease surveillance and capacity to respond to human outbreaks) 
and where veterinary laboratories exist (for strengthening animal disease surveillance 
capacity), and in areas with a greater concentration of poultry production (for virus 
eradication at the source).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Drite Dade (ECSSD) 
Mr Bekim Imeri (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Activities under the Project are not expected to generate significant adverse 
environmental effects as they are focused largely on public sector capacity building and 
Page  3
improved readiness for dealing with outbreaks of avian influenza in domestic poultry and 
human health. These prevention-focused activities are expected to have a positive 
environmental impact as the Project?s investments in facilities, equipment, and training 
for laboratories will improve the effectiveness and safety of the existing avian influenza 
handling and testing procedures and meet the international standards established by the 
WHO and OIE.  There are three environmental issues that will be addressed in the 
Operations Manual: the procedures for culling and disposal of poultry; the handling of 
medical waste generated by laboratories and health care facilities; and civil works 
associated with the rehabilitation of labs and the construction of the virology laboratory 
for the KVFA.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The environmental considerations for carcass disposal typically have the potential for one 
or more of the following environmental impacts: health and safety hazards for the 
workers and the public; soil and water pollution from leakages of the carcass waste; 
excavation of materials and disposal of surplus soil/earth and other materials, risks to 
environmentally sensitive areas, flora and fauna; vicinity of the disposal site to the busy 
areas like national road, health centers, markets, schools or natural reserves or historic 
sites; site location (avoiding flooded, eroded or sliding areas).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project supports investments in civil works (construction and rehabilitation of 
laboratories and hospitals) and in carcass disposal. An Environmental Assessment and 
Environmental Management plan satisfactory to the Association (both of which are 
conditions of effectiveness) will evaluate these issues and mitigating procedures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environmental Assessment will be launched on or around January 31, 2007. Two 
meetings in rural areas will be held with key stakeholders and with rural community 
participation to discuss environmental assessment findings between February 10 and 20, 
2007. The assessment will also be advertised through media and available for review 
after February 28, 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2007 
 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/10/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
A
waiver for the requirements to complete the EA and EMP during project preparation 
has been sought per para. 12 of OP 4.01.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ibrahim Hackaj 
12/05/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Drite Dade 
12/05/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bekim Imeri 
12/06/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
12/11/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
12/21/2006 
Comments:   
