Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC3204
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P102174 
Project Name:  Institutional Development for Education Project 
Task Team Leader:  Keiko Miwa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 29, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (50%);Secondary education (30%);Tertiary education (20%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (P);Conflict 
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
2.70
3.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The long-term overall goal of the proposed project is to support the government in the 
implementation of the Strategy for the Development of Pre-University Education in 
Kosovo and Strategy and the Strategy for the Development of Higher Education.  The 
specific objective of the proposed project is to strengthen systems, institutions and 
management capacities needed for education quality improvements.   
 
3. Project Description 
The priority areas of the proposed project are key elements of the government's Pre-
University and Higher Education Strategies, and grouped into four: (i) Strengthening the 
organization and financing of the education system in post Status Kosovo, (ii) Building 
institutions and management capacity to promote quality improvements, (iii) Creating 
conditions to introduce efficient designs and reduce multiple shifts in Kosovo's schools, 
and (iv) Strengthening the management capacity at system and institutional levels for 
higher education.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The construction of two pilot model schools is considered under the Project, at sites yet to 
be determined. However, the project will include only small scale civil works with 
localized impacts connected to the construction of these two proposed school structures 
that will be built on municipal land. Therefore, the project will trigger the World Bank 
policy OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. The Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) prepared by the MEST recommends preventive measures and monitoring actions 
to address possible minor environmental impacts related to the proposed construction 
activities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project has been classified as environmental assessment category B since minor 
environmental impacts are anticipated in relation to small scale civil works for the 
construction of two schools.  These investments are expected to be environmentally 
beneficial (such as the introduction of energy-conserving technology) and are not 
expected to have any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. The minor 
potential environmental impacts are expected to be localized and able to be mitigated 
during the implantation stage.  An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been 
prepared in order to integrate environmental concerns into the design and implementation 
of the proposed Project.  As a part of the EMP, the construction of the pilot model 
schools will be subjected to a site-specific environmental screening and review process.  
This process will minimize site-specific environmental impacts and will use a 
standardized appraisal format that includes, but is not limited to, review of:  
 
-- Current environmental problems at the sites (soil erosion, water supply 
contamination, etc.);  
Page  3
--Potential environmental impacts, if any, due to the project (disposal waste from 
construction, construction noise and dust, etc);   
 
-- Potential impacts on archaeological and historical sites; and  
 
-- Potential requirements, in any, for involuntary resettlement or temporary relocation of 
a
limited number of affected persons during the construction activities.  The mitigation 
and monitoring plans of the EMP will be attached to the civil works contracts and include 
guidance to provide consistent technical standards on proper construction procedures to 
ensure the protection of public health and the local environment.  The contractors will 
follow the local construction standards and will be responsible to ensure that all local 
existing regulatory standards and requirements are met. The EMP will be disclosed with 
the public and stakeholders on the MEST website before Project Appraisal.  Any 
comments received during public disclosure will be incorporated in a final EMP 
document.  
 
The policy OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered as the project is not 
expected to require any land acquisition or resettlement.  The schools will be built on 
municipal land and the EMP will specify that site selection will ensure no displacement 
of residences or economic activities is required.  
 
The policy on OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resource is not triggered by the project, 
but the EMP will include measures to address any chance finds.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant indirect or long-term impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has already prepared an EMP for the proposed construction works that 
provides environmental guidelines and outlines appropriate mitigation and monitoring 
measures during the proposed activities.  The Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology (MEST) will be responsible for the implementation of the proposed Project.  
The Permanent Secretary of the MEST will be responsible for the coordination and 
monitoring of activities at the technical level.  For Priority area 2 (construction of two 
pilot models schools), the Director of the Infrastructure Department of the MEST will be 
responsible for implementation.  
 
The Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning (MESP) has the primary 
responsibility for implementing environmental policies and protection under Kosovo's 
Environmental Protection Law of 2003 (the "Law").  At the local level, municipalities are 
responsible for specific protection activities as specified in the Law.  
 
Page  4
On the Project level, a Specialist will be identified within the MEST, who will be 
responsible for coordination and supervision of the environmental plans and risk 
mitigation measures undertaken in the Project and cooperate with territorial departments 
for environment protection.  The Specialist will work in close coordination with the 
Director of Infrastructure Department of the MEST responsible for coordination of the 
construction of pilot schools, and will carry out the following tasks:  
 
-- Coordinate environmental training for staff, designers and local contractors;  
 
-- Disseminate existing environmental management guidelines and develop guidelines 
in relation to issues not covered by the existing regulations, for implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of mitigation measures;  
 
-- Ensure contracting for construction and supply of equipment includes reference to 
appropriate guidelines and standards; and  
 
-- Conduct periodic site visits to inspect and approve plans and monitor compliance.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the MEST, local communities and municipalities, NGOs, 
engineers, and architects.  
 
The EMP will be disclosed in-country in local language prior to appraisal through the 
MEST's website and at the Infoshop in Washington.  The MEST will, throughout the 
project implementation, have continuous consultation with the stakeholders, as necessary, 
to address environmental issues/concerns that may affect them.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/17/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/25/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  5
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Keiko Miwa 
10/15/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
10/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/11/2007 
Comments:  The approval authority of ISDS has been transferred to the SMU on October 11, 2007 
because this is a category B project 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Arup Banerji 
10/29/2007 
Comments:  (acting Sector Manager for Education) 
