Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/30/2007 
Report No.:  AC3224
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P108080 
Project Name:  Kosovo, Financial Sector TA 
Task Team Leader:  Sophie Sirtaine 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 6, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Banking (70%);Micro- and SME finance (15%);Non-compulsory pensions, 
insurance and contractual savings (15%) 
Theme:  Standards and financial reporting (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overarching objective of the proposed project is to enhance Kosovo's financial 
system's stability and development. The project will contribute towards greater financial 
sector stability and development by supporting (i) stronger prudential regulation and 
supervision by CBAK for banks and non bank financial institutions, (ii) the institutional 
strengthening of CBAK, and (iii) the strengthening of the banking and microfinance 
industry through capacity building.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes three components, benefiting respectively CBAK, KBA and AMIK. 
 
Component I: assistance to CBAK 
 
Component I will aim to strengthen CBAK’s institutional capacity and the regulatory 
and supervisory framework for banks and non banks. The component will include two 
main sub-components aimed respectively to (i) strengthen CBAK’s long term 
institutional and financial capacity and sustainability; and (ii) further strengthen banking 
Page  2
sector supervision, especially off-site supervision; and strengthen and upgrade the 
regulatory and supervisory framework for insurance activities and intermediaries (mainly 
on ongoing supervision) and for other NBFIs under the purview of CBAK. 
 
Sub-
component I.I will aim to strengthen CBAK’s institutional capacity and ensure its 
long term sustainability. In view of Kosovo’s approaching status resolution and the need 
for local institutions to rely less and less on international experts, it is important that 
CBAK’s long term sustainability be ascertained. This requires ensuring its long term 
financial sustainability, and its continued access to skilled local staff. As donor grants to 
CBAK reduced substantially from their peak in 2002, CBAK relies mostly on the interest 
income it earns on funds entrusted to the institution (in particular deposits from KTA, the 
Kosovo Trust Agency) to fund its expenditures (net fees and commission income being a 
limited source of funding for CBAK at present). Thus, CBAK’s long term financial 
sustainability is highly vulnerable to a potential withdrawal of KTA’s deposits, a risk 
which, given current political uncertainties, cannot be excluded. In addition, CBAK has 
suffered from a high level of staff departure in recent years, motivated largely by the 
higher salaries offered by private institutions. Thus, there is a need to analyze alternative 
sources of funding for CBAK, and to define means to better motivate and retain staff. 
Against that backdrop, the component will finance the preparation of a medium term 
development strategy for CBAK based on market development trends, as well as a 
detailed functional/capacity/skills assessment of CBAK. On the basis of these medium-
term strategy and capacity assessment, a phased medium term staffing plan will be 
developed for CBAK. In parallel, CBAK’s salary scale will be benchmarked to private 
banks’ and insurance companies’, utilities’ and ministries’ in Kosovo and its other (non 
salary-based) staff incentives reviewed (including other benefits, promotion 
opportunities, training plans, etc). On that basis, proposals will be made to CBAK’s 
management team to improve staff satisfaction and reduce risk of attrition. 
Simultaneously, medium-term financial projections will be prepared for CBAK under 
various scenarios and a review conducted of CBAK’s sources of funding, benchmarking 
fees to other European financial sector authorities. This will lead to the submission of 
proposals (if and as needed) to ensure CBAK’s long-term financial sustainability, 
including the implementation of the staffing plan and the staff satisfaction measures. 
Depending on the availability of project resources, this first sub-component may also 
finance a financial literacy campaign to raise population awareness on financial products, 
returns and risks, as well as on campaign on the role and importance of the credit registry, 
the use of non-cash payments instruments and other relevant topics. In addition, if and as 
needed, disclosure requirements by financial institutions will be reviewed and amended. 
 
Sub-component I.II will aim to strengthen CBAK’s regulatory and supervisory 
capacities. As explained earlier, fragilities in the banking sector emanating largely from 
connected lending, led CBAK to orient its surveillance of banks in recent years largely on 
onsite inspections focused on banks’ loan portfolios. As fragilities have decreased in the 
banking sector, it is necessary for CBAK to conduct more comprehensive financial and 
offsite analyses of banks and non bank institutions. To do so, the processing of incoming 
regulatory information needs to be formalized and further developed. Firstly, regulatory 
reporting needs review and revision, and secondly, an automated database should be built 
Page  3
to receive and manipulate the statistical data with which to analyze bank and non bank 
conditions and conduct relevant market and individual institution analyses. Thus, the 
component will include a review of current regulatory forms and processes for banks and 
non banks and provide recommendations to ensure they provide adequate information to 
CBAK (in scope and nature) for its financial and off-site supervision, without creating 
excessive cost on individual institutions. If needed as per the conclusions of the review, 
and if there is enough project resources left, the component would also support the 
development of a regulatory data base aimed to receive regulatory reporting and help 
generate individual bank analysis reports, peer review analyses, and financial 
sector/stability analysis reports. This should provide a strong analytical basis for the off-
site supervision. The data base could be further extended to provide an Early Warning 
System. CBAK staff will be trained in using the new database and in producing improved 
stability reports and bank analyses. 
 
Sub-component I.II wil
l
also strengthen CBAK’s capacity to monitor the banking 
sector, especially through better off-site supervision and analyses of “whole bank risks”. 
While CBAK’s onsite examiners have benefited from substantial technical assistance, 
especially in reviewing loan portfolios, there is a need to further develop banking 
supervisors’ capacity to evaluate “total bank risk”. The improved regulatory reporting 
that should result from the grant’s previous component, will allow more thorough and 
accurate analysis of ongoing bank conditions as well as to better monitor developments 
following onsite supervision. Currently, follow up of examination results is limited, and 
offsite analyses reveal a need to better understand and interpret financial information. 
Thus, in coordination with other donors involved in strengthening banking supervision in 
Kosovo, the component will support training programs for bank (onsite and offsite) 
supervisors focused on whole bank financial analysis and systemic analysis. It will also 
train supervisors in preparing supervisory strategies for each banking institution and in 
establishing a supervisory documentation process. Finally, to help supervisors design and 
create better offsite supervisory processes and provide them with a strong perspective 
regarding the role offsite supervision plays in the ongoing, risk based supervisory 
process, hands-on experience, i.e. the ability to see established processes in action, will 
help transfer knowledge to individuals that are responsible for conducting the same 
process in the CBAK. Thus, if sufficient funding is available, the grant will support 
opportunities for both offsite and onsite supervisors to “apprentice” with other European 
supervisory agencies in the offsite function. Such opportunities will also be offered to 
staff in the corporate and licensing departments of CBAK. 
 
Finally, sub-component I.II will help strengthen the regulation and supervision of the 
insurance sector, pension funds and other NBFIs. CBAK’s capacity to supervise NBFIs is 
limited and largely based on a reporting checklist approach. As the industry is growing 
and becoming more sophisticated, there is a real need for CBAK to develop a solid risk-
based ongoing insurance and other NBFI supervision strategy. In the insurance sector, the 
project will thus support in priority a review of the legal framework for effective on-
going supervision and claims management and assist CBAK in defining on that basis an 
ongoing supervision strategy for life and non life insurance companies. This assistance 
will be accompanied by assistance to build CBAK’s capacity to conduct effective 
Page  4
supervision of insurance intermediaries, through the provision of training and peripatetic 
assistance to insurance supervisors, the finalization of insurance supervision manuals, and 
the development of an insurance market report. In anticipation of the planned 
liberalization of Third Party Liability (TPL) premiums and of the launch of life insurance 
activities by various companies, the component will also give priority to financing (i) a 
functional, supervision and technical assessment of the proposed TPL tariff liberalization; 
and (ii) a detailed actuarial assessment of life insurance activities and products. Finally, 
the component will support review and completion of the legal framework for TPL 
insurance, life insurance, actuaries, reinsurance, and insurance intermediaries 
–depending 
on the availability of project resources left. Regarding other NBFIs, the project will give 
priority to supporting a review of the regulations and rules for the licensing and risk-
based supervision of private pension funds (Pillar II and Pillar III) and of investment 
funds (UCITSs and venture capital funds). This could be extended to other professional 
securities market participants (in line with a capital market development plan that will be 
prepared under the grant too if funding is available). 
 
Component II: assistance to AMIK 
 
Component II will aim to strengthen the microfinance industry of Kosovo to achieve 
sustainability and expand outreach. Through AMIK, training will be provided to MFIs, 
especially small ones, based on a need assessment carried out by AMIK. The training will 
aim to strengthen smaller MFIs, focusing on helping them become financially self-
sustainable and less donor-dependent and managing risks adequately. Specific assistance 
will also be provided to MFIs transforming into deposit-taking institutions, in areas of 
particular importance in the transformation process (such as on deposit taking activities, 
asset and liability management, etc). This assistance will be coordinated with the 
European Fund for South East Europe (EFSE) which also provides TA to selected 
transforming MFIs. In addition, a simplified assessment of the impact of microfinance in 
Kosovo will be conducted in order to provide AMIK with an advocacy tool in support of 
the microfinance industry. The grant will also support the participation of AMIK to other 
advocacy events. 
 
Component III: assistance to KBA 
 
This component will strengthen the capacity of the Kosovo Bankers’ Association to 
provide adequate training to local banks, especially small ones, to build their technical 
capacity. On the basis of an ongoing training needs assessment carried out by an 
international consultant for KBA, the grant will provide training to KBA’s trainers (and 
relevant bank staff) on advanced banking sector topics which the training need 
assessment will have identified as being required by the banks. It is anticipated that 
training will be needed on risk management issues for banks, as well as on Anti Money 
Laundering (AML) issues. Training KBA’s trainers on these topics will ensure the long 
term sustainability of the trainings as the trainers will be able to provide the trainings to 
the banks as and when needed by the banks. Training will also be provided to bank 
training officers to help them better assess training needs in their own institutions, again 
with the objective to ensure the sustainability of identifying and providing training to the 
banks. 
Page  5
Given the limited size of the grant, implementation of the project will focus on priority 
areas first, namely the institutional strengthening of CBAK (Component 1.1), the review 
of reporting processes and reporting information by banks and non banks (included in 
C
omponent 1.2), the strengthening of CBAK’s capacity to supervise insurance companies 
and pension funds, the TPL premium liberalization feasibility study and the life insurance 
actuarial study (included in Component 1.3). Other project activities will be implemented 
to the extent that project resources are still available.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Pristina.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
NA   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
NA   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sophie Sirtaine 
10/23/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
10/30/2007 
Comments:   
