Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2594 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kosovo 
Project ID: P101214 
Project Name: Kosovo Real Estate Cadastre and Registration Project 
Task Team Leader: Wael Zakout 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (40%);Sub-national government 
administration (40%);Law and justice (20%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  4.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project will be a follow up on the Enhancement of Tenure Security Component of 
the Business Environment Project. This component is part of the Kosovo Cadastre Development 
Program II, a joint effort by the donor community (Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, and the World 
Bank). The overall goal of the Kosovo Cadastre Development Program is to enhance tenure 
security and facilitate the development of land and property markets.  
 
The central objective of the proposed project is to enhance the security of property rights in 
Kosovo. This will be achieved through: (i) registration of apartments; (ii) improvement in  
service delivery of the municipal cadastre offices and strengthened capacity of the Kosovo 
Cadastre Agency; and (iii) harmonization and improvement of the laws and regulation that 
government cadastre and registration.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will include the following components:  
 
Page  2
Component1. Registration of Apartments.  It is estimated that Kosovo has around 600,000 
apartments. Although a legal basis for apartment registration exists, this has yet to be 
implemented.  As a result, the current practice is not to register apartments in the IPRR, and 
virtually all apartments are outside the official register of the Municipal Cadastre Offices. Local 
and international banks that operate in Pristina report that there is a strong consumer demand for 
loans secured by apartments, and that one of the main obstacles to expanding lending is the 
absence of apartment registration in the IPRR system.  Furthermore, because sales of apartments 
are not registered, the PISG is unable to realize the potentially significant revenues that could 
accrue from levying taxes on the registration of transactions and mortgages.  The proposed 
component will register all apartments and buildings in the IPRR. The IPRR will also register 
other rights, such as mortgage and lease contracts.  
 
Component 2. 
Institutional Support to the KCA and MCOs. The component will support 
the transformation of the KCA into an autonomous and self financing entity with the Chief 
Executive Officer appointed by a Board of Directors who represents the Government as well as 
major user groups, such as the bankers associations, real estate agents, and other concerned 
organizations.  The Board will also include representation of all ethnic groups in Kosovo.  The 
KCA will become a non-political organization free from political interference by the 
government. The future KCA should function in accordance with a business model, be capable 
of setting its human resource policies, and establishing its own salary structure and capital 
investment strategy in order to enable it to recruit and maintain excellent staff and operate 
effectively and efficiently. The new KCA will also have a strengthened relationship with the 
MCOs to ensure uniformity in the application of the property law in registering property 
transactions across Kosovo. Since this transformation is essential to strengthening the KCA and 
ensuring sustainability of the property rights registration system in Kosovo, it is suggested that 
the adoption of a law to enable this transformation is essential before the Bank and other donors 
finance the Kosovo Cadastre Development Program III.  
 
Component 3. 
Policy and Legislative Reforms. The component will support the 
formulation of policies and preparation of laws and regulations to bring coherence and clarity to 
property rights law in Kosovo and to enable the speedy implementation of the reconstruction of 
cadastre and registration of apartments. The component will also support amendments to the 
existing cadastre and immovable property registration laws and other laws as may be determined 
to be necessary during project preparation. The component will also support the development of 
proper policies to promote the development of land markets both in rural and urban areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project will cover the entire country, but will focus on urban areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Project implementation is designated to the KCA (Kosovo Cadastre Agency) and the MCO 
(Municipal Cadastral Offices). The project will financially support strengthening the overall 
institutional capacity of these two organizations including their capabilities of implementing and 
monitoring minor safegaurds issues related to the development of this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project might finance investments related to small rehabilitation of existing building 
offices. In this case, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental Management Plan to mitigate 
any likely environmental impacts developed during the construction stage of these rehabilitation 
works.  
 
The need for new office space will be determined during preparation. If this is the case, it 
was agreed that the legal agreement specify that any new construction take place on 
unencumbered land that is already owned by the municipality. If any construction of new office 
space is necessary, the status of any land proposed for new construction as unencumbered would 
be verified.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
During preparation, the likelihood of new building construction will be determined, and the 
cultural property issues which trigger OP4.11 will also be reviewed.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/09/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/11/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
The team proposes to pre-appraise the project around March 2007.  Appraisal could take 
place around June/July 2007, with a delivery date around October 2007. If the project will 
finance rehabilitation of offices for MCO and KCA use in Kosovo, an EMP will be prepared 
by the Borrower and disclosed in country by June 2007 before appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
11/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/17/2006 
Comments:  cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
11/17/2006 
Comments:  approved. 
