Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2946 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/25/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kosovo 
Project ID: P102174 
Project Name: Education Innovation Project 
Task Team Leader: Keiko Miwa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (50%);Secondary education (30%);Tertiary education (20%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (P);Conflict 
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50
0.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to improve the quality of teaching-learning conditions at 
all levels through the institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology, municipalities, schools and universities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1.  Strengthen the governance, leadership, and management of the education system: This 
priority area aims to strengthen the governance, leadership, and management of the education 
system, with particular attention to institutional building of municipalities in post-Status Kosovo.  
This includes activities associated with the decentralization of the education service delivery:  
 
-- Developing an appropriate legal framework for primary, secondary and tertiary education 
which clarifies the roles and responsibilities of each level and the accountability mechanisms of 
the education system in post-Status Kosovo.  
 
-- Strengthening the leadership, decision making and resource management at the municipality 
and school levels through training and municipal development grants.  
Page  2
-- Training for the use of the educational management information system (EMIS), which was 
developed through the EPIP, for analysis of key policy issues and decision making by MEST and 
municipalities.  
 
-- The assessment of the impact of the implementation of per-capita financing formula 
developed in 2002, and any necessary adjustments in light of the assessment and the new Status.  
 
2.  Enhance the quality of education and inclusiveness. The second priority area focuses on the 
quality of teaching-learning inputs, processes, and outcomes in a holistic manner.  It will build 
on initiatives and pilots carried out on quality-related aspects of education during the last seven 
years in Kosovo, including:  
 
-- The implementation of teachers? professional development and licensing system which was 
developed by MEST in 2004.  
 
-- The implementation of the assessment of students? learning outcomes, and establishment of 
the baselines to monitor learning outcomes in the long-term.  
 
-- The review of the pilot matura (high school leaving exam) and its full implementation.  
 
It will also build on and continue the school development grant implemented in the Education 
Participation Improvement Project (EPIP).  
 
-- Provision of school development grants which would promote activities to improve the 
quality of teaching-learning conditions and enhance inclusive education.  
 
3.  Improve the teaching-learning environment of education: The third priority area aims to 
address the current and future constraint in learning space.  
 
-- School mapping - the survey of the existing school buildings and projection of the learning 
space needed in the next 5-10 years, taking into account demography and enrollment target.  
 
-- The development of standard designs for classrooms and school facilities, which are fiscally 
sustainable, appropriate for new teaching methods, and energy efficient.  
 
The fund for the actual construction and rehabilitation is likely to be mobilized from other 
development partners.  
 
4.  Improve the management of higher education and the quality of teaching at universities:  
The fourth priority area is to build the management capacity and improve teaching in Pristina 
University.  
 
-- The establishment of a simple management system for (i) financial resources to facilitate 
budgeting and expenditure, and (ii) students? registration.  
 
-- The review of the current teaching practice and the development of measures to improve the 
quality of teaching at Pristina University, such as, the introduction of internal and external 
evaluation, accreditation, feedback mechanisms from students, training on pedagogy, etc..  
 
-- The institutional building of the Faculty of Education at Pristina University.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The proposed Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology and the municipal education departments. The project will financially support 
strengthening the overall institutional capacity of these organizations including their capabilities 
to monitor and address safegaurds issues related to the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
At the stage of the PCN, it is expected that the IDA will not finance the actual construction or 
rehabilitation of schools.  This will be confirmed during the preparation mission in June 2007.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/27/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Keiko Miwa 
04/24/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maureen Anne McLaughlin 
 
Comments:   
