Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3184 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/23/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P107608 
Project Name: National Road Rehabilitation (Osh-Isfana) Project 
Task Team Leader: Henry G. R. Kerali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 28, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 19, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regional integration (S);Other rural 
development (S);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
0.00 
 
Islamic Development Bank - Al Aqsa Fund 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to restore reliable access to Batken oblast and 
provide an alternative transport route for potential transit traffic from/to Tajikistan. This will 
ultimately support local and regional socio-economic development, which is a key objective for 
the Government. Benefits of the proposed project are expected to include increase in reliability 
of access to/from Batken oblast, transport efficiency gains from a reduction of transport costs 
and travel times for people and goods along the corridor, and reduction of the share of domestic 
transport costs and non-factor services in the total value of commodities transported along the 
corridor.  
 
The main beneficiaries will be the local populations in Batken and Osh oblasts living along the 
road corridor as well as domestic and regional transporters. At present, road traffic is disrupted 
several times when crossing international borders at Uzbek and Tajik enclaves. On the eastern 
Page  2
section of the corridor (between Osh and Kyzyl-Kiya) in the absence of any constraints, the 
average daily traffic is about 3,000 vehicles of which 30 percent are trucks. Further west 
however, where the traffic has to cross borders, the figures drop drastically.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
major priority in the Government’s Development Strategy Till 2010, and more particularly the 
Presidential Program of Roads Development for 2008-2010, is the rehabilitation and rerouting of 
the existing road from Osh to Isfana. The road, which is central to the economy of Southwest 
Kyrgyzstan, is in poor to fair condition and crosses into Uzbek territory near Pulgon and at the 
Sokh enclave. The road also passes through Tajikistan territory between Batken and Isfana. The 
rehabilitation of the road and construction of detours will not only link Batken Oblast with the 
rest of the country, but also provide an alternative for potential transit traffic to/from China to 
Tajikistan and on to Afghanistan.  
 
The total costs for rehabilitation and new construction of the road from Osh to Isfana are 
estimated to be around USD135 million according to the Presidential Program of Roads 
Development for 2008-2010. Design parameters are proposed to be based on technical category 
III for highways (SNIP norms) for most of the road, including platform widths of up to 12 
meters, carriageway widths of up to 8 meters and shoulders of 2 meters. Three alternative 
pavement designs are being considered ranging from full asphalt-concrete pavement to double 
surface treatment on stabilized gravel road base.  
 
The road design was initially carried out in 2000 by the Design Institute 
‘KyrgyzDorTransProekt’ (KDTP) and is currently being updated. The Bank has prepared, on 
behalf of the Government, an application for PHRD project preparation grant funding from the 
Government of Japan (US$950,000) to finance the updating of the project feasibility study and 
the technical design. This application has been approved by Bank management and will be 
submitted once the next round of PHRD funding is announced (the World Bank was informed 
that the announcement of the new round of PHRD funding is planned by the Government of 
Japan for December 2007).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The road is located in the southern edge of the Fergana valley following the foothills of the Alai 
and Turkestan ranges which lie to the south. A third of the road runs through a semi desert, a 
third through rolling hills and the remainder through fertile valleys. Many irrigation channels 
cross the road bringing water from the mountains between Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan to the 
Fergana valley in Uzbekistan.  
 
The road from Osh to Isfana is about 360 km long with new construction required to re-connect 
Batken oblast with the rest of the country totaling about 100 km, including: (i) 14.7 km detour 
from Kok-Talaa to Pulgon (km 109-123); (ii) 50 km section from Pulgon to Burgandy (km 125 
to 175); (iii) 4.7 km section, including a bridge across the Sokh river (km 195-200); and (iv) 23 
km detour around the Tajik territory at Surkh (km 248 to 271).  
 
Kok-Talaa – Pulgon, 14.7 km long; (km 109-123). The estimated cost for this section is about 
US$21 million.  The duration of the construction is estimated to be 18 months. There is no real 
Page  3
difficulty identified on the first 5 kms on the Eastern part of the section.  At about 7 km from the 
start, the new alignment would be constrained by the Uzbek border to the North and a narrow 
river with a torrential flow regime to the South.  The Bank team understands that the design on 
this particular area (about 1km long) will be challenging and probably costly.  This may require 
retaining walls or gabions to be built within the river bed with sound maintenance schemes in the 
long run.  
 
Pulgon 
–
Burgandy, 50 km long; (km 125 to 175). The estimated cost for this section is about 
US$48 million.  The duration of the construction is set to 29 months.  The Government has 
already invested in the construction of a platform along the entire stretch. The alignment is 
straightforward.  The World Bank team has not identified any concern regarding the technical 
aspects.  The KDTP presented three options for pavements.  The Bank team expects the traffic to 
increase rapidly to 3,000 vpd once the three sections will be completed.  Therefore it is 
recommended to finance a pavement structure with asphalt concrete base and overlay.  
 
Bridge crossing across the Sokh river, 4.7 km long (km 195-200).  
 
The estimated cost for this section is about US$6 million. The duration of the construction is set 
to 18 months.  The main feature is the bridge over the river.  It is designed to be 54 m long, 
consisting of three spans.  The structure would rest on its foundations drilled in the river bed to a 
depth sufficient to prevent erosion of their foundations.  The river would be channeled under the 
bridge by two flanking embankment dams, which would start several 100m upstream of the 
bridge. Access to the bridge would again rely on embankment dams on which the road would be 
positioned. The design maximum flood would be 320m3/s, while the maximum observed flood 
event so far is about 250m3/s.  The Bank team is concerned about the currently proposed design 
for a variety of reasons, from the pure hydraulic point, to the environment and sustainability of 
the investment.  The review of some rather large investment already made to domesticate the 
same river a few kilometers downstream in Uzbekistan is very telling and tend to indicate that 
the bridge is under-designed.  The Bank team was informed that MOT may either proceed with 
the construction of the bridge based on the existing design developed by KDTP using budget 
funds or use project funds to finance the bridge under a revised design along with a more 
extensive cost analysis, thus allowing for the most optimal investment option.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Bank team reviewed in detail the ‘Feasibility Study for the Rehabilitation of the Osh to 
Erkesh Tam and Osh to Isfana Roads in the Kyrgyz Republic’ which was prepared under the 
auspices of the Kyrgyz Government by Kyrgyzdortransproekt, Finnroad and Roughton 
International in 2001. Volume 3 deals with environmental studies and volume 4 with a social 
assessment. The findings of the review and their implications for the institutional capacity 
assessment for the project are as follows:  
 
Volume 3 (environmental studies) covers the scope and detail of a general Environmental 
Assessment (EA), whose purpose is to identify critical road sections for which detailed 
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will 
be required. These are necessary to ensure that environmental due diligence is implemented 
during project design so that the designs can be approved to obtain a construction permit. The 
current detail of the EA is not seen as adequate to either formulate precise environmental 
Page  4
conditions for the construction permit or to formulate contract-ready environmental clauses and 
components in the Bill of Quantities for the civil works/ construction contract(s).  
 
Considerable additional work is necessary to complete required information, conduct thorough 
analyses and develop detailed EMPs. KDTP was found to have insufficient staff resources and 
capabilities. KDTP reported that a large/major part of the required information was already in the 
design documents, however, this was in a scattered manner and often formulated as technical 
specifications rather than environmental issues.  
 
It will therefore be necessary for a thorough environmental impact analysis (EIA) to be carried 
out in a timely manner before project appraisal. A consultant/expert on preparation of EIA 
should be hired to carryout this task. This is envisaged to be financed by the PHRD grant. A 
preliminary review in accordance with World Bank safeguards policies would indicate that the 
15 km section from Kok-Talaa to Pulgon and the bridge over Sokh River near Chong-Kara are 
likely to be environment Category A.  
 
During a meeting with the local branch of the MoEFM in Batken the status of environmental 
monitoring, permitting and enforcement for road projects was discussed. The Oblast has 28 
environmental staff, distributed among the Oblast’s 3 Rayons and 2 Cities. Inspectors routinely 
carry out site visits and inspections (both announced and unannounced), identify violations of 
environmental permits and supervise / check their rectification. If violations of environmental 
regulations or permits are ongoing, the MoEFM Oblast unit has the power (and has already used 
it in several cases) to suspend works until environmental compliance is achieved.  
 
The MoEFM unit is aware of the planned road projects and has a role in reviewing the designs 
and granting approval with respect to environmental criteria. Projects can be either reviewed in 
the Oblast or in Bishkek, if the latter, the opinion is sent to the Oblast for information. A project 
design such as for roads, needs the MoEFM’s approval in order to receive the construction 
permit (CP).  
 
Regarding the Oblast unit’s capability to fulfill it’s legally prescribed monitoring, permitting 
and enforcing role the staffing appears adequate both in numbers and in general qualifications. 
There are, however, shortcomings in transport, communication, documentation (e.g. digital 
cameras) and IT equipment of the offices. Also the staff lacks specific skills and knowledge in 
assessing environmental criteria on the severity of impacts of roads / large infrastructure projects, 
as well as the range of potential remediation measures, which can be integrated into project 
design and implemented during construction.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Generally a safeguards categorization of “A” is proposed for the road section Kok
-
Talaa 
–
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pulgon (km 109-123) and the bridge crossing the Sokh river (km 195-200).The works encompass 
major rehabilitation / reconstruction works for the first section and the construction of a 
completely new alignment plus a major bridge structure for the second. The road in the first 
section also passes through hilly terrain, which is susceptible to slope instabilities and where 
several ravines and streams coming from higher mountainous terrain need to be crossed.  
 
On the one hand the road’s impact on the environment will have to be carefully 
investigated. Although the landscape is semi-arid and sparsely vegetated and there appear to be 
no major biodiversity issues, the local flora and fauna should be carefully assessed and potential 
negative impacts explored. Moreover the road will channel traffic through existing settlements, 
notably Pulgon, where problems due to dust, pollution, noise and traffic safety are envisaged.  
 
For the Sokh River crossing the main environmental challenges will be the correct 
determination of hydrological conditions and resulting design assumptions, parameters and 
solutions. Especially the impact on the river cross section by embankment dams for the road, the 
length of the bridge and the number of fields and pylons is expected to have potentially 
significant environmental impact and will have to be carefully evaluated.  
 
The road section Pulgon-Burgandy (km 125 to 175) has been mostly completed under 
Government financing. The platform is in place and the alignment follows mainly flat, arid 
terrain without significant settlements, fauna or flora. The project would finance the finalization 
of the road structure, such as road base and asphalt topping. It was observed that already efforts 
have been made to mitigate the road’s environmental impact, such as erosion control measures of 
cut slopes and landscaping of borrow pits. The impact of the project would be mainly positive by 
reducing dust generation, which currently is a major nuisance and hazard to road users and the 
sporadic nearby settlements. This section by itself would be recommended to be rated 
environmental category “B”.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It appears that neither the Kok-Talaa/Pulgon nor the Pulgon/Burgandy sections will require 
the acquisition of private land, as the land is already state-owned or acquired.  If the Sokh Bridge 
is located on the proposed alignment, some agricultural land (irrigated ride paddies and other 
plots) will be affected.  Depending on the status of information available before appraisal, the 
client will prepare either a Land Acquisition Plan or Land Acquisition Policy Framework 
acceptable to the Bank prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
Page  6
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/26/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
detailed environmental impact assessment (EIA) with environmental management plans 
(EMP) corresponding to feasibility study level will be commissioned for all 3 sections.  The 
Bank Team will assist the MoT in preparing TOR for the Consultancy contracts and hire 
qualified firms or individuals. The EIA is expected to be completed in September 2008.  
 
If the designs are completed for all segments prior to appraisal, a Land Acquisition Plan will 
be prepared; if not, a Land Acquisition Policy Framework will be prepared acceptable to the 
Bank prior to appraisal.  
 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N-A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
12/21/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/02/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
01/07/2008 
Comments:  Cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
