Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/30/2006 
Report No.:  AC2363
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P098949 
Project Name:  Second Village Investment Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gotz A. Schreiber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 31, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Municipal governance and institution building 
(P);Participation and civic engagement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)13.00
18.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The second Village Investment Project (VIP-2) will continue the efforts made under the 
first VIP, by expanding the coverage and continuing the support provided to local 
communities and local self-government bodies.  The overarching aim of the project is the 
alleviation of rural poverty. It seeks to achieve this by pursuing three specific objectives: 
(a) improving governance and capacity at the local level; (b) strengthening the provision 
of, and access to, essential infrastructure services; and (c) supporting private small-scale 
group enterprise development. It does this at the grassroots level, by supporting income 
and employment generating investments in village infrastructure and in group-managed 
small enterprises, and by helping communities and local authorities work together to 
achieve key development objectives at the local level.  It will strengthen local 
government administrations (aiyl okmotus) and councils (aiyl keneshs) and grassroots 
institutions -- making the more inclusive, accountable and effective at meeting villagers' 
self-identified development needs.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project is to be supported by a Grant from the International Development 
Association (IDA) of US$15 million equivalent. Substantial cofinancing is anticipated to 
be provided by DfID.  Coverage of the current VIP will be expanded to the country's 
remaining 126 aiyl okmotus not yet participating, and continued support will be provided 
for the 347 communities already participating.  VIP-2 will utilize the institutions 
established and processes and mechanisms developed under the first VIP.  It will draw 
upon the capacity created, and built upon the experience gained and lessons learned.  The 
project will consist of three main components.  
 
Component 1 - Capacity Building and Empowerment - comprises training and support 
to communities, local governments and community based organizations (CBOs) in (i) 
social mobilization, (ii) strategic planning, micro-project preparation and implementation, 
and (iii) good governance. Participating communities will be provided with training and 
support in social mobilization and monitoring, needs assessment, resource assessment, 
and participatory planning.  The project will collaborate very closely with a number of 
partner organizations already engaged in community mobilization and capacity building 
in the ongoing VIP (e.g., DFID, UNDP, Urban Institute/USAID, Swiss Red Cross, 
Counterpart Consortium, etc.).  Residents in beneficiary communities will build skills and 
gain experience in local development planning and micro-project implementation through 
their participation in the Village Investments component and will be eligible to receive 
training in: business development, infrastructure planning and operation, and good 
practices for avoiding or mitigating environmental impacts of micro-projects. 
Governance training will emphasize: (i) skills, mechanism, processes and tools for good 
governance, (ii) accountability and transparency in conducting public affairs, and (iii) 
strategic planning for community development. It will include broadening of awareness 
and understanding of national procedures and requirements for environmental assessment 
and management.  Particular emphasis will be placed on measures to minimize the room 
for misuse, fraud and corruption.  
 
Component 2 - Village Investments - supports a facility and mechanisms for delivering 
financial and technical support for community-based initiatives around which villagers 
and local authorities collaborate in an ongoing process of strategic planning, investment 
selection, and micro-project implementation.  Communities will be required to apply and 
adhere to principles of transparency, participation and accountability.  Through a 
participatory and fully transparent process, communities will assess and identify local 
problems, establish their own priorities for using their community grants, and identify 
and prepare micro-projects that address their needs. The aiyl-kenesh level Local 
Investment Union (LIU), through its Executive Committee (LIC), will coordinate this 
effort, drawing on the contributions of the Village Investment Unions (VIUs) and their 
Executive Committees (VICs).   
 
Participating communities will receive community grants, phased over four years, to 
implement their agreed and approved community investment plans.  Micro-projects 
included in the community investment plans will reflect the villager's needs and priorities 
and their willingness to organize themselves and dedicate material, financial and 
Page  3
managerial resources to common undertakings.  They fall into two main categories: 
economic and social infrastructure, and group-based small business ventures.  The 
communities themselves decide on the most appropriate use of the financial support they 
receive and on the composition of their annual investment plans.  The communities will 
contribute at least 25% (including at least 3.75% in cash) of their community grant 
allocation as their own counterpart contribution.  
 
Component 3 - Project Management - provides support for overall project management 
by the Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS).  The agency does not 
have a large cadre of technical staff.  Instead funding is provided to contract local 
expertise to screen micro-project proposals, and facilitate and monitor their 
implementation.  Community Development Support Officers (CDSOs) will work directly 
with two to three communities and will provide the essential link between the 
communities, ARIS and other outside partners.  The project will finance key agency staff, 
consultants, operating costs, technical assistance, training, essential equipment and office 
refurbishment.  Funding will also be provided for information dissemination, M&E 
activities and project audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented countrywide.  Project activities will be located mainly 
within or close to existing settlements. Proximity to protected or sensitive areas is not 
anticipated.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will fund micro-projects of different types, primarily small-scale social and 
economic infrastructure facilities in or very close to existing settlements, but also small 
Page  4
investments in local services, agro-processing and natural resources management. All 
will be very small and are not expected to have significant negative environmental 
impacts.  Possible minor impacts will most likely relate to construction residues and 
management of waste material from small-scale agro-processing facilities and village-
level primary health care centers.  Investments potentially carrying environmental risks 
that are unlikely to be manageable at the local level are not eligible for financing under 
the project.  
 
There will be no resettlement or land acquisition.  
 
The project will not finance any micro-projects that would be rated Environmental 
Category "A".   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long-term negative impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Very effective measures have been put in place under the current project to address 
safeguards issues, and they are being applied and closely monitored.  They are laid out in 
detailed Guidelines for Environmental Review of Micro-Projects, which are part of the 
Operational Manual and are provided to all participating communities and micro-project 
groups.  The procedures to be followed are consistent with OP 4.01 and Kyrgyz 
requirements and will ensure compliance with safeguards procedures and issues.  Each 
micro-project will be reviewed for safeguard purposes, and where warranted specific 
mitigation and compliance measures will be identified; their implementation will be 
monitored by project staff, community safeguards volunteers and public officials.  The 
prescribed procedures clearly define and assign institutional arrangements and 
responsibilities and the process of safeguards assessment requirements, emphasizing 
transparency and comprehension by the target communities and local officials.  
Appropriate training is being and will continue to be provided to local officials and 
community safeguards volunteers.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project is highly participatory and demand-driven.  The main stakeholders are 
members of rural communities, leaders and staff of local governments, community 
leaders, political leaders, traditional leaders, CBOs and NGOs. The principal 
participatory mechanisms will be extensive interviews, workshops at different levels, and 
structured participatory planning and M&E processes. As appropriate, stakeholders will 
Page  5
be provided with training or experiential awareness-raising exercises to increase their 
own capacity to participate or to enable them to include others in the process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/23/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/23/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
A
full environmental assessment, involving multiple and extensive consultations with a 
broad range of stakeholders, was carried out in 2003, and detailed Guidelines for 
environmental micro-project screening, scoping, review and assessment of micro-projects 
were developed and are included in the Operational Manual.  The Guidelines also include 
a
list of ineligible micro-projects.  The prescribed process of screening, scoping and 
analysis or assessment described in the Guidelines is designed to identify any potential 
conflicts with existing or future safeguard policies.  Further screening is carried out in 
accordance with the national legislation and regulations for environmental review, and 
the outcomes are monitored by the ARIS safeguards specialist.  Compliance is also 
monitored during implementation by the LICs themselves, and independently by local 
staff of the State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF) and of 
other ministries with relevant jurisdiction (Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture).  
The Community Development Support Officers, under the direction o f the ARIS 
safeguards specialist, will track compliance with agreed mitigation measures and 
operational practices to ensure that micro-projects remain in compliance with the Bank's 
safeguard policies.  
 
The Guidelines (and compliance with them) under the current operation have been 
reviewed during the preparation of the proposed repeater project and have been found 
appropriate and effective.  Some minor revisions were introduced to reflect current 
institutional responsibilities in the country (primarily the establishment of the SAEPF in 
2005). Future ex-post compliance assessments will ensure that the samples assessed are 
fully representative of the range of micro-projects implemented.  
 
Additional consultations with representative stakeholder groups in different parts of the 
country have been conducted during the preparation of the repeater project.  The 
Guidelines, incorporating several small modifications, have been disclosed and widely 
publicized in the country before project appraisal, as have the updated EA (reflecting 
recent institutional changes in the Kyrgyz Republic) and the minutes of the recent 
stakeholder consultations.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gotz A. Schreiber 
05/27/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gotz A. Schreiber 
05/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
05/27/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
05/30/2006 
Comments:   
