Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC2834
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P096409 
Project Name:  Second On-farm Irrigation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Joop Stoutjesdijk 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (75%);Central government administration (25%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S);Water resource 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.60
4.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed development objective of the Second On-farm Irrigation Project (OIP-2) is 
to improve irrigation service delivery on a sustainable basis that would contribute to 
increased agricultural productivity among irrigation farmers.  This will be achieved 
through further development of Water Users Associations (WUAs) and rehabilitation and 
modernization of irrigation and drainage infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
OIP-2 will build on the work done under the (first) On-farm Irrigation Project (OIP-1) 
and will provide assistance through three components: (i) WUA strengthening; (ii) 
infrastructure rehabilitation and modernization; and (iii) project management.  
 
--Component 1: WUA Strengthening  
 
The component will provide assistance to ensure that WUAs are able to efficiently and 
productively utilize their rehabilitated irrigation systems.  Under the first project, 439 
legally registered WUAs, serving over 710,000 ha of irrigated land, were formed. These 
associations have provided a stable institutional base for individual water users to group 
together in management entities, working towards proper management, operation and 
Page  2
maintenance of the systems under WUA-management.  The formation of active WUAs 
has eliminated the land and water resources management vacuum that was left when the 
State and Collective Farms were disbanded.  This has allowed the DWR to concentrate its 
limited staff and resources on off-farm system management as well as higher-order water 
resources management.  
 
Component 1 builds on the procedures established under the first project with the aim of 
further strengthening WUAs such that they will become self-sustaining.  The main tasks 
to be accomplished under this component include: (i) strengthening and training WUA 
Support Units and WUA management; (ii) improving system operation to achieve more 
efficient and productive water use; (iii) improving maintenance management, to ensure 
that maintenance needs are identified and financed; (iv) providing technical credit to 
WUAs to provide the facilities required for effective operation and maintenance; (v) 
expanded environmental monitoring and analysis; (vi) collaboration with agro-services 
providers; and (vii) support to strengthen WUA-related organizations, including water 
councils and the National Union of WUAs.  
 
--Component 2: Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Modernization  
 
Most elements of ongoing rehabilitation under OIP-1 are functioning satisfactorily, after 
a
succession of remedial interventions introduced over the past 2-3 years to address 
problems encountered.  The costs, scope and implementation arrangements for the 
rehabilitation component are derived from experience gained under the first project, with 
some minor additions to enhance performance.  OIP-2 will continue with rehabilitation 
and modernization of WUA-managed systems with a target of 29 WUAs covering about 
51,000 ha.  As 136 WUAs have supposedly already achieved the rehabilitation readiness 
criterion (milestone four), further criteria have been developed to refine the screening 
process.  
 
--Component 3: Project Management  
 
The Department of Water Resources (DWR) will have overall responsibility for project 
implementation.  A small PIU within DWR will be responsible for the daily management, 
administration, and coordination of the project, including procurement and financial 
management.  The project management team will be assisted by various teams of 
consultants (individuals and companies) for monitoring and evaluation surveys, 
environmental audits, financial audits, etc.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would be implemented country-wide and would target some 470 WUAs with 
training and around 29 WUAs (commanding about 51,000 ha) that have qualified for 
assistance with the rehabilitation and modernization of the irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure under their management.  Selection of the WUAs will be based on 
milestones developed under OIP-1, strengthened with additional criteria in order to select 
Page  3
the best WUAs.  It is almost certain that WUAs will be selected from each of the seven 
Oblasts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr David M. Colbert (LCSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
--Environmental Assessment  
 
(NOTE: The IDA preparation team included an Environmental Specialist, David M. 
Colbert, from the FAO Investment Center.)  
 
The project has been classified as Category 'B' for purposes of OP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment because it is not expected to involve any significant or 
irreversible adverse environmental impacts.  Experience with OIP-1 to date has shown 
this to be the case.  The project will involve neither the construction of new irrigation 
systems nor the resettlement of people.  Any potential adverse environmental impacts are 
not expected to be significant and can be effectively prevented or minimized by 
application of the appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures identified in the 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared for the project.  
 
The overall environmental impact of the project is expected to be positive.  The 
rehabilitation of selected irrigation and drainage infrastructure will realize definite 
environmental benefits by improving irrigation water management, decreasing water 
losses, and reducing soil salinity and waterlogging.  Furthermore, the project's support for 
strengthening environmental monitoring and analysis in DWR and the WUA Support 
Units will improve DWR's overall ability to monitor the environmental impacts of project 
interventions and take appropriate actions where necessary.  
 
Page  4
The potential adverse environmental impacts are basically the same as those for the 
OIP-1, i.e. increased agrochemical pollution and water contamination from increased use 
of fertilizers and pesticides, soil erosion associated with existing agricultural practices, 
and environmental impacts resulting from construction activities, including improper 
disposal of excavated sediments from canals.  These adverse impacts are not significant 
and can be effectively prevented, minimized, or eliminated by the appropriate preventive 
actions or mitigation measures identified in the site-specific EMPs.  
 
The framework EMP for OIP-2, which reflects lessons learned from OIP-1, 
recommends several broad preventive actions and mitigation measures to address the 
potential adverse environmental impacts identified.  These include: (i) training and 
extension services on proper application of fertilizers and pesticides (to be provided by 
advisory service providers) to address the agrochemical pollution issues; (ii) training and 
advice on improved on-farm soil and water management to address the soil erosion 
issues; and (iii) environmental clauses in the contracts of contractors that will perform the 
civil works (monitored and enforced by field-based construction supervisors) to address 
the construction-related impacts.  
 
The framework EMP also requires, and provides guidelines for, the preparation of site-
specific EMPs for WUA-managed irrigation systems that will be rehabilitated under the 
project, which will recommend additional measures specific to the circumstances and 
environmental conditions at the irrigation system to be rehabilitated.  To complement 
these measures, the EMP also recommends continuing and expanding the environmental 
monitoring program for irrigation and drainage water quality initiated under OIP-1 and 
strengthening the environmental monitoring and analysis capabilities of DWR and the 
WUA Support Units.  
 
Under OIP-1 the PIU undertook a number of activities to implement the 
recommendations of the EMP prepared for that project.  The PIU used a national 
environmental specialist to draft guidance for environmental oversight of project 
activities, design a project-related water quality monitoring program, purchase field 
equipment for water sampling, and train engineers in the Oblast Support Units and Raion 
Support Units to conduct the environmental oversight and water sampling.  The results of 
the environmental oversight and monitoring activities are contained in the environmental 
specialist's reports that were prepared at the end of 2005 and in March 2007.  The reports 
found no significant adverse environmental impacts from the rehabilitation works 
completed under the project and relatively few instances of high mineralization or 
pesticide residues in water at various sampling points around the country.  
 
The PIU did a credible job under OIP-1 in establishing a system to oversee the 
environmental impacts of rehabilitation works under the project and to monitor related 
water quality for mineralization and agrochemicals.  The challenge for OIP-2 is to 
institutionalize these accomplishments of OIP-1 within the DWR.  This may include on-
the-job training for water management specialists in the central office of DWR to help 
them assume the management responsibilities for these environmental activities. This 
may also include additional technical training in water quality monitoring and analysis.  
Page  5
Furthermore, the EMP recommends that OIP-2 support the PIU in extending better 
outreach to the WUAs and WUA members on environmental issues and disseminate 
information on the environmental compliance and water quality monitoring activities of 
DWR.  
 
--Safety of Dams  
 
OIP-2 will follow a program approach, with the WUA-managed irrigation systems 
eligible for rehabilitation under the project to be selected during the first years of project 
implementation.  Therefore, it is not yet known whether there are any systems with water 
storage reservoirs implicated in the project.  However, from experience under OIP-1 it is 
likely that several systems will be selected that have small (less than 15 m in height) 
dams.  Once this has been determined for OIP-2, appropriate actions to ensure dam 
safety, including more detailed inspections and safety measures, will be taken.  In the 
case of small-scale irrigation dams and night storage reservoirs that may be part of a 
selected irrigation system, special guidelines governing this situation were prepared 
during project preparation and included in the EMP.  
 
Before any rehabilitation activities can take place under OIP-2 at an irrigation system to 
which these guidelines apply, the PIU will contract a qualified national design firm to 
make an engineering and safety assessment of the irrigation dam or storage reservoir in 
question, and prepare designs for the recommended measures.  The consultants who will 
carry out the safety assessment will also look into the potential consequences of dam 
failure, including such principal criteria as the number of people at risk, and economic 
assets downstream that should be used to prioritize any intervention aimed at improving 
dam safety.  The design engineers will also be retained to provide construction 
supervision of the rehabilitation works.  
 
The PIU will contract a qualified engineering contractor, one that has experience with 
small earthen dams and/or small storage reservoir systems, to perform the remedial 
measures recommended in the engineering and safety assessment.  The PIU, through the 
engineering team, will oversee the implementation of any remedial measures performed 
at irrigation dams or storage reservoirs under the project.  
 
--Projects on International Waterways  
 
It is certain that many of the irrigation systems that will be rehabilitated under OIP-2 
draw water from rivers that are international waterways shared by the Kyrgyz Republic 
with neighboring Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.  Potential changes in water 
flow or deterioration in water quality during the construction works will be mitigated 
through implementation of the EMP. As there will not be any enlargement of existing 
irrigation systems or development of any new irrigation areas, project interventions are 
not expected to adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flows to downstream 
riparian states.  The rehabilitation and modernization of infrastructure and improvements 
in water management should result in an increase in system efficiency, thereby 
generating water savings and providing reliable water supply to the users.  A recent 
Page  6
impact assessment of 13 WUAs where rehabilitation works were completed two years 
ago under OIP showed that the water abstraction per unit of irrigation area is down in 10 
WUAs.  This points to increased water use efficiencies as a result of systems that can be 
better managed with fewer water losses.  Considering all this, the project falls under the 
exception to the notification requirement contained in the safeguard policy, approved by 
the Vice President for Europe and Central Asia Region on March 20, 2007.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable, as this is a rehabilitation and modernization project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Kyrgyz Republic's environmental legislation and mechanisms include an 
environmental permit procedure for physical activities, and an environmental impact 
assessment, including a State Environmental Expertise Review.  
 
The proposed project will continue OIP-1 practices, which were satisfactory to the 
Bank.  This includes implementation of the EMP, which involves environmental 
monitoring of project impacts during and after construction, as well as associated 
capacity building.  
 
Implementation of mitigation measures (e.g. pollution prevention, protection of natural 
resources, and worker and public safety) will be required from contractors who would 
have to follow guidelines for environmentally sound construction practices. These 
requirements will be included in bidding documents and meeting them would be a 
contractual requirement of the works, to be supervised by construction supervision 
consultants.  Under OIP-1, staff of the State Agency for Environmental Protection and 
Forestry regularly visits project sites to monitor the performance of the contractor with 
regard to environmental conditions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The principal stakeholders are members of the Water User Associations, yet to be 
identified, who will participate in the identification of rehabilitation investments, decide 
on the investment package, participate in the tendering process and oversee construction 
in the field.  They will have copies of the contracts, which will include relevant 
environmental clauses and in which the EMP is embedded, to enable them to assure 
compliance with environmental measures.  
 
Page  7
OIP-2 will provide for an outreach program to the WUAs and WUA members on 
environmental issues and disseminate information on the environmental compliance and 
water quality monitoring activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/05/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/13/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/16/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  8
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk 
04/16/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr David M. Colbert 
04/16/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
04/16/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
04/16/2007 
Comments:   
