Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2721 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P104706 
Project Name: Strengthening the National Statistical System of Kyrgyz Republic 
Task Team Leader: Mustafa Dinc 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (94%);Sub-national government 
administration (6%) 
Theme: Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (P);Managing for development 
results (P);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (S);Other economic management 
(S);Population and reproductive health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
4.10
4.10 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal is to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the national statistical system 
that will provide relevant, timely and reliable data for evidence-based policy making in support 
of government?s development strategies and the monitoring and evaluation of the progress. This 
will be achieved by reviewing and possibly updating the existing statistical legislation, 
improving the capacity of human resources through relevant training programs, improving and 
updating the management information systems, strengthening coordination, collaboration and 
information sharing among stakeholders, data users and producers including line ministries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This project will be a Specific Investment Loan, under the umbrella of the STATCAP Adaptable 
Program Loan (APL) to improve statistical capacity through a sector-wide approach, using the 
SMP as the basis for investments. STATCAP is a financing program, which is designed as a 
horizontal APL, to make investments in statistical capacity easier and more effective and was 
Page  2
approved by the Bank?s Board in March 2004. It is designed to be simple to initiate, plan and 
operate. Countries will obtain separate loans, credits, or grants (if the country?s IDA envelope 
consists of grants) to finance their national statistical capacity building projects, which will be 
appraised and prepared for approval at the regional Vice President level following normal 
provisions for investment lending. STATCAP is designed to support a medium to long-term 
approach. The cornerstone is the development of a comprehensive and integrated national action 
plan for statistical capacity building, a Statistical Master Plan (SMP), often linked to a National 
Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS). SMP is prepared through consultation with 
both data providers and data users.  
 
Kyrgyz Republic has met all requirements of STATCAP and the project components are 
designed to support the implementation of the SMP, and will be implemented in a coherent, 
consistent and well-sequenced manner. The major components of the project are planned as:  
 
(a) 
Institutional Development (improving and updating statistical legislation, policy, 
regulatory and institutional framework and organizational structure to strengthen the institutional 
capacity to carry out the formulation, coordination, and implementation of appropriate statistical 
policies and programs that will address to the needs of the country),  
 
(b) 
Human Resource Development (HR management framework; training of statistical data 
producers and users to improve their technical skills including introduction of new standards, 
methodologies and managerial skills in all statistical offices of the national statistical system),  
 
(c) 
Development of Statistical Infrastructure (supporting the development of an effective 
monitoring and evaluation system, improving the basic elements of the statistical infrastructure 
such as sample frames; establishment and improvement of registers -enterprise and individual 
entrepreneurs- and developing a unified classification system),  
 
(d) 
Data Development (upgrading data collection mechanisms, 2009 Census of population 
and housing, economic statistics -National Accounts, price statistics etc.- and socio-demographic 
statistics with an emphasis on the MDGs and CDS indicators)  
 
(e) 
Physical Infrastructure and Equipment (upgrading existing information technology (IT) 
and other equipment that is essential to carry out existing and project activities) and  
 
(f) 
Project Management (coordinating project activities, managing reporting and auditing 
activities and ensuring compliance with the procurement, disbursement and financial 
management policies and procedures).  
 
The total cost of the project is estimated around US$ 4.8 million in the SMP. However, the final 
cost and the amount of Government?s contribution will be determined during the pre-appraisal 
and appraisal. DFID, SIDA and TICA (Turkish International Coordination Agency) have already 
expressed their interest in supporting the development of statistics in Kyrgyz Republic and the 
implementation of the SMP provided that the Bank is the leading agency with some contribution 
to the project from the country IDA allocation. The amount of the donor contribution will be 
determined after the Bank?s contribution is decided.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Teh main activities of the project will take place in Bishkek, but there would be some activities 
in the regional and local offices of the National Statistical Committee.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government has demonstrated its readiness to work on the project by approving the SMP on 
March 7, 2006 and giving a high priority to its implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/10/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mustafa Dinc 
01/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/25/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards based on the premise that there will be no civil works financed that 
pose appreciable environmental risk. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Carlos Felipe Jaramillo 
 
Comments:   
