Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2349 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P098949 
Project Name: Second Village Investment Project 
Task Team Leader: Gotz A. Schreiber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 25, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 11, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Municipal governance and institution building 
(P);Participation and civic engagement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)10.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The second Village Investment Project (VIP-2) will continue the efforts made under the first 
VIP, by expanding the coverage and continuing the support provided to local communities and 
local self-government bodies.  The overarching aim of the project is the alleviation of rural 
poverty. It seeks to achieve this by pursuing three specific objectives: (a) improving governance 
and capacity at the local level; (b) strengthening the provision of, and access to, essential 
infrastructure services; and (c) supporting private small-scale group enterprise development. It 
does this at the grassroots level, by supporting income and employment generating investments 
in village infrastructure and in group-managed small enterprises, and by helping communities 
and local authorities work together to achieve key development objectives at the local level.  It 
will strengthen local government administrations (aiyl okmotus) and councils (aiyl keneshs) and 
grassroots institutions -- making the more inclusive, accountable and effective at meeting 
villagers' self-identified development needs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project is to be supported by a Grant from the International Development Association (IDA) 
of US$15 million equivalent. Substantial cofinancing is anticipated to be provided by DfID.  
Coverage of the current VIP will be expanded to the country's remaining 126 aiyl okmotus not 
yet participating, and continued support will be provided for the 347 communities already 
participating.  VIP-2 will utilize the institutions established and processes and mechanisms 
developed under the first VIP.  It will draw upon the capacity created, and built upon the 
experience gained and lessons learned.  The project will consist of three main components.  
 
Component 1 - Capacity Building and Empowerment - comprises training and support to 
communities, local governments and community based organizations (CBOs) in (i) social 
mobilization, (ii) strategic planning, micro-project preparation and implementation, and (iii) 
good governance. Participating communities will be provided with training and support in social 
mobilization and monitoring, needs assessment, resource assessment, and participatory planning.  
The project will collaborate very closely with the partner organizations already engaged in 
community mobilization and capacity building in the ongoing VIP (DFID, UNDP, Urban 
Institute/USAID, Swiss Development Corporation, Swiss Red Cross, the Soros Foundation, and 
Counterpart Consortium).  Residents in beneficiary communities will build skills and experience 
in local development planning and micro-project implementation through their participation in 
the Village Investment component and will be eligible to receive training in: business 
development, infrastructure planning and operation, and good practices for avoiding or 
mitigating environmental impacts of micro-projects. Governance training will emphasize: (i) 
skills, mechanism, processes and tools for good governance, (ii) accountability and transparency 
in conducting public affairs, (iii) awareness of local responsibilities and rights in its fiscal 
relations with higher levels of government; and (iv) strategic planning for community 
development. It will include broadening of awareness and understanding of national procedures 
and requirements for environmental assessment and management.  Particular emphasis will be 
placed on measures to minimize the room for misuse, fraud and corruption.  
 
Component 2 - Village Investments - supports a facility and mechanisms for delivering 
financial and technical support for community-based initiatives around which villagers and local 
authorities collaborate in an ongoing process of strategic planning, investment selection, and 
micro-project implementation.  Communities will be targeted for their inclusion on the basis of 
their need, using poverty criteria, and of their willingness to apply and adhere to principles of 
transparency, participation and accountability.  Through a participatory and fully transparent 
process, communities will assess and identify local problems, establish their own priorities for 
using their community grants, and identify and prepare micro-projects that address their needs. 
The aiyl-kenesh level Local Investment Union (LIU), through its Executive Committee (LIC), 
will coordinate this effort, drawing on the contributions of the Village Investment Unions (VIUs) 
and their Executive Committees (VICs).  
 
Eligible and participating communities will receive community grants, phased over four years, 
to implement their agreed and approved community investment plans.  Micro-projects funded 
will reflect the villager's needs and priorities and their willingness to organize themselves and 
dedicate material, financial and managerial resources to common undertakings.  They fall into 
two main categories: economic and social infrastructure, and group-based small business 
ventures.  The communities themselves decide on the most appropriate use of the project 
Page  3
financial support they receive and on the composition of their annual investment programs.  The 
communities will contribute at least 25% (including at least 3.75% in cash) of their community 
grant allocation as their own counterpart contribution.  
 
Component 3 - Project Management - provides support for overall project management by the 
Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS).  The agency does not have a large 
cadre of technical staff.  Instead funding is provided to contract local expertise to screen micro-
project proposals, and facilitate and monitor their implementation.  Community Development 
Support Officers (CDSOs) will work directly with two to three communities and will provide the 
essential link between the communities, ARIS and other outside partners.  The project will 
finance key agency staff, consultants, operating costs, technical assistance, training, essential 
equipment and office refurbishment.  Funding will also be provided for information 
dissemination, M&E activities and project audits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented countrywide.  Project activities will be located mainly within or 
close to existing settlements. Proximity to protected or sensitive areas is not anticipated.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Management responsibility for the project will lie with ARIS, which has adequate capacity.  Key 
staff, including a Safeguards Coordinator and regional specialists, have been trained to ensure 
compliance with environmental safeguards by the communities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
review of the environmental guidelines used under the current Village Investment Project 
and of their application during project implementation has been carried out during the 
preparation of this repeater project.  It confirmed that the guidelines are sound and effective and 
that they are being closely adhered to.  Micro-projects were carefully assessed and all agreed 
mitigation measures were implemented.  Communities and project staff closely followed all 
agreed and applicable procedures.  Ex-post assessments done by ARIS were exemplary.  No 
significant changes are envisaged, therefore, but a few small adjustments will be made to these 
guidelines and in the implementation arrangements so as to strengthen the pre-investment 
consultation process, the involvement of local environmental agency staff, and record-keeping.  
 
Each micro-project will be reviewed for safeguard purposes.  The project's Operational 
Manual includes a chapter providing environmental guidelines to assist the implementing 
communities and ARIS in this function.  Specific and detailed guidelines for environmental 
review of micro-projects are being provided to all participating communities and institutions.  
The procedures to be followed are consistent with OP 4.01 and Kyrgyz requirements and ensure 
compliance with safeguard procedures and issues.  They clearly describe institutional 
arrangements and responsibilities and the process of environmental assessment requirements, 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
focusing on transparency and on comprehension by the target communities and local officials. 
The Operational Manual includes a list of ineligible micro-projects.  
 
Based on the excellent experience with the first VIP, no adverse impact is expected.  The 
project will continue to fund micro-projects of different types, primarily in social and economic 
community infrastructure within or in close vicinity of existing settlements.  Investments into 
small-scale services, agro-processing and natural resource management are also expected to be 
implemented.  All micro-projects will be of a small scale and are not expected to have significant 
negative environmental impacts individually or collectively.  Investments that may carry 
environmental risks that are unlikely to be manageable at the local level, such as mining or dam 
construction are not eligible for financing under the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/25/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No additional safeguard-related studies are needed.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gotz A. Schreiber 
05/16/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
05/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
05/16/2006 
Comments:  Approved. 
