Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/17/2006 
Report No.:  AC2213
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P087811 
Project Name:  Reducing Technical Barriers for Entrepreneurship and Trade 
Task Team Leader:  Sylvie K. Bossoutrot 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 6, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Other industry (45%);General industry and trade sector (35%);Central 
government administration (10%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);Small and medium enterprise support 
(S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective is to streamline the compulsory standards 
requirements for business, develop systems to enhance product quality and safety, and 
increase enterprise competitiveness in pilot sectors. The key project outcomes will be a 
decrease in the cost of regulatory compliance for business and, in the longer term, an 
increase in the share of non-gold trade with WTO partners.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project activities will be grouped under four components: (i) a Technical Regulation 
component to streamline and align the national technical regulation framework with 
international standards and develop a WTO compliant Enquiry Point; (ii) a Metrology 
and Standards component to enhance the capacity of the National Institute of Standards 
and Metrology (NISM) to develop voluntary standards and meet the basic measurement 
needs of the industry; (iii) an Accreditation and Quality Enhancement component to 
develop an internationally recognized accreditation scheme, prepare selected testing 
laboratories and certifying bodies for international accreditation and promote quality at 
Page  2
enterprise level; and (iv) a project management component to support coordination and 
implementation of project activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented in Bishkek.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
Page  3
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sylvie K. Bossoutrot 
01/24/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marialisa Motta 
01/24/2006 
Comments:  Since this is a low risk Category C project, safeguards clearances were transferred to 
the Task Team and Sector Manager. Ms. Motta approved while Acting Sector Leader for Mr. 
Corrochano. 
Page  4
