Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC3146
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P096993 
Project Name:  Agricultural Investments and Services Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maurizio Guadagni 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 21, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 Local 
Communities 
2.70 
 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
9.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
2.40
14.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to improve the institutional and infrastructure environment for 
farmers and herders, with a strong emphasis on the livestock sector.  The Project is an 
explicit part of the JCSS and supports all four of the programmatic JCSS areas.  It will 
help improve the management of a major resource, the country?s pastures, and will do so 
with an explicit focus on fostering strong and sustained pro-poor growth and on long-
term environmental sustainability.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises three main components: (i) Pasture Management and 
Improvement, (ii) Agricultural Support Services, and (iii) Project Management.  To 
achieve its objectives and ensure maximum impact, it addresses a set of closely linked 
constrains in animal nutrition, animal health, farm management practices and the 
livestock marketing environment which need to be treated in an integrated manner.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will essentially be involved in all of the 490 villages and communities 
throughout Kyrgyzstan expanding from an initial in Naryn Oblast.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project will trigger OP 4.01 and OP 4.09.  It will not trigger OP 4.12, since it will not 
require the acquisition of private land or rights of way over private land or restrict 
traditional on access to income-generating natural resources.  Neither will it trigger OP 
4.11, since neither traditions nor physical cultural assets will be put at risk.  
 
The Project is rated Environmental Category B, because of the potential environmental 
issues associated with the small-scale investments in pasture infrastructure and in 
livestock processing and marketing facilities.  These impacts are readily identifiable, 
small in scale and minimal in impact and can be effectively prevented, minimized or 
mitigated by the appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures identified in the 
environmental assessment (EA) and the environmental management plan (EMP) prepared 
for the project.  
 
The EA confirmed that the pasture management and agricultural services aspects of the 
project trigger the pest management safeguard policy. However, given the limited nature 
of the pest management issues presented by the project and its overall emphasis on 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM), the EA determined that preparation of a separate pest 
management plan was not necessary.  
 
It has not yet been decided whether the project will finance a limited amount of 
pesticides. This decision will be taken during appraisal. In case, only limited amounts of 
Page  3
pesticides for demonstration under the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and Farm 
Field Schools activities. If the purchase of pesticides will be allowed under the project, a 
framework to reduce the risk related to such use will be developed and operationalized. 
Such framework will be based either on a positive or negative list (i.e. which products 
could or could not be financed). In addition, training will be provided for the safe 
handling and use of pesticides.  
 
The Project is not expected to involve any significant, long-term or irreversible adverse 
environmental impacts.  Overall, the environmental benefits of the project's interventions 
are expected to outweigh any potential adverse impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As noted above, the potential adverse environmental impacts of the project are primarily 
those associated with the small-scale infrastructure investments for improving pasture 
management (see Component 1) and livestock processing and marketing (see Component 
2). These impacts are largely related to the design, construction and operation of the 
infrastructure investments to be financed by the project. Experience with similar 
investments under the Village Investment Project (VIP) suggests that the potential 
impacts are readily identifiable, small in scale and minimal in impact. The adverse 
impacts are not expected to be significant and can be effectively prevented, minimized or 
mitigated, as was done under the VIP, by appropriate preventive actions or mitigation 
measures. Other potential environmental risks the EA identified are from the application 
of pesticides and herbicides in pasture management and the burning of vegetation on 
pasture lands. These potential impacts are discussed below.  
 
Construction Impacts. The infrastructure improvements to be financed under the AISP 
for the most part will involve construction or rehabilitation of pasture 
management?related infrastructure (e.g. watering points, stock routes, bridges, animal 
shelters, etc.) identified under the CPMPs prepared under project guidance. The project 
will also finance construction of community investments to support livestock processing 
and marketing (e.g. dairy facilities, slaughterhouses, etc.). These are small-scale 
infrastructure investments and thus limited in environmental impact. Nevertheless, care 
should be taken under the project to prevent or minimize the potential adverse impacts 
from construction and operation of these investments.  
 
To this end, the project will ensure that all civil works will be designed and operated in 
accordance with environmentally sound engineering practices and governed by the 
applicable environmental standards of the Kyrgyz Republic. For the most part, these 
works will not require the use of heavy machinery (i.e. excavators, bull dozers). The 
principal construction impacts will involve (i) management of construction waste but 
may also include (ii) interference with access and movement of animals and people; (iii) 
disturbance of pastoral activities resulting from access restriction, soil compaction; (iv) 
waste, noise, mud and dust at sites and on access roads; (v) damage to trees or other 
vegetation and (vi) disturbance of wildlife at sites close to ecologically sensitive areas.  
 
Page  4
Application of Pesticides and Herbicides. The principal ecological concern in regard to 
pasture management is the potential application of pesticides, including for animal 
dipping, and herbicides as part of pasture management plans. Here it is necessary to take 
into consideration that in the light of new requirements of GOKR environmental laws on 
protection of environment, chemical methods of weed control at mountainous pastures 
are not always acceptable. The main ecological risks are related to safe use and 
application of pesticides and adequate application of fertilizers with the goal to prevent 
excessive surface runoff and contamination of soil, as well as surface and ground water. 
The Kyrgyz Republic has adopted the UN Food and Agriculture (FAO) manuals and 
guidelines on use and handling of pesticides and promotion of integrated pest 
management (IPM). The Department on Plant Protection within MAWRPI has 
distributed the regulations related to safe use and storage of permitted pesticides and 
renders services on training, licensing and regulation of their use in accordance with the 
Stockholm Convention and FAO manuals. These regulations will be applied to any 
purchase, distribution or application of pesticides or herbicides under the project.  
 
Burning Vegetation. There are some potential negative impacts on the mountain 
pastures caused by the practice of burning vegetation and bushes. Burning, particularly in 
autumn, considerably changes the water schedule towards withering, which under Kyrgyz 
conditions of prevailing arid climate is extremely undesirable. Mountain slopes made 
bare by withering retain snow poorly because it is blown away by wind and transferred to 
valleys and shallow gullies. Any melted snow and precipitation quickly flow down the 
slopes, resulting in soil deprived of moisture and aggravating erosion. At scorched-earth 
sites where this burning has taken place, the soil on sunny days gets significantly warmer 
than at non-scorched sites (due to the black cinders and lack of plant residuals that play 
the role of mulch). It is impossible to burn bushes out completely. The practice of 
burning is appropriate only at places where there are too many plant residuals that impede 
the growth of nurslings.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Construction Impacts.  The EA recommends a combination of preventive actions and 
follow-up monitoring to minimize the potential construction-related impacts described 
above. First, all projects will undergo environmental screening by the APIU in order to 
identify and address potential environmental risks. Second, all contractors will be 
required to prepare a site-specific environmental management plan (EMP), which will 
describe in detail the measures proposed to prevent or mitigate construction-related 
environmental impacts. In the case of community investments that may result in the 
generation of animal or other solid wastes (e.g. slaughterhouses, dairies), the EMP will 
include an appropriate waste management plan to address these potential impacts. The 
environmental screening and site-specific EMPs will be reviewed by the APIU and by the 
SAEPF at the oblast level in order to comply with its SEE requirements before any 
financing or construction can begin at the project site. Third, all construction contracts 
will have standard environmental, health and safety clauses required by Kyrgyz 
legislation and IDA procedures (see Annex D for model environmental contract clauses). 
Page  5
These preventive measures should address any potential adverse impacts from the 
construction activities.  
 
Application of Pesticides and Herbicides.  The EA recommends a combination of 
preventive actions and follow-up monitoring to minimize the potential environmental 
risks from application of pesticides and herbicides. First, the EA recommends that the 
project should possibly recommend alternative management techniques for any pest or 
weed problems identified in the CPMPs. Second, the project should provide appropriate 
training of farm workers in alternative management methods as part of its training in IPM 
and other good agricultural practices.  
 
Burning Vegetation.  The EA recommends a combination of preventive actions and 
follow-up monitoring to minimize the potential environmental impacts from the practice 
of burning vegetation and brush on mountain pastures. The EA recommends that the 
project disseminate appropriate information on the environmental impacts of this practice 
and provide training in alternative pasture management practices as part of its training in 
good agricultural practices.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Construction Impacts.  The APIU will conduct site inspections prior to, during and upon 
completion of construction activities to ensure full compliance with the site-specific EMP 
and contract conditions. Final payment to the contractor should be contingent on the final 
inspection, with particular attention to the requirement to restore the site to its original 
condition upon completion of construction activities. The involvement of oblast officials 
from the SAEPF in monitoring and evaluation will help in developing systematic 
environmental monitoring at project sites.  
 
Application of Pesticides and Herbicides.  The APIU will observe and monitor the use 
of pesticides or herbicides at project-related pastures during project implementation and, 
where warranted, periodically monitor water quality for pesticide or herbicide residues in 
surface runoff. The Rural Advisory Services will provide training on safe handling and 
use of pesticides.  
 
Burning Vegetation.  The APIU will monitor the use of burning practices at project-
related pastures during project implementation and encourage alternative pasture 
management practices. The involvement of oblast officials of the SAEPF may be used to 
support APIU monitoring.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project will touch a wide range of vested interests.  At the community level, they are 
related to the size of herd (small or large), location of owners (inside or outside of the 
community), types of pasture use (grazing, hunting, tourism, bee-keeping, mushroom 
hunting, herbal medicine gathering); access to arable land; and opportunities for rent-
seeking (leasing and sub-leasing land, obtaining grazing and shepherding fees).  Outside 
Page  6
the community a number of people and institutions have vested interests; all of these 
stakeholders have been consulted during project preparation, and a range of different 
actions will be taken during implementation to keep them engaged and to limit their 
opportunity to undermine different project activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/17/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/14/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/17/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Pest Management Framework is included into EAMP (Annex C).   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Maurizio Guadagni 
09/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
09/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
09/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
09/20/2007 
Comments:  Cleared. 
