Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/30/2006 
Report No.:  AC2103
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P088671 
Project Name:  Water Management Improvement Project (WMIP) 
Task Team Leader:  Joop Stoutjesdijk 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 8, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (60%);Central government administration (40%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Water resource management (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
19.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.70 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
4.40
9.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project will have a two-pronged development objective: (i) improving 
irrigation service delivery and water management for the benefit of a sustainable increase 
in irrigated agricultural productivity; and (ii) improving national water resource 
governance for the benefit of water users and the nation as a whole.   
 
3. Project Description 
-- Component 1 - Rehabilitation and Modernization of Irrigation Infrastructure (US $19.8 
million) to secure the water supply to agricultural areas with an estimated command area 
of 84,000 ha that serve about 40,000 farm families.  Twenty priority schemes have been 
selected, although it is possible that a number of priority schemes will drop out of 
consideration following detailed technical and economic analysis at the detailed design 
stage.  It is also accepted that there remains flexibility that some other schemes could 
replace those on the list during the project implementation phase if subsequently found to 
be more attractive or necessary.  A wide range of works has been proposed to overcome 
these problems, with the extent of work varying from scheme to scheme.  The proposed 
works include: construction of, or repair to, headworks; construction of, or repair to, 
Page  2
settling basins and sediment ejectors; repair to, or replacement of, concrete lining, using 
either precast canalettes, precast vertical or inclined slabs, or cast-in-situ concrete; 
cleaning, repair, or reconstruction of overpasses and underpasses to take cross-drainage 
and sediment flows across canal sections; repair, replacement, or construction of channel 
control structures; mechanical desilting of canal sections; and repair to, or construction 
of, gauging stations at the point of diversion to each sub-project.  
 
-- Component 2 - Management of Resources (US $4.85 million) to achieve sustainable 
and efficient water resources management.  The main tasks to be accomplished under the 
project include: (i) implementing the recently approved Water Code; (ii) reforming 
DWR’s technical and financial performance, turning it into an efficient and client-
orientated bulk water supply and management organization; (iii) supporting further WUA 
development, with emphasis on water management; (iv) information and dissemination 
programs; and (v) training and capacity building.  
 
-- Component 3 - Organization of Beneficiaries (US $2.52 million).  This component 
will support formation and support for pilot Federations of Water Users Associations and 
transfer of minor irrigation systems (less than 1,000 ha) to Water Users Associations, 
thereby reducing the role of the government irrigation service provider.  
 
-- Component 4 - Project Management (US $0.95 million) to provide funding for the 
staffing and operation of a project implementation unit, integrated within the Department 
of Water Resources, so that project implementation can be carried out in a timely and 
effective manner.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Geographically, main emphasis will be given to the Ferghana Valley, comprising the 
three Oblasts of Batken, Jalal-Abad, and Osh (as they are located in the project area of 
the Bank’s Ferghana Valley Water Management Initiative that includes support to the 
Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan).  However, taking into account the urgent 
rehabilitation needs elsewhere, and particularly in Talas Oblast that also has trans-
boundary issues, government found it desirable to cover selectively the whole country 
and allow some investments in other oblasts as well.  
 
A
number of the priority systems abstract water from rivers that have direct trans-
boundary issues.  For example, in Batken Oblast, the Ak-Tatyr system has an allocation 
in the following proportion: Kyrgyz Republic – 80 percent, Tajikistan– 20 percent, and 
the Isfairam-Sai system has a shared allocation in accordance with a Protocol signed on 
April 11, 1980, with the water allocation norms fixed in the following proportions: 
Kyrgyz Republic – 30 percent, Uzbekistan 70 percent.  For schemes in trans-boundary 
rivers, the design work will include the preparation of river basin management plans.  
The particular focus of such plans will be to fully understand the water sharing 
agreements and determine the physical needs to be able to properly measure water flows 
and abstractions.  Adequate information sharing arrangements with the lower riparian 
will be set up as well.  It is believed that a full understanding and transparency of water 
Page  3
uses will take away some of the local tensions along the trans-boundary rivers and 
streams.  
 
Dam safety measures will be considered, as necessary, if one or more of the project 
schemes are within dam command areas. Considering the priority schemes, TMR scheme 
(Nookat Raion, Osh Oblast) is dependant on Naiman Dam and Aravan-Ak-Bura and 
Yuzhnyi (Kara-Suu Raion, Osh Oblast) is dependant on Papan Dam.  A provisional sum 
of US $1.0 million has been set aside for dam safety purposes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Ms Rita Klees (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
--Environmental Assessment  
 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared, with focus on the first 
project component.  The main outcome of this report is a master EMP and the guidelines 
to develop site-specific EMPs, which should be submitted for Ecological Expertise 
examination at the Department of Environment.  These EMPs can be for one 
rehabilitation schemes, or clusters of similar ones, so that the reviewers can comment on 
specific environmental issues of concern.  
 
The project does not envisage the construction of new irrigation systems nor the 
resettlement of people, and WMIP has been classified as Category B for the purpose of 
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.  The EMP has been prepared to make sure that 
potential negative impacts are prevented, mitigated, or compensated.  
 
The main direct environmental aspects of concern are the handling of dredged or 
excavated materials from canals, drains, and structures during construction and 
Page  4
maintenance phase; environmental damage caused by contractors during construction 
activities; and environmental flow issues in those basins not subject to international 
sharing agreements.  The main indirect impacts are a potential increase in waterlogged 
and salinized areas due to increased ability to distribute water to the WUAs, and a 
potential deterioration of drainage/discharge water due to increased fertilizer and 
chemical uses.  These impacts could cause trans-boundary issues in some systems.  
 
The main tool that is being proposed to mitigate environmental impacts during the 
construction phase are environmental clauses in the contracts of the contractors that will 
perform the civil works, with financial punishments associated to non-compliance.  The 
construction supervisors will control the implementation of the environmental clauses in 
the contracts.  However, to make them effective, regular and surprise inspections must be 
performed by oblast staff of the State Agency for Environment Protection and Forestry.  
 
During the O&M phase, the main tools of environmental control are water quality 
sampling and water quantity measurements, to be performed by raion level staff of DWR.  
Equipment has already been procured under OIP.  
 
--Safety of Dams  
 
During project preparation, a team of dam engineers inspected thirteen irrigation dam in 
the country in order to identify the main dam safety issues, propose activities to improve 
dam safety, define priorities and provide preliminary cost estimates.  The Bank's Dam 
Adviser has reviewed the preparation report and has concluded that the dam safety 
assessment carried out during preparation was sufficient at this point in time.  He also 
agreed with the strategy to carry out a detailed safety assessment of a particular dam 
when an irrigation system proposed for rehabilitation is in the command area of such 
dam.  For that there will be qualified design consultants.  In addition, a smaller version of 
the Panel of Experts on Dams, set up under IRP, will be maintained and used as needed 
on some of the complex dam safety issues, in case such dams are included under WMIP.  
 
--Projects on International Waterways  
 
Several of the irrigation systems proposed for rehabilitation under the project abstract 
water from rivers that are international waterways for the purpose of OP 7.50.  The most 
notable international waterway basins that would be in the project area are the Syr Darya 
and Talas.  The riparian states of the Syr Darya are Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, 
Uzbekistan, and Kazakhstan; and for the Talas it is Kyrgyz Republic and Kazakhstan.  
 
Since the main project component only deals with rehabilitation and improvement of 
existing irrigation and drainage systems, and will not finance new schemes, and since 
other project components will focus on improvement in water use management and 
efficiency, WMIP will not change the abstraction volumes of the systems and will not 
have an adverse change to the quality or quantity of river water flows, and the project-
funded works will not change the nature of the original systems.  As such, the project 
Page  5
falls within the exception to the notification requirement under OP 7.50, approved by the 
Vice President for Europe and Central Asia Region on May 6, 2005.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Kyrgyzstan has adequate environmental legislation and mechanisms, which include an 
environmental permit procedure for physical activities, and an environmental impact 
assessment, including a State Environmental Expertise Review.  Rehabilitation of 
irrigation infrastructure under ongoing projects -- Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (IRP) 
and On-Farm Irrigation Project (OIP) -- has not resulted in significant environmental 
concerns.  Implementation of mitigation measures (e.g. pollution prevention, protection 
of natural resources, and worker and public safety) will be required from contractors who 
would have to follow guidelines for environmentally sound construction practices.  These 
requirements will be included in bidding documents and meeting them would be a 
contractual requirement of the works, to be supervised by construction supervision 
consultants.  Under IRP and OIP, staff of the Ministry of Ecology and Emergencies 
regularly visits project sites to monitor the performance of the contractor with regard to 
environmental conditions.  This kind of monitoring will take place under WMIP as well.  
 
The rehabilitation and modernization of infrastructure and improvements in water 
management should result in an increase in system efficiency, thereby generating water 
savings and reliable water supply to the users.  The ability of government agencies such 
as DWR and Hydromet to measure water flow and quality will be strengthened under 
WMIP, while regulation will be enforced better under the new Water Code.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The preparation of each project component actively engaged relevant stakeholders both 
indirectly, drawing from the experience of IRP and OIP, and directly, through a number 
of studies, such as the Social Assessment (which was undertaken during project 
preparation), and consultations with various officials.  The first and third components 
incorporate lessons learned from the earlier projects.  The emergence of WUAs 
federations will have significant impact on the role and structure of the Department of 
Water Resources.  The only outstanding issue is to ensure that irrigation officials who 
support the move to federation do not experience a conflict of interest that either 
jeopardizes the process or compromises the sustainability of the federations.  
 
Page  6
The second component, designed to implement the Water Code, poses many challenges 
both in the design and implementation of provisions of the Water Code and the practice 
of engaging a wide range of stakeholders actively in the restructuring process to gain 
their commitment and collaboration.  This component will proceed carefully, giving the 
respective institutions time to absorb and integrate reforms and overcome the resistance 
that inevitably develops during institutional changes.  Priority will be given to moving at 
a
pace that generates collaboration and ownership, rather than following a fixed schedule.  
 
Other than inherent challenges associated with institutional restructuring, the project has 
no significant social risks.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/23/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/23/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/30/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
No 
Page  7
been made for public awareness and training? 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk 
01/20/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Rita Klees 
01/20/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
01/20/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
01/23/2006 
Comments:  As acting sector manager I clear the package, and clear the EMP and proposals  for 
ensuring due diligence on environmental and social sfeguards during implementation. 
