Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2773 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/02/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P096409 
Project Name: Second On-farm Irrigation Project 
Task Team Leader: Joop Stoutjesdijk 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (75%);Central government administration (25%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S);Water resource 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00
4.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve irrigation service delivery and water 
management for the benefit of a sustainable increase in irrigated agricultural productivity.  
 
The preliminary key performance indicators include: (i) number of fully costed operation and 
maintenance plans developed for the irrigation and drainage systems under the management of 
Water Users Associations that have received assistance with rehabilitation and modernization; 
(ii) collection rates at least 90 percent of estimated tariff within two years after completion of the 
rehabilitation works; (iii) water distribution to farmers within the rehabilitated systems in a 
timely manner, in line with irrigation requirements; (iv) evidence of high satisfaction rates 
among water users with the performance of the WUA; and (v) increase in crop yields by at least 
20 percent within four years after rehabilitation of the infrastructure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
OIP-2 is part of a series of IDA-funded projects that support the irrigation and drainage sub-
sector.  The Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (IRP; P046042), completed in 2006, assisted in the 
rehabilitation and modernization of twenty five irrigation schemes, commanding over 280,000 ha 
Page  2
and four large dams that provide water to 415,000 ha.  Major outcomes of the improvements of 
the dams included a secured operational safety, resulting in improved safety of downstream 
settlements and a guaranteed water supply.  As a result of the interventions, reservoir storage was 
allowed to increase again to full supply level, increasing the combined storage capacity from 
1,183 Mm3 to 1,317 Mm3, equivalent to an increase by 12 percent.  This additional storage 
capacity and the better operation of the dams has allowed an improved water supply to the 
irrigation areas under the command of the dams.  The rehabilitation and modernization of the 
irrigation systems has allowed a secured and timely delivery of irrigation water, as a result of 
which agricultural performances could be maintained or improved, benefiting an estimated 
50,000 households.  
 
Under the On-farm Irrigation Project (OIP; P049723), the development of Water Users 
Associations (WUA) has been highly successful. At the end of 2006, almost 440 WUAs were 
legally established and registered, commanding an irrigation area of about 700,000 ha out of 1.1 
million ha available in the country.  Most of these WUAs have benefited from a comprehensive 
awareness campaign and subsequent training program.  A total of 63 WUAs that manage an area 
of 120,000 ha are expected to benefit from rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation and 
drainage infrastructure that is under their management.  Impact data for 13 WUAs (command 
area about 27,000 ha) where rehabilitation has been completed for at least two irrigation seasons 
shows encouraging results, especially related to the functioning of WUAs.  The results show that 
the areas under irrigation have increased in 11 WUAs; the water abstraction per unit irrigation 
area is down in 10 WUAs; the Gross Value of Production per unit water is up for 8 WUAs; the 
ISF rate has increased in 11 WUAs and collection recovery is up and exceeds 90 percent in 9 
WUAs, with two additional WUAs having around 80 percent collection rate; and O&M 
expenditure rates are up in 9 WUAs.  
 
The Water Management Improvement Project (WMIP; P088671) that started in August 2006 
will continue rehabilitation and modernization of off-farm irrigation infrastructure on about 
85,000 ha.  It will also assist the government with the implementation of the new Water Code 
(2005) that promotes integrated water resources management and will include the establishment 
of the State Water Administration and River Basin Councils as well as the development of river 
basin plans.  It will also reform the Department of Water Resources' (DWR) technical and 
financial performance, turning it into an efficient and client-orientated bulk water supply and 
management organization and support formation and development of pilot Federations of WUAs 
and transfer of minor irrigation systems to WUAs, thereby reducing the role of the government 
irrigation service provider.  
 
OIP-2 is expected to build on the work done under OIP and provide assistance through two 
major components, with a third smaller component providing project management support.  
 
Component 1: WUA Strengthening.  This component would continue the support to and 
strengthening of about 450 WUAs.  The sustainable development of WUAs is a long-term 
process that started under OIP-1, but that will require further training to be provided by the 
WUA Support Units (SU) that operate within the Department of Water Resources (DWR).  The 
training requirements would be different from OIP-1.  Based on a needs assessment, each Raion 
SU is to design tailored, need-specific training programs for their WUAs. WUAs would also be 
Page  3
able to benefit from the provision of small equipment (computers and other office equipment, 
radios, motorcycles, bicycles, water measuring devices, etc.) and vehicles.  The proposed OIP-2 
is also expected to collaborate closely with the various agencies involved in extension and 
advisory services as well as marketing to improve the support provided to farmers in 
rehabilitated systems.  
 
Component 2: Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Modernization.  This component would focus 
on the rehabilitation and modernization of distribution systems in about 75,000 ha that are 
managed by WUAs.  Works accomplished so far under OIP-1 (December 2006) include 800 km 
of irrigation canals rehabilitated or reconstructed, 111 km of drains cleaned, 26 storage reservoirs 
cleaned of sediment and structures repaired, and 1,323 outlets and other hydraulic structures 
installed on canals.  OIP-2 is expected to focus on similar type of works.  
 
Component 3: Project Management.  This component would support the Department of Water 
Resources in implementing the project, including assistance in contract administration, 
procurement, and financial management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be implemented country-wide and would target some 450 WUAs with 
training and around 40 WUAs (commanding about 75,000 ha) that have qualified for assistance 
with the rehabilitation of the irrigation infrastructure under their management. OIP-1 used a 
number of milestones to select qualifying WUAs.  It is expected that similar milestones will be 
used, but as there are already many qualifying WUAs, the selection criteria will be strengthened. 
An important selection criterion for participating WUAs is likely to be the location in the 
command areas of higher-order irrigation systems that have been rehabilitated under other IDA-
funded projects.  Clear scheme selection criteria would be drawn up during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Kyrgyz Republic has adequate environmental legislation and mechanisms, which include an 
environmental permit procedure for physical activities, and an environmental impact assessment, 
including a State Environmental Expertise Review.  Rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure 
under recently completed or ongoing projects (Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (IRP) and OIP) 
has not resulted in significant environmental concerns.  Implementation of mitigation measures 
(e.g. pollution prevention, protection of natural resources, and worker and public safety) would 
be required from contractors who would have to follow guidelines for environmentally sound 
construction practices.  These requirements would be included in bidding documents and 
meeting them would be a contractual requirement of the works, to be supervised by construction 
supervision consultants.  Under IRP and OIP, staff of the Ministry of Ecology regularly visits 
project sites to monitor the performance of the contractor with regard to environmental 
conditions.  This kind of monitoring would take place under OIP-2 as well.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In 2005/6, an Environmental Assessment (EA) was prepared for the Water Management 
Improvement Project.  This EA includes a generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP).  
During OIP-2 preparation the documentation prepared under WMIP would be reviewed, as 
would be the documents related to the environment prepared under OIP.  A master EMP would 
be prepared for OIP-2, based on the findings and recommendation from WMIP.  For the systems 
that will benefit from project assistance during the course of implementation an analysis of the 
potential impacts of the proposed interventions would be made at the time of design and a site-
specific EMP would be prepared, following guidelines to be developed in the master EMP.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
There is a possibility that some of the systems that would be rehabilitated are under the 
command of irrigation dams.  IRP already had a dam safety component, so all the major 
irrigation dams have already adequate safety.  During the preparation for WMIP a dam safety 
assessment was carried out for the 12 irrigation dams that are in the country.  As OIP-2 will 
follow a program approach, with the WUA-managed irrigation systems to be selected during 
project implementation, it is not yet known which dams would be in the immediate project area.  
Guidelines will be prepared, to be disclosed before appraisal, how to deal with the irrigation 
dams and night storage reservoirs in case they are part of a sub-project.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Many WUAs draw on water from rivers that are international waterways.  Potential changes 
in water flow or deterioration in water quality during the construction works would be mitigated 
through implementation of the EMP.  As there would not be any enlargement of existing 
irrigation systems or development of new irrigation area, it is considered that the project 
interventions would not materially affect the quality or quantity of water flows to downstream 
riparian states.  The rehabilitation and modernization of infrastructure and improvements in 
water management should result in an increase in system efficiency, thereby generating water 
savings and reliable water supply to the users.  A recent impact assessment of 13 WUAs where 
rehabilitation works were completed two years ago showed that the water abstraction per unit 
irrigation area is down in 10 WUAs, ranging from around 20 percent to over 50 percent, which 
points at increased water use efficiencies, as a result of systems that can be managed better with 
less water losses.  
 
OIP-1 received a waiver for notification.  Based on the above, the task team is of the 
opinion that there is no need to notify the riparian countries, but will work with LEGEC and 
LEGEN before appraisal to agree on either a straight waiver or on seeking exemption through a 
memo to the RVP.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  5
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/06/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An environmental specialist will join the proposed March 2007 preparation mission to carry 
out the environment-related work described above.  A social scientist will join that mission 
as well.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk 
03/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
03/02/2007 
Comments:  Seen and approved. An environment specialist will join the team in March. As a repeater 
project, I delegate responsibility for due diligence on safeguards for this project to  the task team. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
03/02/2007 
Comments:  this is approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
