Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2832 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/28/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P104994 
Project Name: Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (60%);Solid waste management (20%);Roads and highways (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project is to improve the living 
conditions in selected "novostroiki" in Bishkek and Osh, the two largest cities of the Kyrgyz 
Republic, by increasing the availability of basic infrastructure services to the inhabitants of these 
settlements.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will tentatively consist of the following three components:  
 
A. Infrastructure (tentative cost USD14.0 million):  Municipalities and representatives of 
"novostroiki" communities have identified water supply, roads, solid waste collection, and 
educational services as key priorities.  An assessment of the specific needs of the different 
"novostroiki" will be undertaken over the next two months. Its results will allow to select, in 
close consultation with the "novostroiki" communities, the investments of the first-year 
investment program, and define the outline of the programs for the following years.  
 
B. Institutional Development (tentative cost USD1.5 million):  Institutional development 
support will focus on assisting the Government and the Bishkek and Osh Municipalities in the 
Page  2
preparation of realistic strategies management of "novostroiki" settlements.  Tentatively 
identified support areas include: developing sustainable systems of resource mobilization for 
future investments in "novostroiki;" reviewing administrative arrangements for "novostroiki" 
areas; and preparing effective urban planning and housing policies.  
 
C. Operating Costs and Other Expenditure (tentative cost USD0.5 million):   The component 
will finance the operating costs of the ARIS implementing unit and support to municipal 
departments associated with project implementation. It will also finance expenditure for 
monitoring systems and surveys, and annual audits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All physical investment components of the project will be located in so-called "novostroiki" 
settlements at the periphery of Bishkek and Osh, the capital and second largest city of the 
Kyrgyz Republic, respectively.  "Novostroiki" (literally "areas containing new constructions") 
consist of settlements established on the basis of plot lay out plans prepared by the municipal 
authorities that include (respected) rights-of-way for streets and public facilities (schools, etc.), 
but lack for the time being necessary basic infrastructure (water supply, roads, etc.).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by ARIS (Community Development and Investment Agency).  
ARIS is already the implementing agency for other Bank projects including the First Village 
Investment Project (P073973), the Second Village Investment Project (P098949), and the Small 
Town Infrastructure and Capacity Building Project (P083377). It is fully familiar with Bank 
safeguard policies and requirements and has the necessary expertise to satisfactorily deal with 
possible issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
To be discussed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
to be determined as part of further project preparation prior to QER   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/05/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable at this stage.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/28/2007 
Comments:  Based on further project preparation, the appropriate environmental assement, 
framework and or management plans will be prepared and disclosed by appraisal. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
03/28/2007 
Comments:  As the ISDS makes clear, further project definition is required before all safeguard 
requirements will be clear. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
