Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2801 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/26/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P096993 
Project Name: Agricultural Investments and Services Project 
Task Team Leader: Maurizio Guadagni 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 21, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: August 9, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.40 
 Local 
Communities 
2.80 
 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
9.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
2.50
15.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to improve the institutional and infrastructure environment for crop and 
livestock farmers.  This would enable them to raise their productivity and incomes and thereby 
help reduce poverty in the rural areas.  The project will directly support more productive, 
profitable and sustainable smallholder crop and livestock production through the provision of 
essential support services, critical capital investments and delivery of appropriate know-how.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is to be supported by a Grant from the International Development Association (IDA) 
of US$ 10.0 million equivalent. Substantial cofinancing is anticipated to be provided by IFAD 
(US$ 9.0 million), and by the Swiss SDC (US$ 2.5 million).  The rural communities themselves 
will provide the cofinancing for the pasture management program and for investments in 
livestock processing facilities.  
 
The project will consist of three main components:  
Page  2
(a) Pasture Management and Improvement.  A participatory and community-based approach 
will be applied to pasture use and management by the rural communities and their pasture user 
associations, so as to ensure economically viable and socially and environmentally sustainable 
use.  This will be supplemented by a facility for small community investment grants, which will 
provide the communities with some resources to invest in pasture infrastructure and related 
facilities.  
 
In a participatory process of community mobilization, capacity building, learning-by-doing and 
institutional development, the rural communities will establish pasture management associations 
and through these, and with advice from cooperating local technical agencies, develop 
Community Pasture Management Plans (CPMPs).  These will include information on available 
pasture resources, principles for allocating user rights, potential revenues and the mechanisms to 
collect them, and plans for the use of such revenues for pasture management and improvement.  
 
Resolving some of the problems identified in the CPMPs will require specific investments, such 
as rehabilitation of critical infrastructure (e.g., watering points, stock routes, bridges, animal 
shelters, etc.), improvements in pasture quality (e.g., overseeding), or the production, preparation 
and storage of forage crops and winter feed.  To implement such priority investments included in 
their CPMPs, communities will receive small block grants for two consecutive years; they will 
contribute a minimum of the equivalent of 25% of the grant from their own resources.  
 
(b) Agricultural Support Services.  The project will support the development and operation of 
market-oriented support services that will assist farmers with agronomic and farm management 
advice, market information, and animal husbandry, nutrition, health care and breeding.  The 
objective will be to improve farmer access to relevant information and know-how and hence 
strengthen their knowledge, understanding and adoption of sustainable and profitable practices.  
 
Livestock services will be improved through several measures, centered on regulatory and 
institutional reforms fostering the development of private livestock service providers.  The aim is 
to promote the effective and country-wide provision of animal health and breeding services, 
including vaccinations, de-worming, pre- and post-slaughter inspection, artificial insemination, 
etc.   
 
The project will support extension and demonstration efforts regarding proper animal nutrition, 
particularly during winter, with emphasis on forage and silage production and the use of feed 
supplements and concentrates.  Special attention will be given to the establishment of community 
seed funds, successfully introduced under the ASSP, for fodder crops.  
 
The project will also support the final phase of institutional development of the Rural Advisory 
Service, established under the ASSP with the support of IFAD and SDC, so as to strengthen its 
capabilities in fields such as soil fertility management, animal husbandry, and integrated pest 
management.  
 
Page  3
(c) Project Management.  Overall coordination of project activities and the fiduciary aspects of 
project management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented countrywide.  150 communities will be covered with the 
currently available financing. The communities will be selected on the basis of pasture resources, 
demonstrated interest and prior involvement with the VIP to facilitate implementation.  The 
project can be scaled up beyond this initial scope up if and when additional funding will become 
available.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Project management will be handled by the Agricultural Projects Implementation Unit (APIU) in 
the Ministry of Agriculture.  It is adequately staffed and equipped and has eight years of 
experience in managing IDA-financed projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment Report (EAR) presenting screening criteria for selected 
investments and including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be developed during 
project preparation to describe the necessary environmental management procedures and 
technical prerequisites for maintaining good environmental practice.  The Environmental 
assessment requirements will be also included into the Operational Manual, and will be provided 
to all participating communities and institutions.  The procedures to be followed are consistent 
with OP 4.01 and Kyrgyz requirements and will ensure compliance with safeguard procedures 
and issues.  They clearly describe institutional arrangements and responsibilities and the process 
of environmental assessment requirements, focusing on transparency and on comprehension by 
the target communities and local officials.  Where needed, local officials will be trained in 
preparing simple and appropriate environmental management plans.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project will promote the expansion of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) to additional 
crops and regions as well as to livestock production.  This is expected to reduce farmers' needs 
for chemical pesticides.  
 
The EAR/EMP will address any pest management issues likely to arise during the project.  
A
participatory management plan for pasture management will be developed as part of the 
project preparation.  A separate pest management plan will be prepared if significant pest 
management issues are envisaged. The project will not procure any pesticides.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/09/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft Environmental Management Plan will be shared end April with the Safeguards 
Team to  get their comments.  The EMP will be disclosed (in English and local language) in 
the Kyrgyz Republic and InfoShop before the start of appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Maurizio Guadagni 
03/21/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/21/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
03/26/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
