Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2933 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID: P097961 
Project Name: LAO PDR - Financial Management Capacity Building Project - 
Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Saiyed Shabih Ali Mohib 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASPR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (50%);Central government administration 
(50%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Public expenditure, financial management 
and procurement (P);Debt management and fiscal sustainability (S);Managing for 
development results (S);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The original project objective, which remains unchanged, is to build and strengthen institutional 
capacity of GOL to assist in the implementation of the government's structural reform program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This is an additional financing to support new activities within component B of the ongoing 
Financial Management Capacity Building Project.  Project restructuring is also being proposed 
following an MTR (March 2007) and changes are being proposed to some of the Key 
Performance Indicators as discussed in the Concept Memorandum approved on April 16, 2007.  
 
Additional financing will fund activities to support GOL in the implementation of the new 
organic Budget Law.  The implementation of the Budget Law is complimentary to and reinforces 
the Public Expenditure Management Support Program (PEMSP).  The proposed IDA-Grant of 
Page  2
US$2.5 million equivalent would support new activities in the following areas: 
Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Framework, Implementation of revised Chart of Accounts and 
Support to Treasury Centralization.  These subcomponents will be fully integrated into the 
restructured project framework under the component supporting the PEMSP.  
 
Project Restructuring:  The proposed restructuring as requested by GOL will focus on priority 
areas to support: (a) the Public Expenditure Management Strengthening Program (PEMSP); (b) 
strengthen debt management system and (c) enhance the audit capacity of the State Audit 
Organization.  
 
Within the framework of the PEMSP, the restructured FMCBP will continue to support 
capacity building initiatives as initially envisaged. However, the GOL has requested IDA support 
to improve the infrastructure of its training centers as a necessary condition to create an 
environment that is conducive to learning.  In this respect, the restructured project will support 
the rehabilitation and extension works for the MoF training center in the North.  These are small 
works estimated to cost approximately US$500,000.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The main project interventions will benefit ministries, other government institutions located in 
Vientiane or the provincial capital cities.  However, certain project interventions will address 
issues and institutions across the country.  Project interventions will not affect any protected 
areas, or sites or critical natural habitats or any other culturally and socially sensitive areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The initial project interventions did not trigger any environmental or safeguard policies.  
However, the new activity for rehabilitation to be introduced under the restructured component B 
of the project will call attention to some of the safeguard policies.  These, however, will have no 
significant negative impact.  Measures to ensure compliance will be included in the Operational 
Manual.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The restructured project includes a small component for rehabilitation and extension of 
classrooms and dormitories for the training center in the North province.  Environmental issues 
that may arise from the construction include the demolition of old structures containing asbestos, 
and contaminated water from latrines. The safeguards will include the requirement for adherence 
to safety standards in the removal of asbestos. No asbestos will be allowed in new construction. 
The construction of properly designed and sited replacement latrines will ameliorate any impact 
of the current latrines.  The operational manual will contain an environmental screening checklist 
and instructions to control these risks as well as any related to waste disposal, dust and noise.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
There is not expected to be any land acquisition.  Rehabilitation and extension works will be 
done in existing site.  The MoF will furnish to the Bank prior to appraisal evidence that the site 
of the training center is outside any protected zone as defined under OP/BP 4.11.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/09/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
There is no safeguard study required for this project. However, an environment checklist is 
being prepared and measures for compliance with safeguard policies will be included in the 
OM to properly monitor and ensure that there are no negative environmental and/or social 
impact.  MoF will provide documentation to indicate that the actual site of the training center 
is not located in a 'protected area'.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Saiyed Shabih Ali Mohib 
04/18/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/26/2007 
Comments:  ISDS is well written and covers potential environemental issues/impacts. Subsequent 
safeguards review and clearance responsibility is transferred to the SMU. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Barbara Nunberg 
05/01/2007 
Comments:   
