Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/30/2007 
Report No.:  AC2969
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID:  P097961 
Project Name:  LAO PDR - Financial Management Capacity Building Project - 
Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Saiyed Shabih Ali Mohib 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASPR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (50%);Central government administration 
(50%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Public expenditure, financial management 
and procurement (P);Debt management and fiscal sustainability (S);Managing for 
development results (S);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Based on the project refocus, the refined project development objective is: to improve 
GOL budget preparation, execution, reporting and auditing systems; strengthen 
monitoring of state owned commercial bank operations, and to improve financial 
management of selected state owned enterprises.   
 
3. Project Description 
In the proposed restructuring of the initial project as discussed in the Project Paper, the 
GOL will focus on priority areas to support: (a) the Public Expenditure Management 
Strengthening Program (PEMSP) and (b) strengthen debt management system.  
 
Within the framework of the PEMSP, the restructured FMCBP will continue to support 
capacity building initiatives as initially envisaged. However, the GOL has requested IDA 
support to improve the infrastructure of its training centers as a necessary condition to 
Page  2
create an environment that is conducive to learning. In this respect, the restructured 
project will support the rehabilitation and extension works for the MoF training center in 
the North. These are small works estimated to cost approximately US$500,000.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The main project interventions will benefit Ministries, other Government institutions 
located in Vientiane or the Provincial capital cities. However, certain project 
interventions will address issues and institutions across the country. Project interventions 
will not affect any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats or any other 
culturally and socially sensitive areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah (EASRE) 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASRE) 
Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASSO) 
Mr Stephen Ling (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The restructured project includes a small component for rehabilitation and extension of 
classrooms and dormitories for the training center in Luang Prabang in the North.  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01):  
 
The construction of the proposed new works has potential negative impacts falling into 
two categories: (a) during construction, and (b) after construction.  
 
During construction, potential impacts are: (a) dust and noise, (b) release of asbestos 
into the environment through demolition activities, (c) release of contaminated water 
from latrine demolition, (d) impact of location and storage of incoming materials (set-
Page  3
down area) and construction waste, (e) disruption of teaching and student living, (f) 
disruption of local trading and street use.  
 
After construction, potential impacts are: (a) changed traffic patterns due to possible 
shifting of main entrance to the site, (b) drainage outflows, (c) potential grey water and 
black water outflows, (d) waste disposal.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)  
 
Luang Prabang was inscribed on the UNESCO World heritage list on the 2nd of 
December 1995, at the Lao government's request. The Heritage House is a national Lao 
authority, directly reporting to the Minister of Information and Culture. It was created in 
1996 according to UNESCO recommendations following the inscription of the Luang 
Prabang site on the UNESCO World Heritage List. The Heritage House has prepared a 
protection master plan for Luang Prabang.  
 
The MoF will furnish to the Bank prior to appraisal evidence that the site of the training 
center is not affected by any provisions of protection master plan.  
 
Potential long-term negative impacts are: (a) heritage impact: that the new works 
violates the protection master plan, or (b) streetscape impact: the new works comply with 
the master plan, but are designed in a style inappropriate to the historic style of the 
surrounding area.  
 
Potential long-term positive impact is the improved streetscape due to well-designed 
new buildings, entries and boundary walls or fences.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The training center currently has on-site MoF staff trainees population of about 300. The 
training center has advised that demand, as measured by incoming requests for training 
from departments of the MoF, is about 600. The Project Paper will advise a strategy that 
ensures that current teaching and accommodation is raised to a certain minimum standard 
before any investment in increased numbers. However, it is likely that in the long term 
investment on this site will raise the population on the site.  
 
The impact of such an increase in population is a direct increase in the impacts after 
construction, sited in section 1 above, namely: (a) changed traffic patterns due to possible 
shifting of main entrance to the site, (b) drainage outflows, (c) potential grey water and 
black water outflows, (d) waste disposal.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In order to minimize adverse impacts, the following alternatives were considered:  
 
(a) Outsourcing student accommodation. This was considered not feasible for financial 
reasons.  
Page  4
(b) Putting all new construction on the existing parking lot, and shifting the entrance to 
the site in order for this to be feasible. This will provide construction set down area, allow 
materials and waste to be stored on site, and minimise disruption of teaching and student 
living. This option will be explored further during the design of the facility.  
 
In addition, the LEnS program is trying to create government capacity at local levels to 
deal with environment impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Measures to be taken are described below:  
 
Potential Impact/Measure:-  
 
Generally:  The operational manual will contain an environmental screening checklist 
and instructions to control all risks.  
 
Asbestos: No asbestos will be allowed into new works. There is no regulation of 
asbestos in Lao PDR, so any demolition will be controlled using an Australian standard: 
National Code of Practice for the Safe Removal of Asbestos (NOHSC:2002-1988)  
 
Heritage:  Consultation with Heritage House and Urban Development Administration 
Authority of Luang Prabang  
 
Streetscape: TOR for the architectural and engineering (A&E) firm to include direction 
to (a) prepare a site masterplan for the complete duruew school?not just this stage?and (b) 
pay particular attention to streetscape in the design of new works.  
 
Waste, drainage and waste water: TOR for A&E firm to direct that (a) engineering 
designs to minimise any impact, and that designs ensure capacity to handle growth in 
population of the site, (b) handover of the works to the training center include 
documentation of and training in the proper operation of all relevant systems.  
 
Disruption of teaching, trainees living, trading: TOR for A&E firm to direct the 
preparation of a construction plan which includes set-down areas, construction parking, 
storage and handling of construction waste, and strategy for working around existing 
training centre activities.  
 
MoF has no specialist in-house capacity to plan and implement the measures described, 
as these relate to the design and construction of buildings.  Planning and implementation 
will depend on the selection and direction of a properly qualified A&E firm. The TOR for 
this firm will be particularly detailed, in order ensure that all safeguards are covered.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders and potential key stakeholders are:  
Page  5
-
Government of Lao PDR  
 
-
Teaching staff and trainees  
 
-
Owners of adjacent land and shop owners on the streets fronted by the training centre  
 
-
Urban Development Administration Authority of Luang Prabang  
 
-
The Heritage House  
 
For all stakeholders, the consultation and disclosure process will be as follows:  
 
The architectural and engineering firm employed to design, document and supervise the 
construction works will, in it?s Term of Reference, be required to contact each of the 
stakeholders, and:  
 
-
Inform the stakeholders of the safeguards policies and complaints procedures  
 
-
By way of individual consultation or group meeting, seek stakeholder views on the 
potential impact of the project on the stakeholders.  
 
-
Distribute minutes of these meetings to the stakeholders, and include the minutes as an 
Annex to a Design Report  
 
-
In the Design Report, propose design responses to the proposed impacts  
 
-
Post building plans and elevations in a prominent place on site, during the tender 
period, and inform the stakeholders of this posting.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  6
credit/loan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Saiyed Shabih Ali Mohib 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Stephen Ling 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Barbara Nunberg 
05/17/2007 
Comments:   
