Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2264 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/10/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID: P100081 
Project Name: Avian and Human Influenza Control and Preparedness Program 
Task Team Leader: Hope C. Phillips Volker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
8.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objective of the proposed project is to contribute to Government's 
integrated plan, which aims to minimize the threat posed to humans and the poultry sectors by 
HPAI infection and other zoonoses in Lao PDR, and to prepare for, control, and respond to 
influenza pandemics and other infectious disease emergencies in humans.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Financing will be provided to support Lao PDR’s National Avian Influenza and Pandemic 
Preparedness Plan.  This integrated plan comprises five strategies, namely (1) Development of a 
disease free avian management system; (2) Disease surveillance and response in humans during 
outbreaks; (3) Laboratory and curative care; (4) Health education and community action; and (5) 
Strengthening of institutional and legal frameworks.  Implementation of strategy 1 will be the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, while strategies 2 and 3 will be 
undertaken by the Ministry of Health, with multiple ministries having roles in the 
implementation of strategies 4 and 5.  
Page  2
Strategy 1 consists of activities to reduce the risk of introduction of AI in the formal and 
informal sectors, as well as enhancing the capacity for early detection and warning and rapid and 
effective response in case of an outbreak.  
 
Strategy 2 aims to improve the surveillance in humans, as well as putting in place an integrated 
(human and animal) surveillance system.  The capacity to investigate and respond to emerging 
diseases (including AI) will be strengthened.  
 
Strategy 3 will strengthen the curative resources, including strengthening curative and 
laboratory resources through provision of equipment and training of staff, among other activities.  
 
Strategy 4 will formulate a national campaign on avian and human influenza and disseminate 
the same.  
 
Strategy 5 comprises strengthening the function of the National CDC Committee, developing 
necessary financial and legal frameworks. Supprt for institutional and implementation 
arrangements will also be financed under this strategy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National   
 
E.  Borr
ower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policiees will be strengthened during 
implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal (EASEN) 
Ms Gillian M. Brown (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This Project is being supported under the GPAI, for which a waiver for delaying the EMP 
has been granted.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An IPPF would be developed, outlining the principles to be used if project activites took 
place in indigenous communities.  A communication strtegy will be incorporated into project 
design to address concerns about any large scale project activities and to disseminate information 
into local languages and in culturally and appropriate and accessible ways.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/17/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This Project is being prepared under OP 8.50-ERL; preparation of the safeguard-related 
studies and documents have been granted a waiver by virtue of the waiver given for GPAI.  
The requirements will be fulfilled during implementation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Hope C. Phillips Volker 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
