Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC2539
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Latin America 
Project ID:  P095169 
Project Name:  Latin America: Multi-Country Capacity-Building for Compliance with 
the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 
Task Team Leader:  Matthew A. McMahon 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 7, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (60%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%);Agricultural 
extension and research (15%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Nutrition and food 
security (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.40 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
7.60
9.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will strengthen capacity in the four participating countries--Brazil, Costa 
Rica, Colombia, and Peru-- to implement the Cartagena Protocol (CP) on biosafety.  
 
Attainment of the project objective will be indicated by increased institutional 
effectiveness for implementing the Cartagena Protocol in centers of crop diversity in the 
Project's participating countries, reflected for example, in:  
 
(a) Adoption and use by all targeted institutions in the four countries, of standardized 
biosafety risk assessment and risk management mechanisms developed by the project;  
 
(b) Increased awareness and understanding of biosafety on the part of targeted 
communicators, opinion-makers and the general public;  and  
 
(c) Establishment of networks among the four participating countries to promote inter-
country and inter-institutional cooperation on biosafety and the environment.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project has three components: (a) Strengthening technical capacity in knowledge 
generation for biosafety risk assessment and management; (b) Strengthening biosafety 
decision-making capacity; and (c) Public awareness on biosafety for communicators, 
opinion-makers and the general public.  
 
Component 1:  Strengthening technical capacity in knowledge generation for biosafety 
risk assessment and management (US$4.04 million GEF)  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen regional technical capacity using 
selected, target crops (cassava, cotton, maize, potato and rice) as models for developing 
risk assessment, management and cost-benefit analysis methodologies for new transgenic 
products.  Note: These crops were chosen because they all are economically important in 
the region. Moreover, the centers of diversity of maize, cassava and potato are also in the 
region. Genetically modified (GM) Cotton is already grown by regional farmers, thereby 
offering the best opportunity for ex-post analyses and for monitoring methodology 
testing. Several GM versions of rice are under development for potential release in the 
region.  
 
The following subcomponents will be financed:  
 
1.1 
Strengthening technical capacity for environmental risk assessment and 
management  
 
1.2
Strengthening technical capacity for socio-economic cost-benefit assessment  
 
Expected outputs include: (a) documentation and adapted databases for assessing and 
monitoring gene introgression/persistence, and for mapping the distribution of 
crops/landrace/weedy, wild populations; (b) crop management strategies and operational 
guidelines to minimize transgene flow; (c) adapted, standardized methodologies for 
large-scale monitoring of gene flow; (d) regionally-adapted and standardized 
methodology for evaluating effects on non-crop (non-target) organisms; (e) adapted 
methodologies and tools for socio-economic impact assessment of living modified 
organisms (LMOs) in the tropics and for analyzing potential costs and benefits of LMOs 
in centers of biodiversity; (f) project-generated knowledge described in (a) and (e) all of 
the above downloaded to and accessible in, depositries and project websites on country-
based and at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), and Montreal 
Biosafety Clearing House (BCHs).  
 
Component 2:  Strengthening biosafety decision-making capacity (US$0.56 million 
GEF)  
 
The objective of this component is to implement Articles 10 (decision procedure) and 
22 (capacity building) of the Cartagena Protocol, with a specific their emphasis on the 
regional approaches described in the Articles.  It will build biosafety capacity for 
decision-making entities (competent authorities) and for practitioners (public and private 
Page  3
research community) using the knowledge generated by this project in a collaborative 
effort across the region.  The project will finance the following sub-components:  
 
2.1  Training in environmental risk assessment, management and communication for 
competent authorities and practitioners  
 
2.2  Training in socio-economic cost/benefit assessment for competent authorities and 
practitioners  
 
Expected outputs  include:  (a) decision-making entities (competent authorities, 
implementing entities of national biosafety frameworks) and practitioners (e.g., 
agricultural science professionals, transgenic crop developers and users) trained and 
proficient in the core principles and application of biosafety assessment and biosafety 
management; (b)  competent authorities and practitioners trained to understand and use 
common methodologies to conduct cost-benefit assessment of biosafety products for 
planning purposes.  
 
Component 3:  Training in biosafety for communicators and opinion-makers to improve 
public awareness (US$0.39 million GEF)  
 
The objective of this component is to promote public awareness and stimulate informed 
public debate on biosafety based on quality information generated by specialists in target 
countries, through the mechanism of engaging national research organizations, policy-
makers, communicators and opinion-makers, based on the basis of comprehensive 
information linking biosafety and biotechnology.  
 
The project will finance communications specialists to develop information materials on 
biosafety and information campaigns and will insert them into the public 
debate/discourse at various levels (e.g., through press briefings with national science 
writers, journalists, and other opinion-makers).  CIAT will establish a Project website and 
online newsletter, linked to all partner country collaborators, as a practical and inclusive 
tool for knowledge-sharing, and for fostering stakeholder participation in determining the 
ongoing content of both the website and newsletter.  
 
Expected outputs include: (a) audience-tailored, science-based information modules, 
toolkits and awareness-building tools prepared by communications specialists, based on 
knowledge generated under Component 1 and targeted to social communicators and 
opinion makers with a broad public audience; and (b) delivery of science-based 
information through a range of  media - including the project website - to targeted 
audiences.  Project information is currently posted at URL: www.ciat.cgiar.org   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The executing agency, CIAT, is based in Palmira, Cali, Colombia.  
 
Page  4
CIAT will work in collaboration with designated National Coordinating Agencies in the 
four countries--Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, and Peru--that include the main project 
locations.  
 
The national agencies designated as the National Coordinators include: the Environment 
Research Center of EMBRAPA (Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, Ministry 
of Agriculture, Brazil); The Institute of von Humboldt (ascribed to the Ministry of 
Environment, Colombia; The University of Costa Rica (Costa Rica); and The National 
Environment Council (CONAM, Peru), with linkages already defined and agreed in 
principle with other prominent research entities in each country.  
 
This is a capacity development project and as such all related training activities will be 
conducted in the project participating centers.  
 
As a capacity building project, it will have national coverage. Specific locations unless 
otherwise related to the "centers of excellence" that have not been identified will be 
described during appraisal and/or implementation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
Ms Indira Janaki Ekanayake (LCSAR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project's global environmental objective is to support implementation of the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB) by improving institutional capacity of agriculture 
and environmental ministries as well as specific biosafety-related agencies in the four 
participating countries (Colombia, Costa Rica, Brazil, and Peru) to implement their 
national biosafety regulations in compliance with the CPB. This would ensure an 
adequate level of protection in the field of the transfer, handling and use of transgenic 
crops in centers of crop diversity.  
 
Page  5
The project's explicit goal is to reduce the environmental risks of modern biotechnology 
through activities designed to build capacity to implement the CP. The project will not 
finance the planting of genetically-modified crops.  
 
With its emphasis on capacity building, the project is  expected to have, if implemented 
as planned, no significant adverse environmental effects during implementation.  
 
Nevertheless, the project team will be vigilant and monitor continued safeguard 
compliance as it relates to OP/BP 4.01 Environment Evaluation and OP4.09 Pest 
management, during implementation of the relevant subprojects. Based on the periodic 
analysis and evaluation of the project M&E criteria necessary safeguard steps will be 
taken, as necessary (for example if a potential subproject activity triggers 4.10 policy).  
 
On the social issues, including indigenous peoples, the project is designed to build 
capacity on CPB implementation so as to avoid the potentially adverse impact of LMOs. 
The project capacity building activities are formulated to recognize the vulnerabilities of 
the people whose livelihoods, cultures, and social well-being are inextricably linked to 
the targeted crops and related wild species in the centers of crop diversity affected by this 
multi-country project. The proactive training and risk assessment framework will be 
monitored during the project implementation and compliance to Bank's OD 4.2 
Indigenous Peoples Policy will be taken in to account if and when necessary.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The international consortium of national partners collaborating with International 
Agricultural Research Centers (IARC) and Advanced Research Institutions (ARI) is a 
realistic and workable mechanism to build sustainable biosafety capacity in the region.  
 
Based on the points stated above and the fact that it is a capacity building project 
potential indirect or long term adverse impacts would be negligible. If anything, the 
impact of the project is expected to be positive because through proper implementation of 
compliance with the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, potential risks would be reduced.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The following project alternatives were considered and rejected all of which have in 
addition to what is described below lower safeguard compliance capacity than the multi-
country approach design utilized by this project.  
 
(a) No project:   Rapidly expanding adoption of transgenic crops in Latin America 
without systematic risk and impact assessment, safety management and 
tracking/monitoring systems creates an urgent situation in a region which is among the 
richest biodiversity areas of the world.  
 
(b) Separate projects in the four countries:  Scale, cost and time inefficiencies, lost 
opportunities for collaboration and exploitation of comparative advantage and 
Page  6
complementary skills, and potential lack of sustainability reduce the viability of this 
approach.  
 
(c) Single country project as regional demonstrator:  This approach would require 
major, long-term investment to reach International Standards (IS) and multidisciplinary 
technical capacity, unacceptable given the rapidly-evolving biosafety situation, scale 
inefficiencies and lost opportunities.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Quality Assurance Team (QAT) recommended a Category C rating in its review of 
the Project Concept Note (January 27, 2005).  
 
This rating was re-confirmed by the Quality Enhancement Review (March 7, 2006) of 
the draft Project Appraisal Document.  
 
Despite this rating, the implementing agency is well aware of the potential policy 
triggers (OP 4.01 and OP4.09) and measures that are needed, mainly in terms of holding 
stakeholder consultations (with regard to above mentioned policies as well as OP/BP 
4.10). A communication framework has been formulated (see component 3) and will be 
implemented by the project.  
 
Steps associated with safeguards due diligence of the demand-driven subprojects on 
biosafety to be funded by the project are described in the Operational Manual' subproject 
chapter.  Subproject implementation from the point of view of safeguards will be 
monitored during supervision missions and actions taken as deemed necessary.  
 
The project would be implemented over three years, with the grant partner and 
implementing agency being the Colombia-based Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) 
working in an integrated manner through a consortium of partner countries and their 
respective National Coordinating Agencies, building institutional alliances with 
prominent national agencies to leverage complementary skills in evaluating and 
managing transgenic crops and their products.  
 
As a member of the CGIAR system, and as a well established international center with 
regional and international mandates for many of the model crops being selected by this 
project, CIAT, the executing agency has a broad base of experiences and best practices 
from which to draw in order to avoid any potential harmful affects through adopting best 
practices. Similarly, the institutions implementing activities in the four countries are from 
the public sector and have relevant experience in various themes of the project.  
 
The country capacity for compliance with safeguard policy issues was deemed 
satisfactory (with the exception of Peru, but that would rely on CIP, another international 
center).   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholder involvement has been a core element of the debate on biosafety since the 
first wave of biosafety regulations emerged in the 1990s. There is probably no area of 
technology where stakeholder involvement is more deeply embedded in regulations and 
legislation. Given the ramifications of compliance with the CP, biosafety capacity-
building per se, and the public controversy surrounding GMO crops, the stakeholder 
universe is broad, and this fact is reflected in the reach of the project's knowledge 
generation and dissemination objectives and functions.  The immediate target audience 
for this project includes the national agricultural innovation system (NAIS), public 
authorities and civil society (including environmental interests, farmer groups, producer 
organizations and community organizations) in the participating countries, with the 
international organizations as regional facilitators. Stakeholder engagement is seen as an 
evolving, continuous and adaptable process, responsive to immediate and longer-term 
circumstances and to ensuring that interested groups/entities have both opportunity and 
forums for providing input. See Annex 11 for details of the stakeholder consultation 
process and implementation framework.  
 
Project development was the result of an analysis of issues impeding the full 
development of national biosafety systems in Latin American countries. Indeed despite 
biosafety legal codes, technical capacity to implement the CP was weak and variable in 
and between countries. This led CIAT to develop a series of courses on biosafety for 
biosafety committee members, and to conduct in-country capacity analyses to define 
major bottlenecks, the most glaring of which was found to be the lack of science-based 
assessment methodologies and processes.  Similar independent initiatives were underway 
in most of the participating countries. In regional biosafety meetings, countries also 
expressed concern about the trans-boundary movement of GMOs and their need to have 
confidence in neighboring countries, which prompting CIAT to organize a series of 
meetings among representatives of Ministries of Agriculture and Environment, Social 
Protection and Health, and decisions were taken about who would be the country project 
focal points. While most of the biosafety courses and meetings include civil society 
representatives with divergent views about GMO/biosafety, the general discussion during 
CIAT meetings prior to project preparation focused particularly on responding to the 
needs expressed by country authorities responsible for planning, decision-making and 
management of the biotechnology/biosafety spectrum.  
 
Formal project preparation has involved consultation with a broader group of parties 
based on a Consultation Plan which covers the preparation through implementation 
phases.  Entities consulted include national research institutes from each country, 
government biosafety agencies, ministries responsible for natural resources, agriculture 
and production in each country, and international and regional agricultural institutes.  In 
each of the participating countries, partners include not only agriculture, biotechnology 
and biosafety experts but also representatives of the environmental field responsible for 
biodiversity conservation in those countries (e.g., Institute von Humboldt, Colombia 
CONAM, Peru; EMBRAPA, Brazil; and INBIO, Costa Rica (see Annex 6, Table 6.1).  
 
Page  8
Additional stakeholder consultation events are being planned as well for the remainder 
of preparation and implementation including in-country workshops, e-consultations, 
publication sharing, meeting with biosafety and environmental NGOs and private sector 
groups, and frequent consultations with relevant government instituions in each of the 
four countries. As project preparation has advanced, consultations have been amplified to 
incorporate, for example, the International Project on GMO Environmental Risk 
Assessment Methodologies (GMO ERA) in which several of the project partners are 
collaborators as part of the GMI ERA group.  Three of the four national coordinators of 
the Project participated in the June 2006 workshop on Environmental Risk Assessment 
Methodologies in Brazil, with the specific goal of establishing links between the project 
and other biosafety initiatives.  Indeed, the goal of such consultations is to expand the 
work plan agenda and work areas to be financed by the project, and to foster a pluralistic 
approach to stakeholder participation and knowledge-sharing, the latter being a crucial 
project activity to both link stakeholder communities and foster inclusiveness.   It is also 
an important reason for organizing the work agenda around thematic areas. Furthermore, 
CIAT has initiated the design of a project website linked to sites in all partner countries 
and including an online newsletter, and is planning an information-sharing event with the 
media and key NGOs to establish the foundation for sustaining a consultative approach 
throughout project implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/17/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/24/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/25/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is a category C project and full disclosure is not required. However, the basic data of 
this project proposal was disclosed in the project countries at the preliminary stakeholder 
consultation meetings (as indicated in the Project Brief Annex 11). Additional in-country 
disclosure of relevant project documents is being done through the project web site: 
www.ciat.org, and through the respective country web pages. During implementation 
additional disclosure of project information will be done through the web pages, in-
country workshops, and periodic project newsletters.   
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matthew A. McMahon 
11/08/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Indira Janaki Ekanayake 
10/13/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Juan Martinez 
10/13/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John V. Kellenberg 
12/20/2006 
Comments:  Approved for Mark Cackler 
