Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/31/2006 
Report No.:  AC1991
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Caribbean 
Project ID:  P090731 
Project Name:  CARIB-GEF-Implementation of Pilot Adaptation Investments in 
Dominica, St. Lucia and St. Vincent & the Grenadines. 
Task Team Leader:  Walter Vergara 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 17, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (25%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(25%);Irrigation and drainage (25%);General industry and trade sector (25%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
2.10 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support efforts by Dominica, Saint Lucia and St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines to implement specific (integrated) pilot adaptation measures 
addressing primarily, the impacts of climate change on their natural resource base, 
focused on biodiversity and land degradation along coastal and near-coastal areas.  This 
will be achieved through: (i) the detailed design of pilot adaptation measures to reduce 
expected negative impacts of climate change on marine and terrestrial biodiversity and 
land degradation; and (ii) the implementation of pilot adaptation investments. Reducing 
these impacts will primarily result in protection of biodiversity and prevention of land 
degradation but will also induce economic benefits in the tourism, fisheries, agriculture 
and forestry sectors, help maintain the resource base upon which these economic 
activities rely and promote climate resilient sustainable development. More importantly, 
the experience gained through these local level activities will assist and inform the policy 
decision making process and is expected to influence the enactment of climate resilient 
sustainable development policies.  
 
Page  2
The ultimate goal is to advance with practical steps on the actual implementation of 
adaptation measures and directly influence the adoption of policies that will promote on 
the protection of globally important biodiversity and prevention of land degradation 
while foestring climate resilient development.  The project provides an opportunity to 
seek synergies in support of various multilateral environment agreements and is 
promoting and facilitating more effective coordination. The project also seeks to produce 
knowledge of global value on how to implement adaptation measures in small island 
states that can be applied in other countries in the region, not participating in SPACC and 
even for islands in other regions of the world.  The value of these early lessons will make 
the GEF resources applied, more cost-effective in the medium term.  
 
The project complements the goals of the Mainstreaming Adaptation to Climate Change 
in the Caribbean (MACC) Project and applies the lessons and information gathered 
through the Caribbean Planning for Adaptation to Climate Change (CPACC) project by 
piloting the implementation of adaptation measures in countries that have already taken 
mainstreaming decisions and seek to execute specific measures to address the impacts of 
climate change on biodiversity and land degradation.  
 
Key performance indicators:  
 
The project seeks to improve the resilience to climate change of SIDS through the 
adoption of specific adaptation measures. These are the result of community consultation 
and participation.:  
 
ï‚§ 
Population of flagship species stabilized in Morne Diablotin and Morne Trois 
Pitons national parks in Dominica that are being affected by changes in prescipitation and 
climate extremes  (based on population surveys of species  already in the red book of 
endangered or vulnerable species).  
 
ï‚§ 
30% progress in protected areas (of endemic and unique habitats) management 
effectiveness, integrating climate impacts as measured through GEF tracking tool, that 
are vulnerable to climate extremes and changes in rainfall and evaporation caused by 
climate change.  
 
ï‚§ 
More than 80 ha and at least 5% of the farmers producing in pilot sites with 
improved land use models that foster biodiversity preservation while improving farmers 
income.  
 
ï‚§ 
No less than 10,000 ha with improved land use and park management plans of 
globally important biodiversity, incorporating global climate change risk management.  
 
ï‚§ 
Restoration of at least 100 ha of unique endemic coastal wetlands of global 
importance, including mangroves that are being affected by increased salinization and sea 
level rise  
 
ï‚§ 
Time without adequate water services in key communal buildings (schools, health 
posts, markets, etc.) in three sites reduced by 30%.  
 
ï‚§ 
Maintaining the services from lifeline infrastructure to withstand category 
3hurricanes in the face of intensified hurricanes in the Castries area of St. Lucia.  
 
ï‚§ 
Development of National Sustainable Development Strategy in at least one 
countrythe participating countries which integrates climate change, biodiversity 
Page  3
conservation, and land degradation management within national development planning 
frameworks.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project components The project would support three activities (components) prioritised in 
national adaptation strategies and refined through a series of regional and national 
consultations.  
 
Component one: Design of priority adaptation measures addressing impacts of climate 
change on biodiversity and land degradation (total cost $0.9 million; GEF funding $0.2 
million).  Under this component the following activities will be supported:  
 
•
Subcomponent 1 – Feasibility Analysis of proposed adaptation measures. This 
subcomponent will support: (i) Baseline analysis, analysis of specific climate change 
impacts primarily on biodiversity of global significance, characterization of specific 
problems to be addressed; (ii) Identification of alternatives; (iii) Assessment of 
alternatives (technical, cost analysis, institutional, environmental, social, risk, etc.); (iv) 
Selection of recommended actions; v) analysis of policy framework and implications.  
 
•
Subcomponent 2 - Community Participation. This component will support 
communities participation and community management capabilities through workshops, 
information exchange and training to support the implementation and management of 
measures designed to address climate impacts on biodiversity and land degradation;  
 
•
Subcomponent 3 -Design of adaptation measures. This subcomponent will 
supportconsultant services for: (i) Technical, engineering design; (ii) Environmental and 
Social management plans; (iii) Institutional arrangements of the selected adaptation 
measures; (iv) Community participation; (v) M&E system design to measure and monitor 
vulnerability of biodiversity assets and land degradation to climate change impacts; (vi) 
Procurement Process Selection.  
 
Component two:   Implementation of adaptation measures designed to address climate 
impacts on biodiversity and land degradation (total cost $2.05 million, GEF funding $1.5 
milion).  The project will support the implementation, of pilot adaptation measures in 
seven sites in the participang countries thereby enhancing the resilience of insular 
ecosystems with biodiversity assets under threat from climate change. The investments 
will: (i) establish measures to reduce pressures on biodiversity arising from habitat 
conversion and climate change impacts (Dominica, St. Vincent); (ii) establish measures 
to counter habitat fragmentation induced by climate change through establishment of 
marine and coastal protection measures (for example destruction of coastal ecosystems 
by increased sea lavel rise and salinization, resulting from climate change in Bequia and 
Union Islands, Grenadines);  (iii) adopt integrated approaches to fisheries management 
that consider reduction of anthropogenic pressures (Dominica, Saint Lucia ) seeking to 
strengthen their resilience to climate impacts; (iv) establish adaptation strategies to 
protect globally important biodiversity ine coral reefs (Dominica); (v) restore endemic, 
unique mangrove cover destroyed or altered by coastal salinization induced by climate 
change   (Saint Lucia ); (vi) strengthen key infrastructure to intensified hurricane winds 
and storm surges in Castries (Saint Lucia) and (vii) enhance the climate resilience of 
Page  4
unique and endemic aquatic systems and watershed areas (St. Vincent, Saint Lucia , 
Dominica).  Under this component the following activities, identified in national 
communications and other studies, will be supported:  
 
•
Subcomponent 1 – Implementation of adaptation measures in the biodiverse 
Morne Diablotin National Park and its Neighboring Communities (Dominica) identified 
in updated management plan under component 1. This subcomponent would support 
specific adaptation measures to address the impacts of GCC primarily on globally 
important biodiversity and on land degradation issues and to reduce vulnerabilities in the 
Morne Diablotin National Park and in its neighboring coastal communities of Colihaut, 
Dublanc and Bioche including for associated marine and coastal ecosystems, including 
wetlands and mangroves of globally important biodiversity.  
 
•
Subcomponent 2 - Morne Trois Pitons National Park Integrated Ecosystem 
Management (Dominica): The project would address biodiversity and land degradation 
issues and vulnerabilities to climate change, by: (a)  implementation of strategic measures 
identified in the updated and complemented management plan for the Morne Trois Pitons 
National Park developed in Component one; and (b) establishment of pilot adaptation 
measures to enhance the resilience of aquatic systems and watershed areas being affected 
by climate change impacts and improvement to water resource management so as to 
enhance the capabilities for sustainable development of adjoining communities thereby 
reducing stress on the Morne Trois  Pitons Nation Park.  
 
•
Subcomponent 3 - Sustainability of Water Resources and Supply of the Vieux 
Fort Region (Saint Lucia): This subcomponent seeks to complement the government’s 
water program by adding a climate overlay and establishing adaptation measures that 
would result in increased resilience to the impacts of climate variability and climate 
change in the Vieux Fort Region of Saint Lucia, and the proposed Pointe Sable National 
Park, thereby ameliorating ecosystem degradation caused by anticipated climate impacts. 
Specifically, activities will be implemented to enhance the efficient use of available water 
supplies and increased resilience to water scarcity conditions anticipated from climate 
change impacts on coastal wetlands and intertidal areas that represent unique habitats of 
global importance..  
 
•
Subcomponent 4 –Strengthened critical coastal infrastructure in the Castries area 
(Saint Lucia).  This pilot adaptation measure seeks to demonstrate the design and 
implementation of appropriate interventions to reinforce critical infrastructure (hospitals, 
shelters, fire stations and storm barriers) to the effects on intensified hurricanes and 
tropical storms, in the Castries region of Saint Lucia.  The Caribbean islands need to built 
critical infrastructure that can withstand the increased frequency of tropical storms (a 
change associated with global warming) to serve as pillars for disaster management and 
reconstruction. The project will provide for the scientific and engineering services 
required to assess vulnerabilities, define priorities and retrofit one specific building.  
 
•
Subcomponent 5 - Integrated Ecosystem Approach to Climate Change in Bequia 
and Union Islands (St. Vincent and the Grenadines): This is designed to support national 
efforts aimed at integrating climate change adaptation principles into ecosystem 
management. The project will focus on the implementation of adaptation measures to 
address fresh water needs and coastal vulnerabilities, in particular the salinization of 
aquifers caused by sea level rise, while reducing land degradation and protecting the 
Page  5
fragile biodiversity in the two islands of Bequia and Union. All activities will involve the 
Islands’ NGOs, Government Agencies, the private sector and representatives of civil 
society. The project will support the establishment of adaptation measures to address 
biodiversity, land degradation issues and vulnerabilities.  
 
•
Subcomponent 6 - Climate Change Risk Management for Spring Village (St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines): The project will support the implementation of adaptation 
measures to address land degradation and its impact on sensitive coastal and marine 
ecosystems, including coral reefs affected by increased sea surface temperatures and sea 
level rise. At the same time adaptation measures should address land use / land planning 
issues and associated vulnerabilities. In this regard the project activities will include 
interventions, to be selected during the execution of component one, like: execution of 
key, strategic, actions to initiate the land use plan implementation, including community 
control and enforcement; strengthen forest management and soil conservation efforts; 
reduce vulnerability to flash flooding; reduce shoreline erosion and protect coastal marine 
resources. The project will support river-bank stabilization measures, the implementation 
of mitigation and adaptation measures to reduce the risk of landslides and flash flooding; 
coastal degradation, and the development of natural hazards contingency plans.  
 
All project activities, while addressing the losses in the natural resource base (in 
particular impacts on biodiversity and land degradation) will induce economic benefits to 
key sectors, and attend local development needs.  The local benefits tied to the global 
goals are described in the table below:  
 
Component Three. 
Strengthen national capacity to implement multiple Multi-lateral 
environmental agreements (MEA) obligations with an integrated and holistic operational 
framework (total cost US$0.9 million; GEF US$ 0.2 million). This component, which 
will mostly be financed by third party and counterpart contributions, would finance goods 
and services required to develop and establish the building blocks for addressing multiple 
convention objectives in accordance with national priorities within the “ecosystem 
approach” as adopted by the three governments and promoted by the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), Convention on Biological 
Diversity (CBD) and United Nations Convention to combat desertification (UNCCD). To 
this end the project will support: (i) the production of vulnerability maps; (ii) establish a 
single national reporting framework for the UNFCC, CDB, and UNCCD so as to reduce 
the burden on limited resources available in the three countries, while pioneering a 
harmonized report structure that would integrate climate change, biodiversity and land 
degradation issues:  
 
•
Subcomponent 1.  Production of vulnerability atlases that identify ecosystemsand 
development activities at risk from climate change and land degradation.  Building upon 
existing models of vulnerability mapping, the project will produce a web based geospatial 
information system containing information on environment, community, infrastructure, 
and economic information. Analytical and statistical models and forecasts will be 
employed to calculate vulnerability indices, and the results will be downloadable and 
printable. This component would finance goods and services required to: (i) support 
Page  6
technical mapping that would identify and assess national biodiversity (i.e. marine, 
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and species, agro-biodiversity) under threat from 
climate change and land degradation; (ii) establish GIS-based information management 
systems to provide stakeholder and community access to vulnerability map and relevant 
resource management information; and, (iii) undertake such activities with direct 
involvement of the community.  
 
•
Subcomponent 2 -Establish a single national reporting framework for the 
UNFCC, CDB, and UNCCD so as to reduce the burden on limited resources available in 
SIDs, while pioneering a harmonized report structure that would integrate climate 
change, biodiversity and land degradation issues: This subcomponent will address the 
capacity limitations of SIDs by: pioneering the harmonization of reporting under the 
UNFCC, CBD, and UNCCD Conventions – which serves four purposes, namely: (i) the 
reduction in resource requirements; (ii) the integration and harmonization of 
implementation programs under the MEAs;  (iii) the formal integration of cross-sectoral 
issues into a unified and coordinated reporting framework  and National Sustainable 
Development strategy (developed under Subcomponent 2); and (iv) the establishment of 
single coordinating structure for implementation of the Conventions. The CCCCC will, 
with the support of the Secretariats for the UNCCD, UNFCCC and the CBD and with 
technical input from these Secretariats and the Global Mechanism, IFAD and IUCN: (i) 
develop a harmonized reporting framework for the UNFCC, UNCCD and CBD reports; 
and (ii) assist each participating country develop a single national report utilizing the 
harmonized reporting framework.  
 
Component Four: Project Management (total cost US$ 0.5 m, GEF funding US$ 0.2 m). 
This component will support the overall technical coordination of Project Activities 
(including the implementation of a technical monitoring system) (component 4.1) as well 
as the administrative and financial management of the Project (component 4.2). It will 
include goods; consultancy services; travel and operational and incremental costs 
undertaken by the Project Management. Specifically this component will finance the 
project coordinator, the procurement specialist, other required personnel for the project 
management, and the project external audits.  
 
Sector issues addressed by the project  
 
The project addresses key vulnerabilities as identified in the National Communications 
Climate Change Adaptation Policy, and National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 
that have been developed and approved by each country. The project also addresses the 
need for a more integrated and holistic approach to adaptation that incorporates 
biodiversity and land degradation issues of national significance, thereby strengthening 
the national capacity to address multiple MEA commitments as articulated in the national 
capacity self assessment (NCSA) process. The project contributes to the integration of 
climate change adaptation into land use planning and management, biodiversity 
conservation, forestry and protected areas management, water resource and watershed 
management, coastal zone management, and promotes community-based management 
practices that support national sustainable development objectives.  More importantly, the 
results of the specific pilots will be used to inform and influence the adoption of climate 
resilient sustainable development policies.   
Page  7
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities will take place in the three participating countries.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Walter Vergara (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Preliminarily the Project has been identified as triggering the following safeguard 
policies:  
 
•
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01);  
 
•
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); and,  
 
Social  
 
There are no major adverse social impacts expected as a result of this project given the 
nature of the activities and interventions (pilot subprojects). In Dominica, the relatively 
large land area and comparatively small population base has not caused the stresses on 
natural resources use that are being witnessed in other countries in the region. 
Additionally, Dominica’s steep and rugged terrain has created a settlement pattern which 
favors coastal areas rather than the densely vegetated mountain areas adjoining the 
national parks. In light of these factors, it is unlikely that adaptation measures to be 
undertaken in either of Dominica’s national parks will result in “restricting access to 
natural resource usefor the neighboring communities”. Indeed, the objective of the 
project is to empower local communities to manage their own resources so as to reduce 
vulnerability to climate change impacts. Any adaptation measures that are implemented 
will only be done once appropriated interventions have been identified by local 
Page  8
communities. The local communities have actively participated in the design of these 
pilot projects, and are keen to take an active role in the development and implementation 
of measures that will increase community resilience to climate change.  
 
Consultation Process.  The design and in particular the selection of specific adaptation 
measures is the result of a comprehensive consultation process that included local, 
national and regional discussions with ample participation of relevant stakeholders. These 
discussions have been documented and minutes will be archived in project files.  
 
The process of consulting and deciding upon adaptation measures was initiated with the 
preparation of the Initial National Communications in 2001. This process was supported 
under the GEF through one of its implementing agencies the United Nations 
Development Programme. The national communications consist of a description of the 
OECS countries’ National Circumstances, a National Greenhouse Gas Inventory for 
1994, an assessment of the OECS countries’ vulnerability to the potential adverse 
impacts of Climate Change, an outline of the existing institutional framework, a 
description of the National Response Measures that will be pursued by the Governments 
and a listing of the Priority Actions that the Governments intend to implement in the 
short term.  Under the auspices of component 4 of the CPACC project a National Climate 
Change Issue Paper has been developed in 2001. Component 4 intended to specifically 
support the development of a policy framework for integrated planning and management, 
for cost effective response and adaptation to the impacts of global climate change in all 
the participating countries. The process utilized was fully participatory and consultative 
and involved the holding of two national consultations, during which stakeholders and 
interested parties discussed the pertinent issues.  
 
In 2002 the policy on planning for adaptation to climate change was prepared in the 
framework of CPACC and MACC. The aim of this National Climate Change Adaptation 
Policy is to foster and guide a national plan of action, formulated in a coordinated and 
holistic manner, to address short, medium and long term effects of Climate Change, 
ensuring to the greatest extent possible that the quality of life of the people of the OECS 
countries and opportunities for sustainable development are not compromised. During 
consultation undertaken under the SPACC PDF-B the adaptation measures were finally 
refined and priority identified. The national and regional consultation conducted in each 
of the participating countries of SPACSPACC selected the specific adaptation measures 
to demonstrate the benefits and costs of adaptation activities. The selection process was 
based on the National Communications, Issues Papers for all OECS, and the National 
Climate Adaptation Policies in St. Vincent, Saint Lucia, Dominica, and the selection 
criteria defined by the new GEF window on adaptation (see D.1 Economic and financial 
analysis).  
 
Environment  
Page  9
There are no major adverse environmental impacts expected as a result of this project.  
Minor environmental impacts might be expected from some on the ground investments.  
The project is designed to be entirely positive from an environmental point of view, 
particularly by protecting vulnerable ecosystems from the impact of GCC.  Some 
expected direct positive impacts include: (i) establish measures to reduce pressures on 
biodiversity arising from habitat conversion and climate change impacts (Dominica, St. 
Vincent); (ii) establish measures to counter habitat fragmentation through establishment 
of marine and coastal protection measures (Bequia and Union Islands, Grenadines);  (iii) 
adoption of integrated approaches to fisheries management that consider reduction of 
pressures (Dominca, Saint Lucia ); (iv) establish adaptation strategies related to coral 
reefs that consider the inertia in the climate change system and focus on reducing 
anthropogenic stresses (Dominica); (v) restores healthy mangroves cover and restoration 
of mangroves (Saint Lucia ); (vi) establishment of measures to enhance the resilience of 
aquatic systems and watershed areas (St. Vincent, Saint Lucia , Dominica).  
 
The OM will includeincludes an environmental framework in compliance with 
OP/BO/GP 4.01. An Environmental Assessment will be performed as part of the 
preparation of each adaptation measures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Compliance with OP/BO/GP 4.01 will assured through the development and review of 
EIA for each pilot adaptation measure. An environmental analysis framework will de 
developed and described in the OM. EIA and the corresponding EMP will be reviewed as 
part of the monitoring and evaluation activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project is entirely to be planned, designed and implemented with the community.  
 
All activities will involve the Islands’ NGOs, Government Agencies, the privatesector 
and representatives of civil society.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/13/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/20/2006 
 
Page  10
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/13/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Walter Vergara 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Walter Vergara 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jocelyne Albert 
03/23/2006 
Comments:   
