Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2006 
Report No.:  AC1762
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Central America 
Project ID:  P085488 
Project Name:  Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve Project 
Task Team Leader:  Douglas J. Graham 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 2, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
22.35
22.35 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) of the proposed project is to improve the 
national and binational management of the area of the proposed Corazon Transboundary 
Biosphere Reserve (CTBR), respecting the rights of traditional populations. This will 
contribute to a global objective of ensuring the long-term conservation of the heart of the 
MBC, the largest contiguous area of natural habitat remaining in Mesoamerica, and 
perhaps the best hope in that area for the maintenance of ecological dynamics and 
processes at a large ecoregional scale. The PDO will be achieved by: (a) improving 
binational coordination mechanisms and strengthening indigenous land rights; (b) 
strengthening the National Protected Areas Systems (SINAPs) and legal frameworks; (c) 
facilitating the updating and implementation of protected areas management plans; (d) 
promoting community-based management of natural resources, mainstreaming 
biodiversity conservation into productive activities, and strengthening local and 
indigenous governance structures; and (e) increasing inter-sectoral information exchange.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project consists of six components:  
 
Page  2
1. Consolidation of the Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve ($0.81 million in 
GEF funds): This component will support the creation, consolidation, and strengthening 
of binational coordination mechanisms for the Reserve area, permitting the involvement 
of all stakeholders in the management of the area, including a project-level conflict 
resolution mechanism, and formulation, definition, and official approval of the UNESCO 
Biosphere Reserve. Although strategically desirable, formal acceptance by UNESCO of 
the area’s biosphere reserve status is not a prerequisite to implementing any part of the 
project. This component also seeks to consolidate indigenous land rights, the 
strengthening of which is a precondition for the effective management of the CTBR.  
 
2. Strengthening of the National Protected Areas Systems (Sistema Nacional de Areas 
Protegidas, SINAPs) ($2.9 million): Because more than half  of the geographic area the 
Honduran and Nicaraguan SINAPs is included within the proposed Corazon Reserve, the 
proposed project is an appropriate vehicle for focusing on their national systems. In 
Honduras, an ambitious rethinking and restructuring is underway of the institutional 
structure for the effective day-to-day management of individual protected areas. This is to 
fall under the responsibility of the Honduran Protected Areas Fund (Fondo Hondureno de 
Areas Protegidas, FHAP), which theproject will support. In Nicaragua, the project will 
similarly support the creation and strengthening of sustainable financing mechanisms for 
protected areas, with designs to be determined in the first year of the project.  
 
3. Implementation of Protected Area Management Plans ($2.76 million): This 
component will help the protected area administrations of Nicaragua and Honduras 
implement individual protected areas management plans, through a community-based co-
management structure. Investments will include equipment and infrastructure, additional 
demarcation where necessary, strengthening of stakeholder groups, and updating and 
implementation support of management plans. Community participation will be 
important in project implementation, and supported through capacity-building and related 
subprojects. It is not expected that the CTBR will have its own distinct management plan, 
but rather that it will benefit from coordinated individual management plans of its four 
constituent protected areas.  
 
4. Community-Based Natural Resource Management ($3.56 million): This component 
focuses on community-level management of natural resources to mainstream biodiversity 
conservation into productive activities. This component will be jointly implemented with 
major financing from the partially blended World Bank projects with similar goals. 
Communities will identify priority activities and design training programs to implement 
their own subprojects, with the support, as needed, of the subproject implementing 
agencies. The focus of these subprojects will be on fostering sustainable livelihoods: 
agricultural subsistence activities, community forestry management, agroforestry, 
harvesting of non-timber forest products, and other activities.  
 
Indigenous groups living in and around the project area will be the primary beneficiaries 
of this component. In addition to technical assistance focused on natural resources 
management, special emphasis will be placed on the institutional strengthening of local 
management structures.  
Page  3
5. Monitoring and Information Management ($1.00 million): This component will 
strengthen biological monitoring programs for the entire project area. It will build on 
existing capacities at national levels (for example, the Nicaraguan National 
Environmental Information System [SINIA]), and at regional levels (for example, the 
Mesoamerican Environmental Information System [SIAM] and the Inter-American 
Biological Information Network [IABIN]). This component will also support research 
programs, supporting in particular traditional uses of biodiversity in productive 
landscapes, and investments for informal and formal environmental education.  
 
6. Project Administration ($1.77 million): This component supports the effective and 
efficient administration and operation of the proposed project. Activities will include 
project coordination, production of manuals, audits, financial management, a midterm 
review, and activities related to project closing. Other activities include a 
communications strategy, publications, systematization of project information, project 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and sharing of good practices.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This is a binational project. In Honduras the project area extends from the Rio Platano 
Biosphere Reserve, through the Tawahka Indigenous Reserve to Patuca National Park. In 
Nicaragua, the Bosawas Biosphere Reserve is the project area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSEO) 
Mr Marquez Martinez (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The stand-along environmental evaluation found that the project would likely have the 
following positive impacts on the environment in the project area: reduction in the 
deforestation rate, increase in the conservation of critical habitats, protection of important 
watersheds, reduction in rate of biodiversity loss, increase in the capture of carbon 
dioxide, better use of natural resources, and involvement of local populations in the 
protection of the project area and its natural resources.  
 
The evaluation noted that the subprojects, research financed with small grants, and 
monitoring activities have a slight possibility of provoking localized negative impacts if 
not carefully planned and monitored. Although unlikely, these could include an increase 
in localized deforestation, loss of natural habitats, increase in erosion on steep land, 
increase in pesticide use, or loss of native species.  
 
The protected areas policies of Honduras and Nicaragua do not allow for the involuntary 
resettlement of established residents within protected areas, and no involuntary 
resettlement will be carried out under this project. There is not intended to be a loss of 
shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, loss of livelihoods, or designation of new 
protected areas. Nevertheless, in accordance with the Involuntary Resettlement Policy 
(OP 4.12), the possibility of economic displacement within a protected area triggers the 
policy and requires a “process framework”, which has been prepared and disseminated 
publicly.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect of long-term negative environmental impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Because of the possibility of potential, limited negative impacts stemming from project 
activities, a plan to mitigate these impacts has been detailed. A copy of the full EA 
document in Spanish is available in project files. The document presents a framework for 
environmental screening and impact mitigation that is designed to take into account the 
environmental characteristics of an area where an activity is proposed and the risks 
presented by the activity and determine a mitigation plan to minimize impacts. In a 
separate annex, a complete Integrated Pest Management Plan with a specific focus on 
organic pest control methods is presented. All safeguard-related documents are available 
publicly.  
 
Page  5
In accordance with the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12), a “process 
framework" was prepared and is available publicly.  
 
Finally, an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan has also been prepared for the project.  
 
In accordance with the Bank's policy on Disclosure of Information (BP 17.50), copies of 
the Environmental Assessment, Integrated Pest Management Plan, Social and Indigenous 
Assessment, Indigenous Peoples Development Plan and Process Framework have been 
available to the public at the CCAD website.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As identified in the Social and Indigenous Assessment, key stakeholders of the project 
include the residents of the proposed Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve, 
including indigenous and ladino populations, as well as the government institutions 
responsible for environmental protection and conservation, municipalities, local 
indigenous and civil society organizations, and non-governmental organizations. The 
Social Assessment includes a detailed appendix on the consultation process, in which 
over 800 persons participated in different events.  
 
In accordance with the Bank's policy on Disclosure of Information (BP 17.50), copies of 
the Environmental Assessment, Indigenous Peoples Development Plan and Process 
Framework have been available to the public at the CCAD website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2006 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Page  7
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
04/14/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
04/14/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Juan Martinez 
04/14/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Marquez Martinez 
04/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
