Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2730 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/29/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lebanon 
Project ID: P104774 
Project Name: LB-EMERGENCY POWER SECTOR REFORM CAPACITY 
REINFORCEMENT 
Task Team Leader: Anna Maria Bjerde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Debt management and fiscal sustainability (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
3.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
5.00
8.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to accelerate the implementation of reforms and 
restructuring of EdL by enhancing the capacity in the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEOW), 
the Electricity utility (EdL) and a multi-Ministry Higher Level Committee (HLC) overseeing the 
reform process and in particular the restructuring of EdL, both in the short and the longer term.  
The capacity enhancement is expected to come from three distinct but closely related advisory 
service components (see description below)   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is a key element in the Government?s effort to control the deterioration of its fiscal 
position following the hostilities with Israel last summer.Although the hostilities did not cause 
major physical damage to the electricity infrastructure, the indirect impact through loss of 
revenue and increased cost are estimated to be very significant, requiring even more Government 
subsidies than before.  Indeed, the fiscal impact of the sector is estimated by the Ministry of 
Page  2
Finance (MoF) to be close to US$1 billion in 2006 to cover the cash shortfall of EdL.  The need 
for reform of the sector is now more critical than ever, but there are no quick or easy fixes.  For 
years, the electricity sector has suffered from overall poor governance, management and staffing 
problems, a serious lack of investment in operation and maintenance and new facilities resulting 
in poor quality of service, high system losses and inadequate cost recovery.  
 
Reform of the power sector has been on the agenda for a very long time, including restructuring 
of EdL and the introduction of natural gas as a fuel for power generation.  Recently, a power 
sector reform plan was endorsed by the Council of Ministers which lays out step by step reforms 
of the sector in the short, to medium and long term.  The ultimate objective of the reforms is to 
improve the efficiency of the sector and therefore reduce the substantial required government 
subsidies through restructuring and private sector participation.  
 
The proposed project will contribute towards the cost of three advisory service components, 
which will complement the service contracts already in place and technical assistance and 
investment support provided by other donors.  The Bank supported components are heavily 
featured in the Government?s reform program for the sector and will help assure that the reform 
program can move from plan to reality by injecting much needed capacity to implement the 
reforms.  The project components are the following:  
 
Advisory Service Component 1:  Strengthening the Capacity of the Ministry of Energy and 
Water (MEOW) to Implement Power Sector Policy Reform.  The objectives of the assistance 
proposed under this component are to (i) provide policy advice to MOEW in strategic areas; (ii) 
complete key on-going projects; and (iii) assist in the establishment of the regulatory agency.  
The duration of this component is expected to last for 2 years.  The services covered include (i) 
Policy advice on key sector strategic issues (national energy strategy, sector least cost plan, tariff 
study, fuel sourcing strategy) (ii) Complete on-going projects (proposals for supply of LNG, 
contract to reduce the financial gap in distribution, review of proposals to attract IPPs) and (iii) 
Establishment of the Regulatory Agency (review of previous studies, assist in the recruitment of 
key staff and allocation of budget to the Agency).  Support to the MOEW will also include a 
short-term component that will support the immediate hiring of a strategic advisor to the MOEW 
given the particular lack of capacity in the Ministry at present.  
 
Advisory Service Component 2: Support to Government of Lebanon in the Restructuring of 
EdL.  The objective of the services proposed under this component is to assist the Government in 
the restructuring of EdL, including corporatization of the proposed structure of generation, 
transmission and distribution under a holding company.  The assistance is expected to last for 18 
months, with several intermediate milestones.  The main tasks envisaged under this component 
are to (i) advise on the Government?s proposed structure of the new EdL and restructuring 
strategy, (ii) provide support for the corporatization of the companies to be created, (iii) design 
for each company a detailed organization chart, governance scheme, set of job descriptions and 
staff mapping, internal procedures and help prepare their initial business plan, and (iv) develop 
an asset register and propose level of capitalization of the new companies and shareholding 
structure.  
 
Page  3
Advisory Service Component 3: Support to EdL to Improvement of the Operational and 
Financial Performance and Implementation of the Restructuring.  The objectives of the 
assistance proposed under this component are to (i) help EdL improve its performance with a 
focus on technical and procurement, commercial and financial aspects during the interim period 
between the beginning of the project and the moment the restructuring is implemented, and (ii) to 
assist the restructuring of EdL.  The assistance is expected to last for eighteen months, or until 
EdL is corporatized and restructured.  The tasks covered under this component will address, inter 
alia (i) generation efficiency and procurement, (ii) T&D reliability and efficiency and 
commercial, (iii) financial issues and accounting.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The consultants will be located in Beirut at the key premises of the MEOW, EDL and key 
agencies involved and overseen by the Prime Minister?s office (including spell out HCP and the 
Higher Level Committee).  There will also be close coordination with and at the premises of the 
Ministry of Finance and the Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR) as well as with 
key advisors in the Prime Ministers? Office.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There are no identified safeguard issues in this project.  However, potential indirect social and 
environmental impacts of the reform cannot be ignored and attention to such concerns will be 
carefully incorporated in the scope of the relevant strategic advisory services supported by the 
project.  In particular, the issue of fuel oil storage will be closely examined in the context of the 
fuel sourcing strategy, to avoid future dramatic environmental damage of the scale of the oil spill 
from the Jiyeh power plant?s tanks, upon their destruction during the recent conflict.  Similarly, 
close attention in the scope of the advisory services to the Ministry of Energy will be given to 
identifying and minimizing the adverse impacts of energy policies on the various stakeholders, 
with a particular concern for the most vulnerable stakeholders, such as the poor, when it comes 
to advising on an energy strategy, review of tariff structures, and the overall restructuring of the 
sector.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/25/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anna Maria Bjerde 
01/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
01/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
01/29/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
