Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1947 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/29/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lebanon 
Project ID: P077334 
Project Name: Bekaa Water Supply Rehabilitation and Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader: Mohammed Benouahi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (85%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P);Regulation and competition 
policy (P);Water resource management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
48.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
12.00
12.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives are to:  
 
a) 
Enhance the quality of life in the West Bekaa area by improving the reliability of the 
water supply systems through rehabilitation and extension of the water supply networks.  
 
b) 
Improve the operational efficiency and financial sustainability of the BWA, by: (i) 
putting in place service/management contracts that will provide for appropriate operation and 
maintenance of the water and sanitation networks, and (ii) providing technical assistance for the 
BWA to emerge as an operational utility capable of providing adequate water supply and 
sanitation services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project comprises of the following components:  
 
Page  2
a) 
Rehabilitation and extension of the West Bekaa water supply network ($45 million).  
This component includes the rehabilitation and extension of the water supply systems in the 
villages that are served from the Chamsine and Loussi sources (West Bekaa region), including 
the rehabilitation of house connections and the installation of meters.  The population benefiting 
from the implementation of this component is estimated to be about 130,000.  
 
b) 
Service contract for operation and maintenance of BWA facilities ($10 million).  Given 
the weak institutional capacity at the BWA, this component would finance a 4-year service 
contract for the management, operation and maintenance of the water and sanitation facilities in 
the entire Bekaa region.  The service contract is a relatively short-term solution that will enable 
the BWA to concentrate on the merger of the different authorities, and put in place the basic 
management and information systems of a running utility, to potentially attract in the medium-
term other forms of public private partnerships.  
 
c) 
Institutional strengthening of the BWA ($5 million).  This component would finance 
technical assistance to strengthen the BWA as an institution that is efficient, has improved 
financial sustainability, and is capable of providing adequate water and sanitation services.  The 
technical assistance activities will include: (i) the establishment of commercial and integrated 
accounting systems, (ii) the implementation of a leak detection and repair program, (iii) the 
preparation of a regional hydraulic master plan for the entire Bekaa region, (iv) the 
implementation of an appropriate tariff scheme, (v) the installation of bulk flow meters, (vi) the 
implementation of energy efficiency measures, and (vii) staff training.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Bekaa Valley region is located in the east side of Lebanon between the western and eastern 
mountain ranges (alongside the eastern border of Lebanon with Syria).  The proposed works 
under the project will be concentrated in the West Bekaa area (south of Zahle, the main city in 
the Bekaa region). The towns and villages that will benefit from the proposed project are the 
ones currently linked to the Chamsine spring and the Loussi wells. The proposed service contract 
will cover the service area of the Bekaa Water Authority.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Lebanon's Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR) will be the main implementing 
agency for the proposed project. The CDR has had extensive experience with World Bank-
financed projects, including the satisfactory implementation of environmental monitoring plans 
and mitigation measures.  Prior to appraisal the team will review more closely the institutional 
capacity of the Bekaa Water Authority in terms of evaluating and mitigating safeguard issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alexander E. Bakalian (MNSIF) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has been classified as category B, as it is likely not to cause any major adverse 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
environment impacts. The works under the proposed project include mainly the rehabilitation of 
existing infrastructure (water source at Chamsine, replacement of about 30 km of transmission 
lines, and water reservoir at Kalat Yaqub) and expansion of the transmission lines to a number of 
villages that rely on local wells. The proposed plan - subject to the feasibility study - includes the 
replacement of the existing Loussi wells (covering part of the project area) with the Chamsine 
water source. The Loussi wells have recently exhibited high levels of nitrates. The environmental 
impacts of the proposed works will emanate from the construction activities and are expected to 
be of temporary nature; the construction work and rehabilitation efforts will be undertaken in 
such a way to minimize environmental impacts and mitigated according to an appropriate 
environmental monitoring plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Applicability of this policy will be determined when the EA is completed and findings are 
determined   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Applicability of this policy will be determined when the EA is completed and findings are 
determined   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
No major resettlement issues are expected as the bulk of the works will consist of 
rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and the pipe laying will be carried out along public roads.  
However, the extension of the water network is likely to require acquisition of small plots of 
land; the feasibility study will include a land survey to identify areas where land acquisition 
might be required.  Any potential resettlement or land acquisition issues will be determined by 
the feasibility study.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Applicability of this policy will be determined when the EA is completed and findings are 
determined.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environmental and social assessment will be launched in April 2006, and will benefit 
from the findings of the feasibility study, which is currently underway and expected to be 
finalized by early June 2006.  The EA report is expected to be ready by the end of July 2006. 
Consultations on the results of the EA will be carried with local stakeholders prior to 
appraisal, and the draft EA report will be publicly disclosed before consultations.  The final 
report, which will take into account to the extent possible the comments received from 
stakeholders,
 will be disclosed in country and at the InfoShop prior to the project’s appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed Benouahi 
03/24/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
03/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
03/24/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
