Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/21/2007 
Report No.:  AC2795
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lebanon 
Project ID:  P103885 
Project Name:  Bekaa Emergency Water Supply Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mohammed Benouahi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (85%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Regulation and competition 
policy (P);Water resource management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The key development objective of the proposed government program for the West Beka'a 
and the World Bank-financed project is to alleviate the precarious condition of the area's 
water supply systems due to long-term neglect, which has been further aggravated by the 
recent hostilities.  More specifically, the project is expected to improve health conditions 
of the population of the West Beka'a through the provision of non-contaminated water, in 
increased quantities, by completely rehabilitating the area's water network.  The project 
should also contribute to increased sustainability of the Beka'a Regional Water Authority 
through the regularization/ metering of large proportion of beneficiaries in the area, 
which are currently illegally tapping water from the network.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises the following components:  
 
Component 1: Construction of Water Networks and Facilities.  
 
The component will be financing rehabilitation and expansion of water production, 
storage, transmission and distribution systems in the villages of Er Raouda, Bar Elias, El 
Page  2
Marj, Haouche el Harime and El Khiara with a current population estimated at 49,000 
inhabitants (denominated under the West Beka'a investment program as Zone 1: Western 
Sub-zone).  
 
The works implemented under this component consist of: (i) drilling of 6 wells in the 
vicinity of the Chamsine spring; (ii) rehabilitating the Chamsine spring catchment 
(concrete repairs, chlorination system, and installation of flow measuring devices); (iii) 
building a new pumping station  (to pump to the proposed new regional reservoir); (iv) 
building a regional reservoir of 6,000 m3 capacity in Anjar (elevation 1045 m) and two 
distribution reservoirs in El Khiara (300 m3) and Haouche El Harime (1000 m3); (v) 
building some 29 km of transmission mains (diameter ranging from 100 mm to 500 mm) 
to supply water to the above-mentioned villages to replace the existing system, which has 
already passed its original design life, and (vi) rehabilitating and building some 80 km of 
water distribution networks and house connections in the same villages.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance.  
 
This component is essential to ensure the proper implementation of the project. It will 
include the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Consulting services for construction supervision.  
 
(ii) 
Consulting services to support implementation of the Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP), including the purchase of water quality monitoring equipment.  
 
(iii) 
Technical audit of construction activities to be carried out by mid-term review and 
end of project.  
 
(iv) 
Support to the Project Management Team (PMT).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area comprises the existing Chamsine spring catchment (and pumping station 
-
to be rebuilt) and the villages of El Raouda, Bar Elias, El Marj, Haouch el Harime, El 
Khiara which lie some 10 to 20 km southwest of the city of Zahle (the largest city in the 
Beka'a). The project will improve the availability of clean water to some 49,000 people 
(current estimate). Since the project consists of mainly rehabilitation and limited new 
infrastructure (6 new wells and new pumping station) the impacts will be limited. 
Although the town of Anjar has ruins from the Omeyyad period (8th Century), the 
limited nature of the proposed works will have no negative impact. The additional 
amount (75 l/s) of water to be made available from Chamsine area is small and well 
within the safe yield of the aquifer.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alexander E. Bakalian (MNSSD) 
Ms Tiguist Fisseha (MNSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Safeguards:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
This OP is triggered because of potential adverse impacts during the construction of the 
water supply system. The issues that require mitigation measures relate to: (i) disturbance 
during construction including dust, noise, vibration, access restriction, closure of roads 
and increased traffic; (ii) safety hazard from construction activities; and (iii) 
inappropriate disposal of excavated materials and construction debris. These 
environmental issues will be minimized through appropriate mitigation measures, which 
are normal construction operation practices. Requirements for the works to be performed 
following specific provisions in the EMP and good construction practices will be 
included in the contract documents for civil works.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)  
 
The construction works within the project area (Anjar and the surrounding area) raises 
the possibility of chance archaeological finds. There are no known archeological sites 
that would be affected by the project.  However, in Lebanon, there is always a possibility 
that archeological remains be discovered during excavation. Chance finding procedures 
developed under the Ba'albeck Water and Wastewater Project will be used to address the 
management of unknown archeological materials that may be encountered during the 
course of the construction activities and will be incorporated in the construction 
contracts. The Department of Antiquities will be notified in advance (as per the operating 
procedures under the on-going Baalbeck Water and Wastewater Project) and an 
archeologist of the Department of Antiquities will be present during construction in areas 
with archeological potential and the contractor will be explicitly bound by the chance 
finds clauses that have been prepared.  
 
Social Safeguards:  
Page  4
Involuntary Resettlement: The Safeguards Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 
4.12) is triggered as the project will likely induce modest acquisition of private land for 
some of the sites for the physical component (Component I) of the project, which entails 
the construction of water networks and facilities. Therefore, the relevant Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) has been duly developed to ensure that the project fully 
complies with OP 4.12 guidelines.  
 
In terms of adverse social impacts, the project will likely not induce any physical 
resettlement of local residents or economic activities nor any demolition of structures, as 
the project area is not very densely populated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential benefits should outweigh any adverse temporary impact resulting from the 
construction of the water supply and distribution networks.  It is worth mentioning that 
the Islamic Development Bank is currently financing the construction of sewage 
collection networks and two treatment plants to be commissioned in 2008.  This project 
covers a total of 21 localities, including 2 in the project area (El-Khiara and Haouche el 
Harime).  Wastewater collection systems of the remaining three localities are expected to 
be financed under a proposed Italian Protocol, which has already been negotiated with the 
Gov. of Lebanon.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In compliance with Policy OP 4.12 and in accordance with the Lebanese law, acquisition 
of private land for the implementation of the project will be minimized, and when 
possible, avoided. Hence, the site selection for the project will be guided, among other 
criteria, by the absence of conflicting land uses and minimization of private land 
expropriation. Great care has been taken, and continues to be taken to avoid disturbing 
existing structures, especially residences, areas of cultural, religious or cultural heritage 
value, parks or other areas of public value.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In compliance with OP 4.12, the grant recipient (CDR) has formulated a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF). Given that the exact/precise project construction sites for the 
above-mentioned physical component have not yet been identified at this stage, the RPF 
sets out procedures for screening subprojects and, where so required, will guide the 
preparation of individual site-specific abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) 
acceptable to the Bank that CDR will submit as and when the project conditions so 
require. (The completion of the final project design will determine the exact location and 
size of land required for the constructions.) The Framework will apply to any aspect of 
the project that requires expropriation of private land or assets in the public interest, or 
the involuntary removal of residences or economic activities. The RPF will thus ensure 
that the project fully complies with the Bank's guidelines on involuntary resettlement.  
 
Page  5
In terms of institutional and legal capacity, CDR has a department (D'partement des 
Affaires Juridiques) that handles issues related to land expropriation, which is staffed by 
competent personnel (Lawyers and a Social Scientist) with in-depth knowledge of the 
Lebanon legislation on land acquisition and expropriation. The department staff has also 
acquired extensive knowledge of the Bank's OP 4.12 guidelines, through past experience 
of working on previous Bank projects dealing with similar issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key local stakeholders include: (i) the targeted beneficiaries, which are the estimated 
49,000 inhabitants in the villages of Er Raouda, Bar Elias, El Marj, Haouche el Harime 
and El Khiara; (ii) the Bekaa's Water Authority; and (iii) the land acquisition-affected 
persons.  
 
Based on the final project design, which will determine the exact location and size of 
land required for the constructions, and as part of the RAP preparation, a census/socio-
economic study will be conducted to identify the persons who will be affected by the land 
acquisition in order to establish who will be eligible for compensation, and to carry out 
information and consultation campaigns for the project-affected people.  
 
The disclosure of the safeguard policies have to be postponed to the early 
implementation phase in light of the emergency nature of the preparation of the grant. 
Moreover, the timing of the disclosure will have to await the proper circumstances as the 
current political situation does not permit such consultation and disclosure.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/12/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/05/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/05/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Given the emergency nature of this grant and the current political stalemate, the 
disclosure of the EA and the resettlement plan will be made during the implementation 
phase, to allow for incorporation of the outcomes of proposed stakeholder  consultations. 
Stakeholder consultations will occur when the security circumstances permit.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed Benouahi 
03/01/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Alexander E. Bakalian 
03/01/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Tiguist Fisseha 
03/01/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
03/15/2007 
Comments:   
