Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/08/2007 
Report No.:  AC2566
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lesotho 
Project ID:  P088544 
Project Name:  Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification 
Task Team Leader:  Agata E. Pawlowska 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 18, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTPS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (80%);Vocational training (10%);Micro- and 
SME finance (10%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.10 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The key objective of the project is to facilitate increased private sector investment by 
improving the business environment and diversifying sources of growth. This goal will 
be achieved by reducing the costs of doing business; strengthening the linkages and 
integration of the Lesotho economy with the regional economy, especially with South 
Africa; strengthening support for technical and business management skills thereby 
improving productivity at the firm level; and improving access to finance for MSMEs. 
These measures will also support the poverty reduction strategy dialogue and 
implementation of agreed upon policy measures.   
 
3. Project Description 
The PSC Project consists of three components:  
 
Component One - Improving the Business Environment - will support implementation 
of policy measures intended to improve the business environment and reduce the cost of 
doing business.  
 
Page  2
Component Two - Supporting Economic Diversification - will build the capacity of the 
private sector by: (i) strengthening the linkages with the regional economy, especially 
South Africa; (ii) strengthening institutional support for employable skills and business 
management; and (iii) improving productivity at the firm level.  
 
Component Three - Project Implementation Support - will support implementation costs 
of the PSC Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Kingdom of Lesotho. The PSC Project will support the establishment of two pilot farms 
in two locations as described below in Section II, part A.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The PSC Project will support the establishment of two pilot farms. In the first pilot, 
Alpha Estates, a South African farm, will partner with selected Basotho farmers to grow 
vegetables (e.g., carrots, butternut, potatoes, Brussels sprout, and others). A vegetable 
farm in the Berea district on a 10 hectare site situated about 30 kilometers north east of 
Maseru. The second pilot will focus on the production of apples and cherries, where 
Denmar Estates, another South African firm, likewise will partner with selected Basotho 
farmers to grow crops for the local, South African, and the European Union (EU) 
markets. A horticulture farm in the Leribe district, on approximately 15 hectares divided 
between two unequal separate land parcels in Qoqolosing and Mahobong villages.  
 
Tillage practices for each of the farms will vary significantly. It is important to assess 
the soil types, topography, method of planting, and other factors to develop soil 
conserving, cost-effective tillage practices. Soil preparation and soil testing before 
Page  3
planting are important elements of productivity. To ensure long-term productivity of 
apples and cherries it will be important to prepare the soils through tillage and adding 
organic matter well in advance of planting. Prior to planting, through soil testing, nutrient 
levels and pH levels should be noted for adequacy and appropriate actions taken to apply 
needed agrochemicals and nutrients. In addition, care must also be exercised to minimize 
erosion due to trees or vegetable plantation.  
 
For irrigation, the Berea farm will draw water from the Caledon River, flowing along its 
northwestern borders, and use a center pivot system, currently installed on the farm. A 
pumping station already exists at the farm. At the Leribe site, the water will come 
primarily from boreholes and the existing irrigation system. Sound irrigation systems and 
practices are essential for good crop production at each of the sites.  
 
The type (and quantities) of insecticides to be used at each of the demonstration farms 
could not be ascertained during the period of the EA study. However, insecticides that are 
likely to be used would be similar to those in use in the bordering Republic of South 
Africa. These include: pyrethroids, chlor pyriphos, Delta methryn, prothiophos, cabaryl, 
permethrin and teflubenzuron, methamidophos, metolachlor, carbendazim and 
carbosulfan. While their insecticidal properties are well documented, it is useful to know 
that among these, the last four have shown high leaching potential in alluvial soils 
common in the project area.  Among the plant diseases, common ones include: mildews, 
black spot, and corn leaf blight. If organic farming for apples and cherries is to be 
practiced, pesticides may not be involved especially during the early years. An important 
issue involving pesticide use however is the lack of facilities and weak regulatory 
framework including for pesticide procurement, storage, use and other management 
aspects. The EIA prepared in the context of the project includes detailed provisions on 
environmental impacts and their mitigation measures, including those concerning 
pesticides use, handling and storage.  The EMP also discusses implementation and 
monitoring arrangements of those measures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Based on the EIA findings, it appears that, under proper project management, potential 
environmental impacts from the project are likely to be insignificant. Nonetheless, there 
is a need for a coherent Lesotho government policy that ensures that the requirements of 
the World Bank, and also objectives of Agenda 21 (UNEP), such as integrated pest 
management, and the relevant conventions are developed. At the farmer level, education 
and awareness, including through training are essential.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Each of the South African firms has extensive experience related to the activity, and also 
brings EU network for potential food export. The demonstration results will help scale up 
the activity, helping improve rural livelihoods. Over the long term, the project's objective 
is to add more value to horticultural products grown in Lesotho, particularly vegetables, 
and fruit crops such as apples and cherries. Production will be linked to markets in South 
Page  4
Africa, and the EU through (i) improving quality, volume and delivery capability of 
Basotho farmers; (ii) transitioning away from smallholder farming into group or block 
farming methods; and (iii) production of organic products to help tap into high premium 
(overseas) niche markets.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
There is a need to develop and/or update specific legislations on pesticide importation, 
use, and safe handling and management. Since such issues include health and safety, food 
and environmental protection, agricultural production, and economic affairs are relevant 
and important, an inter-disciplinary and a multi-agency approach with effective inter- and 
intra-agency coordination will be needed. Furthermore, proposed export of fruits and 
vegetables to EU requires meeting "EUREPGAP Fruit and Vegetables standards; 
successful implementation of the above interventions will help meet such requirements. 
During the project preparation activities, drafting of appropriate legislation will be 
initiated.  
 
Furthermore, capacity building activities (such as education, training and awareness 
rising programs) will be developed and implemented under the project on better 
management of pesticide stocks. Given the very high illiteracy levels of Lesotho farmers, 
development of innovative training programs would be required. It may include use of 
audio-visual tools and hands-on demonstrations. In addition, a more "holistic" approach 
to training may also be needed where entire community, as part of the training programs, 
is involved. Training techniques have proved more useful where they have focused on 
identified local needs and use of local dialects during training.  
 
Finally, the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan developed for the project will assure 
mitigation adverse impacts, if any.  M&E in data collection and analyses will not only 
consider non-point runoff (pollution) from vegetable- and orchard-applied fertilizers?both 
organic and inorganic, and pesticides, but also how soil type, slope, watersheds, and 
groundwater relate to surface runoff, drainage, and persistence in and leaching through 
the soil profile. The M&E parameters presented in Table below assume that: (i) tillage 
practices, as applicable, for each of the two farms were used (ii) judicious use of 
fertilizers and pesticides following requirements such as those on the (pesticide 
container) label, in accordance with the Lesotho or South African guidelines, as 
applicable, (iii) participating (field) personnel have some level of training, and (iv) access 
to field instrumentation and laboratory services, as needed, will be provided by the 
project?s two South African partners. An environmental review will be conducted mid 
term of the project to see what (significant) environmental problems, if any, have arisen 
and what corrective action can be implemented.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
EIA has been prepared in broad consultations with other stakeholders, including the 
Government (MTICM, MOAFS, MTEC, etc.), Local DEO officers, farmers who will 
participate in the scheme and South African partners from DENMAR and ALPHA.  The 
Page  5
findings and recommendations of the draft EIA report were discussed with the relevant 
stakeholders with objective to benefit from their inputs and to incorporate their comments 
and suggestions into the final report. The EIA report has been disclosed in-country and at 
Bank prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/13/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  6
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Agata E. Pawlowska 
03/05/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
03/02/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Demba Ba 
03/08/2007 
Comments:   
