Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC318
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lesotho 
Project ID:  P075566 
Project Name:  Lesotho Integrated Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gylfi Palsson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 19, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 3, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Administrative and civil service reform 
(P);Regional integration (S);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(S);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
23.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.70 
 
EC: EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (EDF) 
9.50
14.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Integrated Transport Project (ITP) will contribute to the Government's poverty 
reduction and economic growth strategy by improving the rural and urban population?s 
access to basic services, markets and employment opportunities. By assuring connectivity 
between and within the regions, it will facilitate social service delivery and ongoing 
democratization and decentralization programs. By supporting sector institutional and 
policy reforms, it will contribute to more efficient and transparent use of public resources 
and governance reform programs. By funding civil works, promoting labor-based 
methods and promoting sustainable road maintenance financing, it will generate 
immediate and continuous employment opportunities.  
 
The project is also consistent with the Africa Action Plan as it will contribute to 
activities related to accelerating with development partners implementation of the 
framework on harmonization, alignment and results embodied in the Paris declaration, 
placing effective mechanism for monitoring, reporting, and following up on the delivery 
of aid commitments, and to raise agricultural productivity and to connect rural poor 
people to the rest of the economy through investments in roads   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Under ITP, IDA will along with the EU take a leadership role among donors in 
supporting road sector reforms and capacity building, while supplementing Government 
and other development partners? commitment for developing the road network and 
addressing isolation problems. In addition, the project will support the formulation of 
integrated policies and strategies for aviation, rail and water transport sectors with a view 
towards more coordinated transport sector management.  
 
To accomplish these goals, the project will have four components:  
 
-
Component A: Institutional Reform in the Road Sub-Sector  
 
-
Component B: Policy reformulation in other transport sub-sectors  
 
-
Component C: Infrastructure Investments  
 
-
Component D: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
Component A:  
Institutional Reform in the Road Sub-Sector. Total US$ 8.864 
million:  
 
Financing: EU US$ 8.464 million; Bank US$ 0.400 million.  
 
This component will support Government?s proposed institutional reforms in the roads 
sub-sector and will have two sub-components:  
 
Sub-Component A1: Support for Roads Sub-sector Institutional Reforms. The project 
will support Government?s reform effort with:  
 
&#61607; 
Advisory services for planning change and implementation support at 
central and local level.  
 
&#61607; 
Capacity building for Roads Directorate  
 
&#61607; 
Refurbishing/equipment for Roads Directorate  
 
&#61607; 
Capacity building for Local Authorities  
 
&#61607; 
Equipment for Local Authorities  
 
&#61607; 
Training for staff redeployment to other public sector activities resulting 
from the organizational arrangements.  
 
&#61607; 
Elaboration for private sector development to replace remaining force 
account activities.  
 
Sub-Component A2:  The roads sub-sector development and capacity support will 
finance technical assistance, institutional support and training resources for 
implementation of key reforms stated in Government?s Letter of Sector Policy. These 
include:  
 
&#61607; 
Road safety program with focus on establishment of driver training and 
examination system, vehicle inspection system and creation of a Road Safety Council;  
 
&#61607; 
Institutional capacity for database and Geographic Information System 
(GIS);  
 
&#61607; 
Road Fund (RF) revenue reforms, with a focus on improving cost recovery 
mechanisms and achieving full self-sufficiency by 2010, as well as improvements in RF 
management, RF monitoring mechanisms and road management and maintenance 
funding stakeholder awareness program;  
Page  3
&#61607; 
Study of basic access and mobility including Intermediate Means of 
Transport (IMT) study and pilot project;  
 
&#61607; 
A local construction industry development plan;  
 
&#61607; 
Continuation of the successful contractors training program (CTP);  
 
&#61607; 
TA support for Alternative surfacing standards study;  
 
&#61607; 
Institutionalizing environmental management;  
 
&#61607; 
Upgrading of Lesotho Road Management System (LRMS) including: (a) 
mechanized road condition survey for RB roads; (b) annual review of RB and DRR ? and 
future RD road program; (c) expanding the system for urban roads.  
 
&#61607; 
Evaluation of options for Department of Traffic and Transport 
computerization;  
 
&#61607; 
Implementation of computerization of vehicle registers, licenses and data;  
 
&#61607; 
Supporting capabilities in social assessment and monitoring, gender 
issues, HIV/AIDS and GIS capabilities.  
 
&#61607; 
TA support to implementing agencies (DRR and RB) and RD upon its 
establishment.  
 
Component B:  
Policy reformulation in other transport sub-sectors. Total US$ 
1.180 million:  
 
Financing: EU US$ 1.036 million; Bank US$ 0.144 million.  
 
This component will finance technical assistance and studies for the elaboration of 
transport sub-sector policies and strategies ? urban planning and transport; aviation, rail, 
IMT and inland water transport aligned with roads sub-sector. These sub-sectors have 
been preparing their development plans in isolation from each other and no 
comprehensive study has ever been carried out to determine the impact of individual sub-
sectors on the overall economy of the country.  
 
Maseru Urban Planning and Transport Study. In light of the inadequate urban transport 
planning and management capacity within Maseru City Council (MCC) and in other 
urban centers, MoPWT and later RD will, in the medium term, assist in the management 
of the urban road network until such time that sustainable institutional and human 
resources capacity has been established in MCC and other urban centers to provide and 
maintain adequate infrastructure and related services. For the purposes of preparing for 
such transfer of responsibilities for the urban transport network to the local governments, 
a
comprehensive study will be undertaken.  
 
The purpose is to undertake a comprehensive study of the MCC?s overall urban 
planning and management activities, with a special focus on the transport system.Focused 
studies will also be undertaken in other sectors, such as utilities, housing, employment, 
community facilities and environmental services.  The overall objectives of the Study are 
as follows:  
 
&#61607; 
To provide policy, institutional, financial and investment guidance 
regarding urban planning and management, urban transport infrastructure and transport 
services to the MCC for the next 10-20 years.  
 
&#61607; 
To formulate strategies for development of effective urban planning and 
transport system in Maseru, as well as suggesting short- and long-term improvements in 
Page  4
management systems and service delivery which will benefit the city?s residents in the 
short-, medium- and long-terms.  
 
&#61607; 
To provide policy, institutional, financial and investment framework 
regarding urban public transport infrastructure and associated services to the MCC in the 
short-, medium- and long-terms.  
 
Integrated transport study and policies development (Civil Aviation, Rail, IMT and 
Inland Water Transport) aligned with the roads sub-sector. Policies, strategies, 
development and management of the indicated sub-sectors have traditionally been 
elaborated in isolation of each other and the road sector. In order to achieve a better 
integrated transport sector, this subcomponent will support Government?s effort of stock-
taking and elaboration of complete set of policies and strategies appropriately aligned 
with the road sub-sector.  
 
&#61607; 
Review and formulate policy of civil aviation, rail, IMT and inland water 
transport with the aim of arriving at an integrated multimodal transport policy aligned 
with the country?s road sub-sector policies.  
 
&#61607; 
Review and recommend amendments to institutional arrangements for the 
sub-sectors.  
 
&#61607; 
Develop an inventory and collect condition data for all aviation, rail, IMT 
and inland water infrastructures  
 
&#61607; 
Define roles and responsibilities for regulatory, safety and management 
aspects.  
 
&#61607; 
Prepare a roadmap for the development of aviation, rail, IMT and inland 
water transport infrastructure and services.  
 
Capacity Building. Capacity building through training, in line with the proposed reform, 
for transport sector staff.  
 
Component C:  
Infrastructure Investments. Total Including Contingencies, US$ 
23.375 million:  
 
Bank Financing: US$ 19.038 million  
 
This component will support the Government?s prioritized program for the key network 
improvements through rehabilitation of paved roads with emergency repairs, contributing 
in opening of new corridors, and limited upgrading of rural roads considered critical for 
improving accessibility in the isolated areas. It will finance civil works, environmental 
assessments and design and supervision services for the following activities:  
 
&#61607; 
Emergency improvement for the Northern Corridor through emergency 
repairs on the paved section Oxbow ? Mokhotlong, which has deteriorated rapidly due to 
frost susceptible material in the base course;  
 
&#61607; 
Contributing to South Eastern Corridor, through the construction of two 
bridges over Senqu and Senqunyane rivers, their approaches and a limited length of 
access road. This investment forms part of a multi-donor effort on the ?Roma-
Romabanta- Semonkong-Sekake-Qacha?s Nek? will reduce the distance by 140km 
between the two regional centers of Qacha?s Nek and Maseru.  
 
&#61607; 
Upgrading of Rural Roads, through the upgrading of 25km of 
Mantsonyane-Lesobeng road, currently inaccessible due to difficult terrain, yet critical 
for the socioeconomic development of the eastern region and upgrading of 6km of 
Likotopong-Lintsa feeder road.  
Page  5
Component D:  
Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. Total: US$ 
2.781;  
 
Bank Financing: US$ 2.418 million  
 
&#61607; 
TA support for Project Office to finance the local consultant positions for 
Project Manager, Financial Manager, Financial Controller, Financial Accountant, 
Procurement Compliance Officer, and Environmental and Social Coordinator, with 
support of Secretary, Office Assistant and Driver.  
 
&#61607; 
Additional TA support to Planning Unit to finance the local consultant 
positions for Statistician and Assistant Statistician.  
 
&#61607; 
Monitoring and evaluation, including HIV/AIDS, gender, poverty 
alleviation and economic development associated with civil works.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will support the government prioritized program for the construction of the 
two bridges over the Senqu and Senquyane rivers, periodic maintenance of gravel roads 
and key network improvements through rehabilitation of paved roads with emergency 
repairs, contribution to opening of new roads, and limited upgrading of rural roads to 
improve accessibility in isolated areas. Refer to Component C for location of proposed 
activities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (QAG) 
Ms Wendy M. Walker (AFTTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
Page  6
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
Road upgrading and rehabilitation will have an impact on the environment (land and 
hydrology, vegetation, etc.) but these can be readily mitigated. While the activities are 
beneficial to local communities, there may be some instances of land acquisition and 
compensation for structural and resource loss.  An EA and RAP have been prepared and 
cleared by ASPEN for the Senqu and Senquyane bridges civil works. During preparation, 
an SEA and RPF were written, discussed and disclosed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The roads included in this project have been selected because they will link, or improve 
links with otherwise isolated or remote communities. The road between the two bridges 
in the Senqu Valley has been realigned to provide direct access to the clinic at Ha Nkau 
and from the clinic to the airstrip to facilitate emergency evacuations with the flying 
doctor service. The alignment also prevents the road from cutting directly through 
cultivated fields and instead follows, wherever possible, existing tracks thereby limiting 
land take to small strips of fields.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
Sectoral Environmental Assessment and Resettlement Policy Framework have been 
prepared, cleared and disclosed locally. These documents provide implementation 
guidelines and an institutional framework for the MoPWT. The EA and RAP for the 
Senqu and Senquyane bridges civil works have been completed, cleared by ASPEN and 
disclosed. The MoPWT have established an Environment/Social Coordinator position 
and created a Resettlement Desk which will be fully functional prior to the beginning of 
activities. Training in environmental and social safeguards is being undertaken by the 
Environmental/Social Coordinator.  In addition, the team environment and social 
consultants gave several awareness building seminars on these issues during preparation..   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The major stakeholders are the local communities which will benefit from the upgraded 
roads and new bridges. Other major stakeholders are the MoPWT, district and local 
authorities. Both the RPF and SEA have been disclosed in-country and at the World Bank 
Infoshop.  The affected people are part of a continuous consultation process which began 
when the roads were identified and which has continued during the SEA and social 
studies carried out under the RAP.  The EA and the RAP have been disclosed in relevant 
public places (in Sesotho and English) and made available to all stakeholders (World 
Bank office, local government offices, MoPWT offices, etc.)   
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/19/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/19/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/19/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/17/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  8
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gylfi Palsson 
07/19/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Colin P. Rees 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Wendy M. Walker 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gylfi Palsson 
07/19/2006 
Comments:  Mr. Gylfi Palsson, Acting Sector Manager for Mr. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
