Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3151 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/25/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lesotho 
Project ID: P105738 
Project Name: Lesotho Hospital Public Private Partnership-Partial Risk Guarantee 
Task Team Leader: Feng Zhao 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 9, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 13, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health 
(P);HIV/AIDS (S);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 IDA 
Guarantee 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Lesotho Hospital Public Private Partnership-Partial Risk Guarantee aims to 
contribute to the successful implementation of the health sector reform program by enabling the 
realization and implementation of the hospital PPP. It would also provide a strong signal of the 
Government's commitment to the health sector reform through establishing a functional and 
efficient national referral hospital. Satisfactory financial closure and successful implementation 
of the hospital PPP would improve both the quality and quantity of tertiary health services, 
enhance health service delivery and hospital management, and utilize health resources (budget) 
efficiently and effectively.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The hospital PPP plan is a Design-Build-Finance-Operate project for a 390-bed hospital to be 
constructed on a greenfield site in Maseru. Under the PPP plan, the PPP partner, selected by 
competitive tender, will design, build, partly finance and fully operate the new public hospital, as 
well as refurbish and re-equip three associated filter clinics. The private sector partners are 
required to provide a package of clinical services defined in the tender documents and operate 
and maintain the new hospital to a satisfactory standard. The services delivered to patients at the 
Page  2
new hospital and filter clinics will be measured though specific agreed performance indicators 
and volume targets and monitored by an independent certifier. The PPP contract is anticipated to 
be for 18 years (including an estimated construction period of 3 years).  
 
The new hospital will serve as the national referral hospital for secondary care for patients 
referred from the country's district hospitals. It will also provide training opportunities for the 
secondary and primary health facilities. In addition, the new hospital and the filter clinics will 
provide health services directly to the greater Maseru area, with a population of almost 500,000 
people, one third of the country's population. The hospital will also help Lesotho save the 
resources spent on referrals outside the country, which is estimated at least Maloti 10 to 12 
million per year.  
 
The Government will be responsible for partly financing the capital cost and will provide 
monthly unitary payments to the PPP partners. Based on the IFC's projection, the total estimated 
cost of the new referral hospital is about M500 million or US$ 71.4 million (including VAT).  
Out of the total estimated cost, the Government will invest M400 million (US$57.1 million) and 
the PPP partner will be expected to invest M100 million (US$14.3 million). The unitary payment 
will cover debt service costs, facility and equipment replacement and maintenance costs, and 
operating and staffing costs, as well as reasonable returns for the investors' equity participation. 
The gross unitary payment to the private partner is estimated to be M169 (US$ 24.1 million) 
million per year (based on 2006 values). This unitary payment, on a net basis, is approximately 
the same amount that Government spends to operate the current hospital. The unitary payment 
will be indexed to the CPI as an appropriate measure of inflation.  
 
The proposed PRG will provide the prospective investors with a way to mitigate perceived 
risks. Specifically, the PRG will be likely to cover the risks related to non-payment by the 
Government of (i) upfront capital amounts to support the construction of the hospital; (ii) unitary 
payments; and (iii) termination payments. The provision of the PRG would not increase 
contingent liabilities of the Government as they merely backstop its undertaking already offered 
in the PPP concession. All fees associated with the PRG are payable by the PPP private sector 
partners; bidders who opt to use PRG would incorporate such financing costs associated with the 
PRG into their bid proposals.  
 
An indicative Term Sheet has been cleared by Legal and Strategy, Finance and Risk 
Management (SFR) and will be shared with the Government and potential bidders and will 
enable bidders to estimate the maximum amount that they will request for the PRG. The 
proposed PRG is deemed as the most appropriate instrument to support the hospital PPP as it 
meets all three criteria for an IDA PRG, including: (i) supporting risky operations; (ii) operations 
which are highly dependent on support/undertakings of governments; and (iii) operations where 
the influence of the Bank is needed.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The new referral hospital will be constructed in Maseru district. The site which has been 
earmarked is at Botsabelo Area near National Health Training Centre (NHTC), located on the 
South Eastern side of Maseru Town about five (5) kilometers from Central Maseru.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government disclosed a National Medical Waste Management Plan which will be 
implemented by the Environmental Health Unit (EHU) of the Ministry of Health.  A local 
technical assistance consultant has been hired to work with the EHU to implement waste 
management activities, including training and public awareness activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTCS) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Due to the handling of medical waste at the health clinics and the new hospital, OP/BP 4.01 
is triggered to document how medical waste will be managed and disposed. An Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) will be prepared to ensure that potential adverse environmental and 
social impacts are addressed in a timely manner prior to the commencement of construction.  A 
medical waste management plan will be included as part of the EIA.  
 
As one of its obligations under the PPP agreement, the PPP operator will carry out the EIA. 
The assessment will be reviewed by the IFC and Bank safeguard specialists for confirmation of 
its compliance with IFC and World Bank safeguard policies.  
 
An IFC-funded environmental scoping study was recently completed to identify issues to be 
addressed in the EIA. The scoping study was submitted to the Ministry of Environment in 
August 2007 and has been approved by the National Environmental Management Secretariat.  
Since the site of the new hospital is uninhabited, no major issues were identified during the 
study.  
 
The Project does not trigger OP 4.10 or OP 4.12 since it does not affect Indigenous Peoples 
nor involve involuntary resettlement. The future hospital site in uninhabited and its construction 
will not result in displacement of people, loss of assets or access to assets, or loss of income 
sources or means of livelihood.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since the EIA will be prepared by the PPP operator as one of its obligations under the PPP 
agreement, disclosure of the EIA will take place after appraisal and Board.  Given that EIA 
disclosure will be delayed, it was agreed that the Terms of Reference for the EIA and the IFC 
environmental scoping study should be disclosed since they can be considered as legally 
binding environmental management frameworks for the production, review and approval of 
the detailed environmental plans to be undertaken by the selected bidder/PPP operator.   The 
results of the environmental scoping study and the draft TOR for the EIA will be disclosed 
within the next few weeks.   The completion of the EIA is expected in March/April 2008; 
following approval, the EIA will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank Info Shop.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Feng Zhao 
10/23/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
10/23/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
