Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1648 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lesotho 
Project ID: P088544 
Project Name: Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification 
Task Team Leader: Agata E. Pawlowska 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 18, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (80%);Vocational training (10%);Micro- and 
SME finance (10%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.10 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The key objective of the project is to increase a more diverse private sector participation in the 
economy by increasing its productivity and competitiveness, and hence its ability to compete. 
This goal will be achieved by improving the business environment and reducing the costs of 
doing business; strengthening the linkages with the regional economy, especially with South 
Africa; strengthening institutional support for employable skills and business management; and 
improving the productivity at the firm level. The project measures will also support poverty 
reduction strategy dialogue and implementation of agreed policy measures.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The PSD Project will comprise of the following three key components: (i) Improving the 
Business Environment through Reducing Costs of Doing Business and Strengthening Legal 
Framework; (ii) Strengthening the Competitiveness of the Private Sector and the Capacities of its 
Representative Organizations; and (iii) Supporting Economic Diversification through 
Development of Skills and Market Linkages.  
Page  2
The objective of Component One would be to streamline licensing and registration process and 
improve immigration services. Component Two would aim to address weaknesses in the human 
and institutional capacity of the private sector through a combination of three complementary 
and mutually reinforcing activities to support an enterprise-level development and improving 
firm-level competitiveness; building capacity of key private and public sector institutions 
supporting PSD and finally developing an institutional environment for the public-private sector 
consultative mechanism to catalyze policy dialogue and implementation. Finally, component 
three would support economic diversification through development of skills and market linkages 
in three priority industries: garment, horticulture and tourism. During the preparatory phase 
detailed program framework will be developed for the Garment and Toursim Support Schemes. 
In the area of horticulture, it is intended that pilot programs will be developed to establish a 
commercial horticulture farming and commercial apple operation in Lesotho in partnership with 
the South African producers.  
 
The scope and coverage of each of the components will be further refined and determined in 
details based on: (i) results of the PHRD-funded studies; (ii) discussions with the donors so that 
the overlapping and duplication is minimized; and (iii) discussions with the Government and the 
private sector to ensure their ownership and buy-in.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country: Lesotho  
 
Executing Agency: Ministry of Trade and Industry, Cooperatives and Marketing   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
TBD at pre-appraisal and appraisal stage   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
Horticulture Outgrower Scheme under Component 3 could potentially trigger the 
environmental safeguard policies as it would support establishment of pilot programs in 
commercial horticulture farming and commercial apple operation in Lesotho. The PHRD funding 
will be utilized to define a detailed framework required to launch these activities.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/03/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Agata E. Pawlowska 
02/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/18/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Demba Ba 
05/18/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
