Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2235 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Liberia 
Project ID: P100160 
Project Name: Emergency Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader: Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);Water supply (10%);Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed Project are focused and defined as follows:  
 
To provide Government with emergency support to restore priority infrastructure.  
 
This will be done through the emergency reconstruction, repair and improvement of critical 
road and bulk water supply infrastructure, and, the strengthening of the capacity of Government 
in the transport sector by re-instating and strengthening the management functions in roads 
development and maintenance.  
 
These objectives are consistent with the new Government’s emergency reconstruction agenda 
and are fully aligned with the objectives of the support currently ongoing under TFLIB.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components  
 
Following on this development objective the following components were identified;  
Page  2
a. 
Emergency rehabilitation and repair of Critical Infrastructure: This will support the repair 
of the primary and secondary road network with reconstruction, repair and re-instatement of 
roads, bridges and culverts as well as the improvement of bulk water supply to Monrovia through 
the development of additional groundwater resources at Painesville and connecting these to the 
main water supply systems in Paynesville, Sinkor and CBD Monrovia. This component would 
also allow for supervision and additional design activities associated with the works.  
 
b. 
Strengthening Institutional Capacity: This will focus on the development and 
implementation of the following;  
 
(i) 
Program to actively support the strengthening of the MPW to carry out its road 
management and maintenance functions. This would include capacity building, core equipment 
and systems to operationalise the Ministry. MPW intends to perform all maintenance tasks by 
contract. This will not be achieved 100% within the next three years. Therefore, the equipment 
purchases would be focused to support road maintenance management with only limited core 
maintenance equipment included.  
 
(ii) 
Project management, monitoring and evaluation through the financing of technical 
assistance to the Special Implementation Unit, assuring smooth project implementation, 
consistent supervision and management of all activities as well as monitoring and evaluating the 
effectiveness of the project.  
 
(iii) 
Support to strengthen MPW to carry out the road management and maintenance functions 
including short term support to re-establish basic management systems in MPW. This will also 
include a study to classify the road network and determine its condition as a basis for longer term 
maintenance planning and budgeting.  
 
Implementation Arrangements  
 
MPW will implement the Project through the creation of a Special Implementation Unit (SIU) 
staffed with a combination of competent MPW staff and selected technical assistance. The MPW 
has not been functioning as a proper Ministry for many years and the SIU would be used to assist 
with re-establishing the functions in the MPW.  
 
The SIU-manager will have direct communication with the Team Leader and will be 
responsible for all implementation activities. The following areas of technical assistance were 
identified; project management with a focus on road and maintenance management, as well as 
proficiency in the Bank procurement, financial management and environmental management 
activities. MPW is currently preparing a Terms of Reference for the appointment of a Firm who 
will provide the required skills and train the local staff.  
 
The SIU should be established as soon as possible to prevent any project delays. The target date 
should be June/July 2006. This would require the provision of project preparatory funding to 
allow for funding the SIU contract up to the effectiveness date. The current TFLIB has no 
savings available to also fund this preparatory activity. There is also a need to start with 
procurement activities prior to the planned approval of the proposed Project. MPW has minimal 
capacity to undertake these tasks. The option of a PPF would be explored and implemented 
before appraisal.  
Page  3
Proposed Phasing of the Project and IDA credit amounts:  
 
The project is designed to support the emergency reinstatement of critical infrastructure in the 
road and water sector and will use the outcomes of the assessment studies included in TFLIB as 
the basis for most of the works.  
 
The estimated value of the emergency works identified is about US$21 million. The pre-arrears 
clearance grant is estimated at USS$25 million. GOL informed the Bank that the focus of the 
support should be emergency activities in the roads and the water sectors with some allocations 
for the strengthening of the MPW.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Certain sections of a prioritized set of the major road links connecting Monrovia with Buchanan 
and Ganta respectively as well as the drilling, installation and connection of a new well field at 
Paynesville, Monrovia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower’s capacity to manage safeguards policies within the sector is weak. An 
environmental/social specialist will be procured to work in the implementation unit until such 
time as the cognizant ministry or agencies have the necessary capacity in-house.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This will be applied to the emergency activities planned under this project. The rehabilitation 
work and the new well field may have negative impacts that are local in nature and not complex 
but will require environmental management measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
No resettlement or land acquisition is anticipated during execution of project activities. 
However, if the EA or pre-construction field investigations reveal that there are people to be 
relocated or land to be acquired to implement a project activity, a RAP will be prepared, 
approved by the Bank, disclosed and implemented prior to the start of land clearing or 
construction.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/13/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
In line with the provisions of OP 8.50, the EA and EMP will be done six months after 
Effectiveness.  The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
04/26/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/26/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
04/26/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
