Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC3008
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Liberia 
Project ID:  P105282 
Project Name:  Health Systems Reconstruction 
Task Team Leader:  Alexander S. Preker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 26, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Child health (P);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall goal of the project is to help Liberia to recover from the damage done to the 
health sector during the years of civil war. Under the National Health Policy and Plan, the 
Government has reaffirmed its commitment to working towards achievement of the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) with a particular focus on activities that will 
contribute to overall improvements in maternal and child survival.  
 
Overall goal  
 
Under the National Health Policy and Plan, the Government has reaffirmed its 
commitment to working towards achievement of the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) with a particular focus on activities that will contribute to overall improvements 
in maternal and child survival.  
 
During and after the years of conflict, the health sector in Liberia benefited from 
extensive donor assistance focused on addressing the basic health care needs of the 
population.  However, the foundations of the health sector such as policymaking, 
governance, human resources, physical infrastructure and equipment were destroyed.  
Many of the precious resources brought by other donors are now at risk of being wasted 
due to the collapse in the underlying health systems.  
Page  2
The overall goal of the Project is to address these issues by helping the Government 
rebuild some of the critical underlying building blocks needed for a functioning health 
sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
In partnership with other donors, the proposed Project will contribute to: (a) 
strengthening policy making and management functions of the Ministry of Health and 
Social Welfare; and (b) providing critical inputs to sustain the referral system needed to 
support essential health services.  
 
The Project will achieve these objectives by:  
 
•
Strengthening policy making, planning, management, monitoring and evaluation 
capacity of the MOHSW;  
 
•Increasing the number doctors, nurses, and allied health workers in critical areas of 
staff shortages through recruitment and training; and  
 
•Contributing to the necessary infrastructure and equipment for MOHSW clinics, county 
referral centers, and JFK hospital, especially in the case of services used by mothers and 
children.  
 
Project Components  
 
•
Component A.  Support Systems (US$2,365,000)  
 
•
Component B.  Human Resources (US$2,830,000)  
 
•
Component C.  Infrastructure and Equipment (US$3,305,000)  
 
Component A.  Support Systems (US$2,365,000)  
 
This component will strengthen the policy making, management, monitoring and 
evaluation capacity of the MOHSW.  The component will support the operational 
capacity of MOHSW to effectively manage the Project by, inter alia, strengthening its 
management capacity, and expanding its monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, all 
through the provision of technical advisory services, training and Incremental Operating 
Costs. It will provide technical assistance and training to MOHSW staff to develop policy 
in the following areas: (a) health financing; (b) contracting with providers; (c) health 
labor market dynamics; and (d) decentralization of health services. It will also provide 
information communication technology to MOHSW staff to support the development of a 
health management information system.  
 
The technical assistance will be offered to design a monitoring and evaluation system to 
track implementation of the health plan and introduce the measures to address identified 
problems.   The Project will also support the design of policies and introduction of early 
actions that would mitigate problems when detected.  The policy studies will focus on 
health financing, contracting, labor markets, and decentralization which have already 
been identified under the National Health Policy and Plan as priority areas of further 
policy development.  
 
The Project will introduce contracts with MOHSW targeted clinics and referral centers 
that will be rehabilitated and equipped. Under the contracts, incentives related with 
improving the case mix and the utilization rate of the clinics will be used as a basis for 
contracts that will be issued over the next three years in clinics that received the 
equipment as well in other clinics that already have the minimum equipment. The Project 
Page  3
will also introduce contracts with JFK hospital and teaching facilities at JFK hospital and 
Dogliotti Medical College that will be reequipped and rehabilitated under the Project. 
The proposed system can constitute the basis for an accreditation process of health care 
providers in the future.  
 
To strengthen the health system ICT support for the new Health Management 
Information System (HMIS) at the central and county levels.  It will include computers, 
printers, networks, electricity, and satellite internet connections.  This part of the Project 
will be implemented in close coordination with USAID, which will be providing training 
together with technical assistance in designing and implementing the MOHSW HMIS 
system. Maintenance for the procured equipment will be provided.  
 
The Project will introduce new procedures and training in contract management.The 
Project will also support a strengthening of the MOHSW’s basic administrative unit 
responsible for accounting, budgeting, audits, and contracting, all essential functions in 
managing large contracts with independent providers.  The Project will also support the 
introduction of new financing arrangements to mobilize and pool both domestic and 
external resources to support such activities.  
 
Component B.  Human Resources (US$2,830,000)  
 
This component of the Project will increase the number doctors, nurses, and allied 
health workers in critical areas of staff shortages through recruitment and training.  The 
component will support hiring of clinical teachers, including medical doctors, nurses, 
midwives and allied health workers for purposes of training and supervision of 
Recipient’s clinical care staff.  It will support hiring of medical officers, laboratory 
technicians and radiographers to fill in critical staffing needs in the Recipient’s health 
clinics and hospitals.  It will provide technical assistance and training to Recipient’s 
public education institutions to reform their curriculum to enhance the education level of 
medical doctors, nurses and allied health workers.  It will also provide, technical advisory 
services and equipment to enhance the technical and managerial capacity of key staff in 
the Recipient’s health sector including, inter alia: (a) transportation costs of trainers and 
trainees; (b) per-diem of trainers and trainees; (c) workshops, seminars and courses; (d) 
rental of training facilities and equipment; (e) acquisition of training equipment and 
teaching material; (f) internet access to online learning; and (g) study tours.  
 
The Project will recruit clinical teachers (doctors, nurses, midwives and allied health 
workers) in areas of critical shortage who can both act as faculty for teaching and 
contribute to the supervision of clinical care in the following areas of acute staff shortage:  
(a) doctors (pediatrician, anesthesiologist, pathologist and urologist); and (b) nurses 
(nurse/midwife, nurse practitioner, nurse anesthesiologist, environmental health and 
mental health). A particular emphasis will be made on securing both faculty and staff 
needed to treat mothers and children. The Project will also recruit medical officers, 
laboratory technicians and radiographers to fill in critical staffing gaps in the existing 
workforce. An attempt will be made to recruit from the Africa region or to ensure that the 
recruited staff understands the special clinical challenges faced in low-income and 
severely resource-constrained environments.  High level externally recruited experts will 
be expected to contribute to both active clinical case management and teaching of local 
staff.  In addition, national Liberian staff will be paired with all expatriate staff to ensure 
maximum transfer of knowledge and local capacity building.  
Page  4
Parallel to this recruitment, the Project will support a revision of the curriculum training 
doctors, nurses, and midwives so that it is aligned with the economic and political 
realities that are likely to prevail during the next decade in Liberia.  The Project will also 
support procurement of (a) teaching materials such as books, journals and classroom 
materials; (b) internet access to online learning (satellite access and solar panel 
electricity); and (c) equipment for teaching laboratories. For the procured equipment, 
technical and  maintenance training will be provided  
 
Parallel to this recruitment, the program will offer stipends (fees) to increase the intake 
of students in public schools and offer, on a short term basis, financial support (fees, 
travel and cost of living) for skills upgrading of the medical personnel in neighboring 
countries. The stipends will be offered on a competitive basis to students, priority been 
given to students coming from disadvantage areas. A preference will be given for 
placements in the neighboring countries in West Africa such as Ghana, Nigeria and Sierra 
Leone, countries that share the same accreditation system, to support a strengthening of 
this local network.  Training activities supported through this component will coordinate 
closely with the Global Task Force on Scaling up Human Resources in Health and 
development of a West Africa Health Sciences Campus.  
 
Component C. Infrastructure and Equipment  (US$3,305,000)  
 
This component will contribute to the necessary infrastructure and equipment for 
MOHSW clinics, county referral centers, and JFK hospital, especially in the case of 
services used by mothers and children.  The component will support a rehabilitation of 
Recipient’s essential medical facilities and medical teaching institutions, including the 
maternal and child wards at the John F. Kennedy Hospital and the A.M. Dogliotti College 
of Medicine.  It will also support acquisition of basic medical supplies, medical 
emergency equipment, radiology and laboratory equipment, communications equipment, 
energy generating equipment, internet connection equipment, and ambulances for 
MOHSW clinics, health centers, country hospitals and the John F. Kennedy Hospital.  It 
will complement not duplicate action taken by other donors such as the GF, the PMI, and 
Clinton Foundation as well as the reconstruction of local clinics under the World Bank’s 
LACE project.  
 
The equipment provided would include basic clinical equipment, diagnostic equipment 
(radiology and laboratory equipment), emergency equipment (OR and casualty 
departments), communications, ambulances and solar panels.  A special effort will be 
made to ensure supplies and equipment are available needed to deliver integrated 
management of childhood illness (IMCI).  This would include immunization as well as 
diagnosis and treatment of malaria, diarrhea, acute respiratory illness (ARI), and other 
maternal and child conditions. New contracts between the MOHSW and health providers 
will be renewed only if the minimum equipment will be in place and utilized at the time 
the contracts are negotiated. Priority for equipment supply will be given to clinics, 
referral centers and hospitals which are of strategic placement or have a higher utilization 
rate of the services. The Project will introduce contracts with MOHSW targeted clinics 
and referral centers that will be rehabilitated and equipped. Under the contracts, 
incentives related with improving the case mix and the utilization rate of the clinics will 
be the basis for contracts that will be issued over the next three years in clinics that 
received the equipment as well in other clinics that already have the minimum equipment.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This project is supporting a national program. Not all specific locations have yet been 
determined.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASTE) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As this is an Emergency Recovery Lending, following Operational Procedures OP/BP 
8.0, the Environment and Social Management Framework and the Medical Waste 
Management Plan will be carried out within six months after Grant Effectiveness. The 
main environmental issues for this project relate to the handling and disposal of supplies 
such as medical laboratory substances, X-Ray films and other medical products and 
waste generated during the provision of health care.  It also involves some waste 
generated during rehabilitation of JFK and a couple of other health care facilities, 
however these buildings, although currently in use as health facilities, are stripped down 
concrete shells, so there would be no asbestos removal/disposal issues.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not finance insecticides and/or larvicides for malaria control. No new 
constructions would be financed under the project and therefore there will be no land 
acquisition.  The environmental issues relevant to the project not only include medical 
waste management issues, but also construction related issues like health and safety, 
contamination of surface water, soil erosion, loss of vegetation, etc.  These will be 
addressed within an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which 
will include the production of a Medical Supplies and Medical Waste Management Plan 
(MWMP), to be completed six months after Project Effectiveness.   
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project being small (US$8.5 million) in scope and having a short (2 years) 
implementation period, incinerators would not be a realistic option.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
These issues will be addressed within an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), which will include the production of a Medical Supplies and 
Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP), to be completed six months after Project 
Effectiveness. The ESMF will also cover environmental and social issues related to the 
health sector in general and help produce a national plan to be implemented beyond 
project life.   The project will finance technical assistance in support of the preparation of 
the ESMF and the MWMP.   While the ESMF is being prepared, all contractors involved 
in facilities and rehabilitation work will be guided by standard conditions that will be 
included in their contracts to prevent or mitigate adverse environmental and social 
impacts.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
All implementing partners will be instructed to carry out the following the MWMP in the 
areas where they intervene.  The ESMF will also cover environmental and social issues 
related to the health sector in general and help produce a national plan to be implemented 
beyond project life.   The project will finance technical assistance in support of the 
preparation of the ESMF and the MWMP.   While the ESMF is being prepared, all 
contractors involved in facilities and rehabilitation work will be guided by standard 
conditions that will be included in their contracts to prevent or mitigate adverse 
environmental and social impacts.  
 
Although there is some civil works to be implemented by the project, it is only minor 
rehabilitation for a few health facilities. These health facilities are all currently in 
operation, so no issues of involuntarily displaced persons are expected as a result of the 
project.  Any other potential social safeguards issues for the project would be included in 
the ESMF described above.  Broader social issues for the health sector will be covered 
during the production of a national plan for the longer term which will be financed by the 
project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/31/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/31/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  7
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander S. Preker 
05/24/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/24/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Vincent Turbat 
05/24/2007 
Comments:  Cleared! 
