Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/22/2007 
Report No.:  AC3102
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Liberia 
Project ID:  P103276 
Project Name:  EIP Supplemental Component 
Task Team Leader:  Gylfi Palsson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 22, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 26, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (32%);Solid waste management (25%);Flood protection 
(25%);Sub-national government administration (12%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (6%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Conflict 
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (S);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the EIP is to provide Government with emergency support 
to restore priority infrastructure. The proposed additional component will not change the 
objective of the EIP. It will finance the scaling up of critical activities under the original 
project, enhancing its development impact and maximizing job creation.  
 
These objectives are consistent with the new Government's emergency reconstruction 
agenda and are fully aligned the Government's draft interim Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Paper (iPRSP) which emphasizes employment creation and rapid restoration of 
infrastructure and basic services as central to stability and essential to growth.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional grant would support the Government of the Republic of Liberia 
in scaling up labor-intensive activities under the original EIP, consolidating its impact 
and development effectiveness.  
 
Sub-Component A:  Basic rehabilitation of selected prioritized sections of the rural road 
network and selected Monrovia city streets and roads (US$7.08 million).  
 
This component will include: (a) the rehabilitation of critical rural road sections across 
the country, involving mainly reinstatement of culverts and bridges which have collapsed 
or have been seriously damaged and shaping of roads prism; and (b) the resurfacing of 
the streets pavement, fixing potholes and cleaning and unblocking of affected road 
drainage along the selected city streets.  
 
Implementation of (a) will carried out by UNDP office in Monrovia through the existing 
UNMIL engineering equipment and available engineering and managerial capacity based 
on the experience developed during the ongoing UNMIL/WB pilot road rehabilitation 
project funded by the Transitional Support Fund (TSF); and could be assisted by private 
sector (local contractors). Implementation of (b) will be carried out by the Ministry of 
Public Works.  
 
In view of the fact that the transport activities are generally similar to some of the 
activities under the parent project, they will be implemented following the relevant 
recommendations of the Environmental Mitigation Plan (EMP) to be developed within 6 
months of EIP effectiveness.  
 
Sub-Component B: Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation (US$7.02 million).  
 
This component will engage in simple rehabilitation works in urban areas, mainly in 
Monrovia.  The types of works which are envisaged include: (a) rehabilitation of public 
toilets; (b) repair of selected and limited main and secondary gravity lines in the urban 
sewer network; (c) cleaning and repair of surface drains and underground pipes of the 
urban storm drainage system; (d) large-scale collection of accumulated solid waste and 
associated activities years; (e) small, visible urban works, such as repair of market places 
and painting of public buildings.  
 
The above activities will be implemented by UNDP and, whenever possible, will be 
packaged into relatively small contracts (averaging $100,000) to enable the local 
contracting industry to participate in and execute most works.  Simple tasks which do not 
require detailed engineering prior to their execution (e.g. garbage collections and 
drainage cleaning) will be undertaken immediately utilizing unskilled labor through 
Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and local private entrepreneurs.  
 
For the urban component, Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be developed 
for the solid waste sub-component, the upgrading of the public toilets, the cleaning and 
Page  3
rehabilitation of the drainage network, and the cleaning and rehabilitation of the sewerage 
network.  
 
The usage of the current dumpsite (Fiamah) is a stop-gap measure.  A final solution is 
only possible after a permanent managed landfill site for controlled refuse dumping has 
been identified, approved, and constructed and additional institutional capacity and 
equipment to operate the new site are provided.  This solution cannot be achieved within 
the scope of the SC, which merely provides a temporary solution. However, some 
mitigation measures will be designed prior to beginning of the works and will be 
constructed within the first 9 months of implementation of the SC.  These measures will 
include, among others, soil barriers to minimize the amount of leachate generated, 
diversion of the leachate into the adjacent Liberia Water and Sewerage Company 
wastewater treatment ponds, and improved daily control and management at the landfill. 
An EMP will be developed within 3 months of effectiveness. The EMP will include basic 
operational principles and a simplified operational plan for the upgraded landfill. MCC 
will continue operating the site.  Limited capacity building at the MCC will be provided.  
In addition, the purchase of some equipment under the SC financing for managing the 
landfill in a more professional manner will help mitigate the negative environmental 
impacts from the landfill.  
 
Sub-Component C: Construction Supervision and Project Management (US$2.54 
million, US$1.00 million of which will be financed by TFLIB).  
 
This sub-component includes: (a) Periodic technical audits of the construction works to 
rehabilitate critical rural road sections under implementation of UNDP/UNMIL. The 
audits will be carried out by MPW through a contract; (b) Supervision of works to 
rehabilitate critical rural road sections under implementation by MPW. The supervision 
will be carried out by MPW through a contract; (c) Supervision of works to resurface and 
fix potholes in Monrovia streets, to be carried out by MPW through a contract; (d) UNDP 
management fee; and (e) safeguard consultancies to develop Environmental Mitigation 
Plans and Resettlement Plans, as the case may be. Additional US$1.00 million for 
supervising the urban component will be provided by TFLIB.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Sub-component A includes rural roads across the country. Urban works including roads 
resurfacing, sanitation, drainage, and solid waste collection will be concentrated in the 
central business district of Monrovia.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTEG) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The impacts of the proposed activities will be localized and not significant.  They are 
amenable to prevention or mitigation through application of standard environmental 
management measures, most of which can be incorporated in the contracts for the works.  
No land acquisition or resettlement is anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will be rehabilitating infrastructure that is already in place and no long term 
impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower's capacity to manage safeguards policies within the sector is weak. An 
environmental/social specialist will be procured to oversee implementation of the roads 
and urban EMPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The sum of the activities for this project will be in Monrovia. Disclosure of safeguards 
documents and consultations with the people living or working around the affected areas 
will be done before works begin.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  5
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gylfi Palsson 
08/21/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
08/21/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
08/21/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
08/21/2007 
Comments:   
