Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/31/2007 
Report No.:  AC2905
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Liberia 
Project ID:  P104716 
Project Name:  LR-Agriculture & Infrastructure Development  Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gylfi Palsson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (48%);Ports, waterways and shipping (20%);Water supply 
(20%);Power (12%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
37.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
EC: European Commission 
12.50
12.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will support Government’s efforts in re-establishing basic infrastructure and 
reviving the agriculture activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
This proposed project responds strongly to the emphasis in Government's i-PRSP of 
rehabilitating Liberia's infrastructure base, particularly re-establishing main transport 
routes to spur economic activity and enable delivery of basic services. The Project is in 
the amount of US$49.5 million (IDA US$37.0 million and EC US$12.5 million 
equivalent) and consists of three components:  
 
Component A - Policy Reform, Studies and Technical Assistance: This component will 
support Government with management contract for operation of the Port of Monrovia and 
complementary advisory services in undertaking comprehensive reform of the port 
sector, as well as fund technical assistance to various other entities of the Government 
responsible for transport and infrastructure. It will provide technical assistance to the 
Government in developing policies to enhance agricultural value chains, promote public-
Page  2
private partnerships and strengthen farmers' organizations as the primary institution in the 
rural space to create value added and link farmers to markets (local, national, and 
international).  It will also finance the combined feasibility-Environmental 
Assessment(EA)-design study for the new landfill proposed to be located at Mt. Barclay.  
 
Component B - Infrastructure Investments: This component will fund design, 
rehabilitation and supervision activities of infrastructure assets. Included in these 
activities is reconstruction of the oil jetty in the Port of Monrovia, rehabilitation and 
construction of several major bridges on principal road corridors (including the collapsed 
Vai City Bridge in Monrovia) and on a number of smaller river crossings nationwide. 
Funds will also be made available for maintenance of roads currently under emergency 
repairs. The water treatment plant for Monrovia will be rehabilitated to at least 50% of 
design capacity and provision of safe drinking water in selected secondary city(ies) 
improved. In the agriculture sector, this component will provide essential inputs to spur 
production and rebuild physical market infrastructure such as market places and post-
harvest handling facilities (cocoa, coffee, and cash crops).  
 
Component C - Project Management and Capacity Building: Under this component, 
incremental support will be given to the existing management and implementation 
entities, namely the SIU and PFMU. Funding will also be provided for capacity building 
in the infrastructure sectors, including for the new Environment Unit that is being 
established in the MPW, and support for policy planning and evaluation capacity in the 
MoA to ensure an ability to monitor for results.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This project will focus on infrastructure investments which will include rehabilitation and 
construction of prioritized bridges on principal road corridors, maintenance of roads 
currently under emergency repairs as well as market infrastructure such as market places 
and post-harvest handling facilities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASTE) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental and social impact management for most of the planned investments has 
already been taken care of in Emergency Infrastructure Project (EIP) and Infrastructure 
Rehabilitation Project (IRP). There is an EMP for road and bridge repair produced for 
EIP that is being expanded to cover urban road work. The only new safeguards work 
needed is for the agriculture component, for which environmental guidelines will be 
prepared, and Vai Bridge, for which an EMP will be prepared in parallel with design.  If 
Vai Bridge is reconstructed in its present location, no resettlement will be involved.  If it 
is relocated, a RAP will be prepared if there will be resettlement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As virtually all of the works involve urgently needed rehabilitation of existing facilities, 
no alternatives were considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The capacity at the SIU and PFMU is still low. Under EIP, a consultant environmental 
specialist will be procured.  The SIU will also recruit a full-time staff member to handle 
environmental and social issues.  For the longer term, MPW is establishing an 
environmental unit, and the project will provide support to build its capacity.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include government agencies at central and local level, road and market 
users, communities in the vicinity of the site for the proposed new landfill (the 
Page  4
construction of which is not being financed under this project).  The roads EMP requires 
notification and consultation with affected people and residents so that they are aware of 
construction schedules.  The feasibility and EA work for the new landfill includes 
specific provisions for consultation with the Mt. Barclay community leaders and citizens 
and other stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/31/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  5
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gylfi Palsson 
05/30/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
05/31/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
05/30/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
05/31/2007 
Comments:   
