Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2504 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/12/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Liberia 
Project ID: P103276 
Project Name: EIP Supplemental Component 
Task Team Leader: Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 22, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 26, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (48%);Solid waste management (25%);General water, 
sanitation and flood protection sector (15%);Sewerage (8%);Central government 
administration (4%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the EIP is to provide Government with emergency support to 
restore priority infrastructure. The proposed additional component will not change the objective 
of the EIP. It will finance the scaling up of critical activities under the original project, enhancing 
its development impact and maximizing job creation.  
 
These objectives are consistent with the new Government's emergency reconstruction agenda 
and are fully aligned the Government's draft interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (iPRSP) 
which emphasizes employment creation and rapid restoration of infrastructure and basic services 
as central to stability and essential to growth.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional grant would support the Government of the Republic of Liberia in 
scaling up labor-intensive activities under the original EIP, consolidating its impact and 
development effectiveness.  
Page  2
Sub-Component A:  Basic rehabilitation of selected prioritized sections of the rural road 
network and selected Monrovia city streets and roads (US$ 7.08 million).  
 
This component will include: (a) the rehabilitation of critical rural road sections across the 
country, involving mainly reinstatement of culverts and bridges which have collapsed or have 
been seriously damaged and shaping of roads prism; and (b) the resurfacing of the streets 
pavement, fixing potholes and cleaning and unblocking of affected road drainage along the 
selected city streets.  
 
Implementation of (a) will carried out by UNDP office in Monrovia through the existing 
UNMIL engineering equipment and available engineering and managerial capacity based on the 
experience developed during the ongoing UNMIL/WB pilot road rehabilitation project funded by 
the Transitional Support Fund (TSF); and could be assisted by private sector (local contractors). 
Implementation of (b) will be carried out by the Ministry of Public Works.  
 
In view of the fact that the transport activities are generally similar to some of the activities 
under the parent project, they will be implemented following the relevant recommendations of 
the Environmental Mitigation Plan (EMP) to be developed within 6 months of EIP effectiveness.  
 
Sub-Component B: Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation (US$ 7.02 million).  
 
This component will engage in simple rehabilitation works in urban areas, mainly in Monrovia.  
The types of works which are envisaged include: (a) rehabilitation of public toilets; (b) repair of 
selected and limited main and secondary gravity lines in the urban sewer network; (c) cleaning 
and repair of surface drains and underground pipes of the urban storm drainage system; (d) large-
scale collection of accumulated solid waste and associated activities years; (e) small, visible 
urban works, such as repair of market places and painting of public buildings.  
 
The above activities will be implemented by UNDP and, whenever possible, will be packaged 
into relatively small contracts (averaging $100,000) to enable the local contracting industry to 
participate in and execute most works.  Simple tasks which do not require detailed engineering 
prior to their execution (e.g., garbage collections and drainage cleaning) will be undertaken 
immediately utilizing unskilled labor through Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and local 
private entrepreneurs.  
 
For the urban component, Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be developed for the 
solid waste sub-component, the upgrading of the public toilets, the cleaning and rehabilitation of 
the drainage network, and the cleaning and rehabilitation of the sewerage network.  
 
The usage of the current dumpsite (Fiamah) is a stop-gap measure.  A final solution is only 
possible after a permanent managed landfill site for controlled refuse dumping has been 
identified, approved, and constructed and additional institutional capacity and equipment to 
operate the new site are provided.  This solution cannot be achieved within the scope of the SC, 
which merely provides a temporary solution. However, some mitigation measures will be 
designed prior to beginning of the works and will be constructed within the first 9 months of 
Page  3
implementation of the SC.  These measures will include, among others, soil barriers to minimize 
the amount of leachate generated, diversion of the leachate into the adjacent Liberia Water and 
Sewerage Company wastewater treatment ponds, and improved daily control and management at 
the landfill. An EMP will be developed within 3 months of effectiveness. The EMP will include 
basic operational principles and a simplified operational plan for the upgraded landfill. MCC will 
continue operating the site.  Limited capacity building at the MCC will be provided.  In addition, 
the purchase of some equipment under the SC financing for managing the landfill in a more 
professional manner will help mitigate the negative environmental impacts from the landfill.  
 
Sub-Component C: Construction Supervision and Project Management (US$ 2.54 million, US$ 
1.00 of which will be financed by TFLIB).  
 
This sub-component includes: (a) Periodic technical audits of the construction works to 
rehabilitate critical rural road sections under implementation of UNDP/UNMIL. The audits will 
be carried out by MPW through a contract; (b) Supervision of works to rehabilitate critical rural 
road sections under implementation by MPW. The supervision will be carried out by MPW 
through a contract; (c) Supervision of works to resurface and fix potholes in Monrovia streets, to 
be carried out by MPW through a contract; (d) UNDP management fee; and (e) safeguard 
consultancies to develop Environmental Mitigation Plans and Resettlement Plans, as the case 
may be. Additional US$1 million for supervising the urban component will be provided by 
TFLIB.  
 
Physical contingencies of approximately 5.5 percent are added to the above components.  
 
Implementation Arrangements  
 
The implementation of sub-component A will be carried out by UNDP office in Monrovia 
through the existing UNMIL engineering equipment and available engineering and managerial 
capacity based on the experience developed during the ongoing UNMIL/WB pilot road 
rehabilitation project funded by the Transitional Support Fund (TSF); and could be assisted by 
private sector (local contractors). Rapid execution of roads is essential considering the climatic 
conditions existing in Liberia where major road works can only be executed during the dry 
season (November 2006 - June 2007), hence the choice of the UNMIL and of the execution 
arrangements.  
 
Implementation of sub-component B will be carried out by MPW, through their Special 
Implementation Unit (SIU) who has already proven itself in the on going operation of EIP. 
About US$2 million of the above Sub-Component will be earmarked for this activity including 
the resurfacing of the road pavement along the selected streets, fixing potholes and cleaning and 
unblocking of affected road drainage along the selected city streets the rehabilitation of roads in 
Monrovia.  
 
Proposed Phasing of the Project and IDA credit amounts:  
 
The bulk of the activities under the proposed components are scheduled to begin in November 
2006 and take place during the dry season -- November - June, 2006.   
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
Sub-component A includes rural roads across the country. Urban works including roads 
resurfacing, sanitation, drainage, and solid waste collection will be concentrated in the central 
business district of Monrovia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower's capacity to manage safeguards policies within the sector is weak. An 
environmental/social specialist will be procured to carry out the roads and urban EMP and 
Resettlement Plans as the case may be.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTS1) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This will be applied to the emergency activities planned under this project. The impact of the 
rehabilitation works will be assessed and EMPs will be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
No resettlement or land acquisition is anticipated during execution of project activities. 
However, if the EA or pre-construction field investigations reveal that there are people to be 
relocated or land to be acquired to implement a project activity, a RAP will be prepared, 
approved by the Bank, disclosed and implemented prior to the start of land clearing or 
construction.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/16/2006 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EMP for the roads sub-component and the EMP for the urban works sub-component will 
be disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop six months after Effectiveness of the project. An 
EMP for the urban works will be developed within 3 months of project effectiveness. The 
Plan will include mitigation measures for the: (i) solid waste; and (ii) sanitation activities.  
 
The Sector Unit agrees to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
10/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
10/10/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
