Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2799
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID:  P091723 
Project Name:  Second Trade and Transport Facilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Paulus A. Guitink 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Small and medium enterprise support 
(S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6.00
6.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to speed up the movement of rapidly expanding 
trade along major trans-European transport corridors crossing the Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia, focusing on Corridor X which forms the backbone of the 
Western Balkans transport infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will include (i) upgrading to motorway standards of the road corridor X 
section border crossing Tabanovce to Kumanovo; (ii) modernization of the passenger 
border crossing at the Blace border crossing with Kosovo; (iii) modernization of the road 
toll collection system along main transport corridors; (iv) creating a rail communication 
system on Corridor X and designing an EDI based solution for freight and freight train 
management information sharing between customs and railways, and (v) services 
required to support the successful implementation of the project (procurement, financial 
management, audits).   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed upgrading of the road corridor between Tabanovce and Kumanovo and the 
proposed modernization of the passenger border crossing at the Blace border are the only 
two components which have potential environmental and social impacts. These impacts 
are not likely to be significant because the proposed interventions will be limited to 
modernization or upgrading of existing infrastructure. The project is not located in an 
environmentally sensitive area and only small portions of agricultural land will be 
acquired for expanding the existing road corridor. The only key impact would be the need 
to relocate a portion of a graveyard in the Tabanovce village.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (OPCQC) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential environmental and social issues/impacts are related to expansion of the existing 
road between Tabanovce and Kumanovo (upgrading to motorway standards) and 
modernization of the passenger border crossing at the Blace border with Kosovo. 
Potential environmental impacts are mostly construction related, reversible in nature and 
can easily be minimized or mitigated by applying relevant design and construction 
standards. Accordingly, the proposed project is categorized as a B project and the 
borrower has prepared a stand alone EA/EMP in accordance with Bank OP 4.01 
Environmental Assessment.  
 
A
small portion of a graveyard currently used by Tabanovce village will be affected by 
the proposed expansion of the existing road corridor and as a result, seventeen graves 
need to be relocated to a nearby site identified by the local community. Therefore, the 
proposed project will assist the local communities in purchasing a new piece of land, 
Page  3
close to the existing graveyard, and in actual relocation process, in accordance with 
OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cutural Resources.  
 
Potential social safeguards related impacts are primarily due to the proposed land 
acquisition for expanding the Tabanovce and Kumanovo section. A total of 102 
households are expected to lose part of their land holdings and the borrower has prepared 
an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan in accordance with Bank OP 4.12 Involuntary 
Resettlement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant adverse long term or indirect impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The proposed project involves modernization of existing border crossing infrastructure as 
well as expansion of an existing road corridor. As a result, there are not many alternatives 
to consider, except for a no-project alternative. The chosen option would result in 
environmental (reduced emissions due to smooth flow of traffic and less idling and 
reduced waiting time at the border crossing etc.) and social (increased safety etc.) 
benefits compared to a business as usual situation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower has prepared draft EA, including a plan for relocation of seventeen graves, and 
draft abbreviated RAP which has been disclosed locally as well as in Bank Infoshops in 
Washington DC and Skopje, Macedonia.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
There are 294 parcels of land affected by the Project, owned by 102 households, some of 
which own more than one of the affected parcels. No residences are adversely affected; 
so there will be no physical displacement of persons. There are no buildings that will 
need to be demolished --- there is one gas station that sits along the side of the current 
road, but the building will not be affected by the Project. A census of persons affected is 
available in the Project files.  
 
The Fund for National and Regional Roads held several meetings with the local 
population in the period between January and February 2007. Around 80 representatives 
from the local communities -- persons whose properties will be expropriated for the 
construction of the Tabanovce-Kumanovo motorway, the persons affected by the 
exhuming of the graves, representatives from the relevant church authorities -- 
Kumanovo and personnel from the Department for Property Issues in the Municipality of 
Kumanovo, took part in the meetings and public debates.  
 
Page  4
Specific objectives of the public information campaign and public consultation were (i) 
to fully share information about the proposed project, its components and its activities, 
with affected people; (ii) to obtain information about the needs of the affected people, 
and their reactions to proposed policies and activities; (iii) to ensure transparency in all 
activities related to land acquisition and compensation payments.  
 
The socio-economic survey of 294 affected households revealed that 100% of the 
respondents were aware of the project prior to the survey taking place. Project authorities 
will ensure that local authorities, as well as representatives of PAPs, will be included in 
the implementation process. The project  team plans to hold additional meetings (during 
project appraisal) to further discuss compensation levels and time schedule for payment 
and implementation of civil works, procedures of grievance, and mechanisms for 
monitoring and evaluation. The project authorities will continue the dialogue with local 
officials and representatives of the PAPs during the project implementation process. PAP 
participation would also be ensured during final assessment of compensation and 
monitoring.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/11/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/27/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  5
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paulus A. Guitink 
03/15/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Harikrishnan Panneer Selvam 
03/15/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
03/15/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/16/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
03/29/2007 
Comments:  Cleared 
