Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1971 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/24/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID: P089859 
Project Name: Legal & Judicial Implementation & Institutional Support Project 
Task Team Leader: David S. Bernstein 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (100%) 
Theme: Law reform (P);Legal institutions for a market economy (P);Judicial and other 
dispute resolution mechanisms (P);Access to law and justice (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the LJIIS Project is to assist the Government of Macedonia in enhancing 
government capacity and building institutions needed to systemically implement key laws and 
policies that are designed to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the judicial system.  
Implementation of these laws and policies will help remove constraints on the legal and judicial 
system and improve the func
tioning of Macedonia’s business environment.  Achievement of the 
Project Development Objective will be measured by performance indicators, including 
Government and judicial statistics supplemented by broad-based surveys (i.e., BEEPS), expert 
assessments (USAID’s Commercial Law and Institutional Reform assessments), annual EC 
reviews and others to be developed with the Government during further project preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be comprised of two components:  
 
1.Ministerial and Judicial Capacity Building: The LJ Assessment and the EC have identified 
weak institutional capacity in key ministries and the judiciary as constraints on the development 
and implementation of legislative and policy changes.  Under this component the proposed LJIIS 
Page  2
Project would help improve judicial and ministerial capacity to implement a number of key 
legislative and policy initiatives contained in the Judicial Reform Strategy and the PDPL.  
Assistance will be focused on the following subcomponents:  
 
A. 
Enhancing Ministry of Justice Supervision.  Technical assistance, equipment and training 
will be provided to the Ministry of Justice to enhance its supervisory, licensing and oversight 
capacity for key actors in the justice sector, including enforcement agents, notaries and others.  
In particular, assistance will be provided to help the Ministry of Justice effectively implement the 
new Enforcement Law.  Under this subcomponent assistance will be provided to build the MoJ’s 
capacity to gather and analyze statistical information from the judicial system and to integrate 
this analysis into the Ministry’s policy making process.  
 
B. 
Strengthening Administrative Decisions and Dispute Resolution Capacity.  Following the 
passage of a new General Administrative Procedure Law and Constitutional amendments, the 
Government will develop new laws to guide administrative disputes and the handling of 
misdemeanors.  These changes are designed to push decision making and enforcement of 
administrative sanctions down to administrative agencies; improve the transparency, fairness and 
equity of these decisions; and increase administrative accountability through effective appeal and 
dispute resolution procedures.  In addition, it is expected that these changes will help alleviate 
the backlog currently plaguing Macedonia’s courts.  This subcomponent willprovide technical 
assistance, goods and equipment to build capacity in the MoJ’sAdministrative Inspectorate 
which is charged with overseeing the implementation of these laws.  Technical assistance, 
training and equipment may also be provided to a number of pilot ministries, commissions 
and/or other government organizations to improve administrative decision making and to 
implement fair and transparent dispute resolution procedures.  
 
C. 
Improving Bankruptcy Administration and Ministry of Economy Supervision.  Under a 
proposed new Bankruptcy Law, the Ministry of Economy (MoE) will have supervisory 
responsibility for examining, licensing and disciplining bankruptcy trustees.  The new Law will 
create a professional cadre of trustees who will be re-licensed and organized into a regulated 
profession through the creation of a Chamber of Trustees.  Under this subcomponent, the LJIIS 
Project will help to enhance the MoE’s supervisory capacity and its ability to implement the new 
Bankruptcy Law effectively through technical assistance, training and equipment.  Assistance 
will also be provided for the drafting of secondary legislation; technical assistance and 
equipment to create the Chamber; and training programs for trustees.  
 
D. 
Enhancing Capacity of the Judicial Council and Administrative Office and Strengthening 
Judicial Training.  Following adoption of the Constitutional Amendments and a new State 
Judicial Council Law, the State Judicial Council will be reconstituted and given new 
responsibilities.  Under this subcomponent, the LJIIS Project will provide the SJC with 
assistance to improve the Council’s role in the selection, evaluation and disciplining of judges.  
In collaboration with assistance provided by USAID’s Court Modernization Project the LJIIS 
Project could helpto enhance the Administrative Office’s analytical capacity and use of statistical 
information provided by the courts.  In addition, equipment, goods and furniture will be provided 
to a new judicial training academy as well as technical assistance to develop specific commercial 
law and other specialized courses (i.e., practical bankruptcy law courses, training on the impact 
Page  3
of the new Administrative Procedure, Administrative Disputes and Misdemeanor Laws, 
enforcement of property registration, etc.).  
 
2.Court Rehabilitation and IT Networking:  Courtroom rehabilitation and courthouse 
reconstruction assistance will be provided to a
ssist with the Government’s plans to create 
specialized divisions or courts and to rationalize court structure and jurisdiction. Assistance will 
also be provided to enhance and network the computer systems presently provided under the 
EAR CARDS program. The LJIIS Project may also help with the development of integrated case 
management software based on the EC-supplied ICIS software presently being piloted.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The LJIIS Project will be implemented primarily in Skopje through work with the Ministries of 
Justice, Finance and Economy and implementing institutions and agencies.  The Court 
Rehabilitation and IT Networking component is likely to provide assistance in a number of 
courthouses throughout Macedonia.  This assistance is likely to include rehabilitation within 
courthouses and some reconstruction of court buildings.  One possible location for reconstruction 
could be the Skopje 1 Basic Court.  Priority courthouses will be identified by the Ministry of 
Justice in agreement with the Supreme Court.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To Be Determined   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Karin Shepardson (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP/BP4.01 Environmental Assessment will apply.  The project has been assigned to 
Category B because of some minor court rehabilitation works.  The potential environmental 
issues that trigger the Environmental Assessment safeguard policy relate to common risks 
identified with construction works.  The environmental impacts will be localized in nature and 
will be addressed through an Environmental Management Plan. Two additional safeguard issues 
that might arise relate to the removal of asbestos in the buildings due to reconstruction and the 
possible historic building status (Cultural Property) of some sites.   These will be covered in the 
EMP if it is determined they are relevant.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Management Plan will be prepared and consultantions with public and 
stakeholders will be held before appraisal. Minutes of the consultation will be attached with 
the EMP.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David S. Bernstein 
01/17/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/24/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amitabha Mukherjee 
01/17/2006 
Comments:  Approved subject to the task team clarifying the safeguards status and preparing an EMP 
to address the issues identified. The QER will review in more detail when more information is 
available. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
