Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/09/2006 
Report No.:  36159
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID:  P089859 
Project Name:  Legal & Judicial Implementation & Institutional Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  David S. Bernstein 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 8, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
12.41 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
2.36
2.36 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the LJIIS Project is to contribute to improving judicial efficiency and 
effectiveness and the business climate in FYR Macedonia by: (i) enhancing ministerial 
and judicial capacity to systemically implement the Government’sJudicial Reform 
Strategy and key laws; and (ii) improving judicial infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 – Ministerial and Judicial Capacity Building (US$2.45 million)  
 
This component aims at strengthening the capacity of key institutions to implement the 
selected reforms under the Judicial Reform Strategy.  
 
Subcomponent A: Improving the Quality of Judicial Management and the Judiciary 
(US$1.0 million)  
 
Republic Judicial Council.  Following the adoption of the Constitutional amendments, 
under the proposed Law on the Judicial Council (JCL), the State Judicial Council will be 
renamed the Judicial Council of the Republic of Macedonia (JC), reconsistitued with a 
majority of judges and will be responsible for ensuring judicial independence and 
Page  2
accountability by managing the selection, evaluation, promotion and disciplining of 
judges.   This function is currently shared among the executive, judicial and legislative 
branches of government.  No other donors are presently providing or planning to provide 
support to the new JC at this time. Under this subcomponent, LJIIS will provide 
financing and technical assistance to:  
 
•
Expand and renovate the State Judicial Council’s existing office space so that it 
can accommodate the enlarged JC membership and additional staff.  
 
•
Develop effective and transparent criteria, procedures and processes for judicial 
selection, evaluation, promotion and discipline and provide training to JC members and 
staff and judges in these areas.  
 
•
Design a program for managing specialized judicial careers, including, inter alia, 
standards for continuing education requirements.  
 
•
Develop annual Parliamentary and public reports on its work.  
 
Judicial Training Academy.  The Government has created a new Judicial Training 
Academy which started operations in March 2006.  The new Academy will benefit from 
a
2-year consultancy to strengthen institutional capacity, supported by the EC CARDS 
2004 program and expected to start in May 2006.  In collaboration with the Academy and 
EAR counterparts, it was agreed that the LJIIS Project should support the development of 
specialized training courses for areas in the World-Bank supported policy reform agenda 
in FYR Macedonia and in which the LJIIS is supporting reform implementation.  To this 
end, under this subcomponent, the LJIIS Project will provide assistance to:  
 
•
Develop specialized training courses and materials on: (i) Bankruptcy Law; (ii) 
General Administrative Procedure and Administrative Disputes Laws; (iii) application of 
real property law; and (iv) other laws important for the commercial and business 
environment.  
 
•
Develop management training courses for court presidents.  
 
Subcomponent B:  Administrative Inspections and the Administrative Dispute 
Resolution (US$700,000)  
 
Under the new legal framework, administrative decisions by government bodies can 
continue to be appealed to the agency-level appeals commissions (as is currently done for 
most agencies) or internally through procedures left to be defined.Appeals at the judicial 
level will be handled by a new Administrative Court established by the new Law on 
Courts.  Enforcement of this new framework is the responsibility of the Administrative 
Inspectorate of the Ministry of Justice.   This subcomponent will provide assistance:  
 
•
to clarify, including through preparation of any necessary additional legislation 
and regulations, the new administrative appeals and dispute processes;  
 
•
create awareness of within the public service and to the broader public of the new 
framework and citizen’s rights and obligations;  
 
•
strengthen the capacity of the Administrative Inspectorate to oversee the 
implementation of administrative dispute resolution by public agencies; and  
 
•
develop institutional arrangements for the new Administrative Court.  
 
Page  3
Subcomponent C: Improving Bankruptcy Administration and Ministry of Economy 
Supervision (US$ 750,000)  
 
Under the new Bankruptcy Law, a new Chamber of Bankruptcy Trustees will be formed 
to professionalize the trustees through an ethics code, application of standards of conduct, 
effective discipline procedures and training.  The Ministry of Economy (MoE) will take 
the lead in preparing implementing regulations, developing and conducting the initial 
licensing exam for trustees, and preparing the Chamber’s constituent documents.  The 
MoE will ultimately have supervisory responsibility over the Chamber’s examination, 
licensing, and disciplinary actions.  Withthe conclusion of USAID’s Corporate 
Governance and Corporate Law Project in February 2006, no other donors are providing 
assistance with the implementation of the new bankruptcy system.  Specifically, this 
subcomponent of the LJIIS Project will support:  
 
•
A
resident international bankruptcy advisor to assist the MoE with the day-to-day 
operation of its supervisory authority and general implementation of the new Bankruptcy 
Law.  
 
•
Assistance and equipment to build and enhance the MoE’s supervisory 
capacity,develop trustee licensing and disciplinary oversight and generally improve its 
capacity to oversee the operation of the bankruptcy system.  
 
•
Creation of an effective Chamber of Trustees, including staffing, provision of 
offices and office equipment, and development of conduct standards, ethical rules, and 
disciplinary procedures.  (Project assistance is expected to decrease over time as the 
Chamber becomes self-financing from trustee membership fees.)  
 
•
Development of pre- and post-licensing training programs for trustees.  
 
•
Development of targeted training for commercial enterprises, creditor 
organizations and state agencies who participate in bankruptcy proceedings (including the 
cadastre and Central Registry).  
 
•
Drafting and revising implementing regulations, decrees, orders, etc. and 
anyfuture legislative revisions.  
 
Component 2 – Improving Court Infrastructure (US$7.0 million estimated)  
 
Macedonia’s judicial infrastructure is in need of refurbishment and renovation in order 
to support its judicial reorganization and modernization plans.  There is inadequate space 
in the basic courts to hold hearings and trials, for judges and their staff to work 
effectively and safely, and for parties and the public to have access to hearings and court 
documents.  In addition, the Judicial Reform Strategy seeks to respond to the increasing 
demands on courts and the large backlog of cases, in part, by re-introducing court 
specialization. Under the new Law on Courts this will be accomplished by a number of 
jurisdictional changes for existing courts and the addition of one new court and will 
require both the expansion and adjustment of court house infrastructure.  This component 
of the LJIIS Project will support the renovation and modernization of a number of 
Macedonian courthouses as well as provide technical assistance to strengthen the 
management of court real property assets.  In particular, the project will support:  
 
Page  4
•
Development of design guidelines and standards in accordance with best 
international practices.  
 
•
A
feasibility study, and subsequent design and construction of a new courthouse 
in Skopje.  
 
•
Renovations, including design and construction to selected basic courts 
designated to have enhanced jurisdiction.  
 
•
Renovations of other courthouses, including design and construction, selectedon 
criteria jointly developed by the MoJ and the AO.  
 
•
Furniture for courtrooms, staff, judges, and the public.  
 
Component 3 – Enhancing Judicial Information and Technology Systems (US$2.2 
million)  
 
Computerization of the judicial system is ongoing, initiated with state funds and 
continued with donor assistance, but remains incomplete.  Notwithstanding this 
assistance, not all the courts, nor all the judges have access to computers, there is 
presently no computerized network linking the different courts nor is there any network 
between the MoJ and other justice institutions, such as law enforcement bodies.  A 
fledgling case management system has very limited functionality and has not yet been 
rolled out to all the courts.   Under the PDPL program, the MoJ is preparing a judicial IT 
strategy to provide guidance on improving, integrating and maintaining IT systems 
throughout the broader justice system.  Although a number of other donors remain 
involved, the assistance remains limited in the face of still large needs.  In collaboration 
with these development partners and the Government, a set of priorities were developed 
for World Bank support to complement and supplement ongoing development of MoJ 
and judicial IT systems.  Specifically, this subcomponent will provide assistance for:  
 
•
Integrating and networking the various IT systems throughout the judicial system 
through the MoJ IT Center.  
 
•
Providing electronic access to the laws, decrees and regulations of FYR 
Macedonia to a broad range of justice system users, notably, judges, lawyers, and public 
notaries.  
 
•
Augmenting and enhancing the current integrated court information system in 
order to create a functional Court Information System (CIS), including improved 
interface, more efficient document flow, additional reporting, and development of a 
management reporting module.  
 
•
Hardware, training and technical assistance for the rollout and implementation of 
the functional CIS to approximately 25 courts; and .  
 
•
Selected replacement and upgrades of existing systems and necessary staff 
training.  
 
Expanding Analytical Capacity of the Judiciary.   The lack of accurate, periodic 
statistics on court and judicial performance has had a negative effect on Macedonia’s 
ability to develop and implement sound judicial reform policies.  The Court 
Administrative Office (AO) operating under the direction of the Court Budget Council 
chaired by the Chief Justice has responsibility for administering court operations.  
Page  5
However, the AO lacks the capacity to compile and analyze detailed statistical data on 
judicial and court performance, needed to support evidence-based policy making by 
judicial oversight bodies.  USAID will support general strengthening the Ministry’s 
statistical department.  However, the AO has requested that the LJIIS Project provide 
assistance for building its capacity to gather information from the future Court 
Information System and its new budget and financial management software to be 
developed with CMP assistance.  Under this subcomponent, LJIIS funding will provide 
technical assistance to improve the AO’s capacity to analyze and integrate empirical data 
on court performance, caseloads and backlogs from the standardized statistical reports 
produced by CIS into its judicial policy recommendations.  This assistance will be 
sequenced to coincide with the introduction of the functional CIS software.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented at the national level.  The Ministry of Justice which will 
be responsible for the procurement and contracting for civil works for the court system, 
and the Court Administration Office which will be responsible for contract administration 
including supervising works and contractor implementation, will both be staffed with 
qualified architects and engineers to oversee these activities.  The Ministry of Justice 
Implementation Office will have primary responsibility for ensuring the execution of the 
Environmental Management Plan, but the Court Administration Office will provide 
general oversight of construction and renovation contract implementation. 
Implementation of specific mitigation measures at the works contract level will be funded 
as part of works contract and implemented by the firm selected to perform the works.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged as a result 
of Project activities.  
 
The immediate impact of the proposed investment activities on the environment would 
be limited.  Potential adverse environmental impacts are summarized below and are 
restricted in scope and severity:  
 
-
Dust and noise during construction activities  
 
-
Inappropriate disposal of construction debris;  
 
-
Unsafe handling of hazardous building materials (e.g., asbestos), if any are 
encountered;  
 
-
Unsafe practices during operation of the building;  
 
-
Possible negative impacts on buildings with cultural importance.  
 
These risks will be anticipated in advance of project implementation and addressed by 
local regulations and direct mitigation activities in the design, planning and construction 
supervision process as well as during the operation of facilities.  
 
Alternatives to specific construction or rehabilitation impact mitigation measures will be 
considered and assessed during preparation of the feasibility studies and terms of 
reference for the works contracts for each building or group of buildings, as per 
guidelines provided in the Operations Manual.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project are 
expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An environmental framework assessment has been conducted by the Borrower, and an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared based on this assessment.  
The potential environmental issues that trigger the Environmental Assessment safeguard 
policy relate to common risks identified with construction works and are summarized in 
paragraph 1 above.  The environmental impacts will be localized in nature and will be 
addressed through an Environmental Management Plan.  No land acquisition or 
resettlement is currently envisaged in project locations.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
consultation was held in Skopje with NGOs on April 26, 2006, to discuss the draft 
Environmental Management Plan, and inform them of the other project activities. Drafts 
of the EMP, both in English and Macedonian languages, were provided to the 
participants two working days prior to the meeting. Earlier project stakeholder 
consultations included meetings with the representatives of the Ministry of Justice, 
Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning, Ministry of Transport and 
Communications, Ministry of Culture, Supreme Court, and Basic Courts Skopje 1, 
Tetovo and Gostivar.  The EMP has been disclosed in country on 28 April 2006 by 
publication on the Ministry of Finance website, electronic distribution to a Macedonian 
NGO network, placement on the Bank’s CO site, and by distribution of paper copies in 
Macedonian and Albanian languages to the project municipalities for placement in 
publicly accessible centers.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/28/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  8
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David S. Bernstein 
04/26/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
04/28/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
05/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Deborah L. Wetzel 
05/09/2006 
Comments:   
