Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3036 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/09/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID: P096481 
Project Name: Municipal Services Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: C. Fallert Kessides 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 25, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (40%);Sub-national government administration (30%);Sanitation 
(15%);Solid waste management (15%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
3.00
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to support sustainable delivery of municipal 
services.  This PDO implies a measurable focus on specific services to customers or users, under 
the responsibility of the participating municipalities and of their communal service enterprises.   
It is expected that the subprojects to be supported would be mainly in infrastructure services 
(water supply, sanitation, solid waste) provided by the CSEs; most of these investments are 
likely to be rehabilitation rather than major new facilities.   The project could also finance other  
investments related to municipal functions such as urban planning, local roads, urban transport , 
or refurbishment of public buildings/other facilities under municipal provision.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The selection of municipalities and CSEs will be competitive, based on a limited number  of 
verifiable performance indicators.  The number of municipalities/CSEs to be selected would be 
kept limited to no more than 10 at least in a first phase, allowing larger subprojects and deeper 
impact; a second set could be selected in a second phase.  In terms of project structure, it is 
Page  2
assumed that the investment share will be about 90 percent.  The ID share could include 
assistance to municipalities and CSEs for subproject preparation and to meet performance 
improvements, as well as support to ministries or the professional associations for oversight 
functions and policy analysis.  The project would provide a mix of loan and grant terms.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
It is expected that municipalities above 30,000 population size will meet the initial threshold, but 
selection will be competitive and consider municipalities' willingness to meet certain 
performance criteria. A stakeholders' workshop is scheduled to take place in September, where 
the municipalities will be invited to identify priority projects and provide an expression of 
interest. In addition to size and scope/scale of subproject investment, the commitment of the 
municipality and communal service enterprise to financial management performance would be a 
factor taken into consideration for selection. Following this process the subproject activities will 
be better defined, and the safeguards rating and need for preparation of related documentation 
will be revisited.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower has satisfactory experience under previous Community Development Project.   The 
proposed MSIP project will be headed by a unit in the Ministry of Finance and overseen by an 
interministerial advisory committee.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sabine W. Beddies (SDV) 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project will invest in water, sanitation and solid waste, and possibly local roads. Subprojects 
are likely to be mainly rehabilitation but may include wastewater treatment plants (expected size: 
about 100,000 population), improved sanitary landfills, construction or expansion of local roads.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Above infrastructure projects could affect natural habitats, e.g. through possible impacts to 
waterways from wastewater treatment facilities.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Subprojects might include renovation of historic public buildings or infrastructure works in 
urban sites including historic buildings.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There is a possibility that some of the sub-projects would require land acquisition. However, 
the type and extent of the possible impact is not known at this time, as a result a resettlement 
policy framework will be prepared. Local road works, landfill sitings, or urbanization of informal 
neighborhoods may involve small scale resettlement of current residents.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Water and wastewater treatment projects could affect (through intake/outflow) rivers and 
lakes shared with neighboring countries.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
If large or complex subprojects are identified, a detailed environmental impact assessment 
and environmental management plan will be prepared and disclosed with public 
consultations as required for Category A rating, by time of appraisal.For any Category A 
subprojects, disclosure of due dilingence documents would be done 120 days in advance of 
the Board.  
 
An environmental management framework and resettlement policy framework will be 
prepared. A revised Concept stage ISDS will be issued after the next preparation mission 
when the sub-projects will be more clearly identified (around October 2007).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms C. Fallert Kessides 
07/06/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/09/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
07/09/2007 
Comments:  Cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
