Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2615 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID: P101216 
Project Name: AG. EU ACQUIS 
Task Team Leader: Julian A. Lampietti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (40%);Agricultural extension and research (30%);General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the capacity of the government to assist the 
agricultural sector and meet EU accession requirements.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will be financed by a loan of US$ 20 million equivalent, and will consist of four 
major components (detailed descriptions available in Annex 1):  
 
Component 1: Strengthening MAFWE?s Administrative and Management capacity in 
compliance with EU accession requirements  
 
(i) 
Improvement of the management and administrative capacity and establishment of new 
institutional structures within MAFWE, with an emphasis on strengthening Agriculture Policy 
Analysis, Human Resource Development, Budget Planning, Project Design and Management, 
and Rural Development policies.  
Page  2
(ii) 
Establishment of an Integrated Administrative and Control System (IACS), including 
required IT upgrade, focusing on establishment of integrated databases in accordance with EU 
requirements.  
 
(iii) 
Restructuring the MAFWE regional offices to upgrade their effectiveness for 
implementation of National Agriculture and Rural Development policies and EU-funded 
programs.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening capacity to absorb EU Rural Development (IPARD) funds  
 
This component will support the establishment of a Paying Agency (PA) that would acquire 
accreditation to administer IPARD funds on behalf of the EC. The PA will also take over the 
responsibility to administer Government funded support schemes in agriculture and rural 
development and gradually convert those schemes into EU compliant National Support Schemes.  
 
Component 3: Creation of cost-effective Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) capacity for an EU-
compliant Food Safety System  
 
Effective SPS capacity (under control of MAFWE) is an essential precursor to a functioning 
integrated food safety system. SPS capacity will be strengthened to build the necessary basis for 
a
food safety system in compliance with EU requirements.  
 
(i)  Strengthening the veterinary and phytosanitary services, focusing on restructuring and 
equipping of veterinary and phytosanitary inspection services to increase their effectiveness in 
implementing the food safety regulations; establish an official control system in the 
phytosanitary sector; and ensure official control according to EU requirements.  
 
(ii) Establishment and accreditation of veterinary and plant health reference laboratories 
implementing EU-required methodologies for testing according to ISO, and respecting 
international conventions including implementation of Residue Monitoring Systems.  
 
Component 4: Modernization of Irrigation  
 
This component will help complete reform and restructuring in the irrigation sector. It will 
include key linkages with a proposed Vardar River Basin Project, to be funded by GEF.  
 
(i) 
Rehabilitation of priority irrigation schemes. This will include physical improvements to 
deteriorated irrigation systems which have been prioritized for investment to restore their 
original capacity for irrigation; accompanied by technological improvements (e.g. drip irrigation, 
crop diversification, etc.).  
 
(ii) 
Continued Institutional Reform. The restructuring of the remaining Water Management 
Organizations to Water Economies will be continued, along with establishment of further 
Irrigation Water Communities. This sub-component will also include consolidating a strategic 
approach for irrigation reform and integrated land and water management planning; and training 
and capacity building to enhance technological, management and administrative skills of these 
organizations.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The following safeguard policies may apply: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and 
OP/BP 7.50 (International Waters). These safeguards may be triggered by: (1) rehabilitation of 
Page  3
buildings associated with components 1 and 2; (2) disposal of laboratory waste associated with 
component 3; and (3) physical improvements in irrigation systems. The borrower has 
demonstrated through previous World Bank projects the ability to address items (1) and (3). The 
team is working with the client to assess their capacity to address item (2).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
Mr Bekim Imeri (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Safeguard may be triggered by: (1) rehabilitation of buildings associated with components 1 
and 2; (2) disposal of laboratory waste associated with component 3; and (3) physical 
improvements in irrigation systems.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
During project preparation it will be determined whether there irrigation investment will have 
any impacts on natural habitats (e.g., existing protected sites and Ramsar sites, proposed 
Nature2000 sites).   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
During project preparation it will be determined whether any new construction will trigger 
OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, and / or have impact on cultural property,   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
During project preparation it will be determined if rehabilitation of existing irrigation 
schemes or restructuring of MAFWE offices will require any land taking.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
During preparation the team will follow the inspection and review of documentation 
pertaining to the dam structures.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
During preparation the details on the kind of works the project will support and their 
respective location will be determined.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The borrower has demonstrated through previous projects their ability to address the majority 
of the safeguards issues. The team is in the process of working with the client to review 
current practices and the legal framework for laboratory waste disposal. This review will be 
completed by end-January 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
12/19/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/20/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
12/21/2006 
Comments:  cleared. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
