Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC2948
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P105044 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Transport Infrastructure Investment Project 
Task Team Leader:  Noroarisoa Rabefaniraka 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Railways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.60 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.10
2.10 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's objective is to rehabilitate the country's major transport infrastructure in 
order to reduce transport costs and to facilitate trade.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of five components:  
 
Component A: National Roads Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Maintenance: This 
component finances the upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance of key National 
Roads, as well as the renewal of the ferry system through the rehabilitation of about 30 
ferries.  
 
Component B: Ports Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Maintenance: This component 
finances technical assistance and support to the Ports Authority, the rehabilitation of 
areas within the port of Mahajanga, the rehabilitation of the four main lighthouses, and 
assistance in ensuring compliance with the international Convention against maritime 
pollution, MARPOL.  
 
Page  2
Component C: Airports Modernization and Institutional Reinforcement: This 
component finances the enhancement of safety, security and management of the airport 
network, through the acquisition of equipments.  
 
Component D: MTPW Institutional Support: This component finances the strengthening 
of the Ministry?s capacity to oversee and coordinate the transport and public works 
sectors, improve its productivity and finalize the reform process, as well as the Technical 
Railway Unit and the Oversight Committee?s capacity to monitor the Concession 
Agreement.  
 
Component E: Northern Railway Investment Program: This component finances (i) the 
upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance of the Northern Railway line through railway 
replacement and railway reinforcement, rehabilitation of several bridges, and provision of 
equipment; (ii) the implementation of social and environmental mitigation measures; and 
(iii) operating costs.  
 
The requested additional credit would be directed only to the railways component, and 
help finance the costs of the critical complementary infrastructure rehabilitation along the 
Northern Railway line as well as contribute to a portion of the Concessionaire's 
(Madarail) operating costs affected by the execution of the works.  Those investments are 
required in order to allow the railway operator to handle the growing traffic in the best 
conditions regarding safety, regularity, and reliability of rail transport. They will consist 
of:  
 
the rehabilitation and renewal of 35 kilometers of track on the Antananarivo - 
Toamasina section;  
 
the purchase and installation of 20,000 metallic sleepers on 129 kilometers of track on 
the Antananarivo ? Antsirabe and Moramanga - Lac Alaotra sections  
 
the rehabilitation of two metallic bridges, and repair of five metallic bridges;  
 
the rehabilitation of Andasibe station.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Sites specific to the additional financing are the Northern railways network, i.e. (i) the 
most important transport corridor in the country, connecting the capital of Madagascar, 
Antananarivo, to Toamasina, its main port, (ii) the country's rice granary, Lac Alaotra, 
and (iii) the industrial city of Antsirabe.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTS1) 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed activities will induce some land take and might have the following 
potential environmental impacts: contamination of ground and surface waters, erosion of 
the slopes, and obstruction of water flows.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The scaled up activities do not change the environmental category of the project, which is 
already category A. The project does not trigger any new safeguard policies. Safeguard 
requirements for the new railway component have been complied with.  
 
The transport sector Environmental Assessment (EA), which was disclosed in 2000, 
included an analysis of the railways, addressing inter alia the works to be funded under 
this additional financing.  A specific EA for the Northern Railway was cleared by the 
Bank and the Malagasy National Environmental Office and disclosed on July 29, 2004 
and at the Infoshop on November 1, 2005.  
 
The EMP includes inter alia (i) provisions in the workshops and rail stations to dispose 
of used water; (ii) stabilization of slopes using community-based activities of vetiver 
grass planting and sustainable agriculture; and (iii) reestablishment of water flows and 
rehabilitation of  drainage canals. Its execution is satisfactory. MADARAIL's 
environmental unit is operational and composed of three environmental specialists. They 
Page  4
are developing a monitoring system and an environmental data base. The company now 
has a railway security system and a safety policy with effective implementation plans.  
 
Resettlement/compensation caused by the railway component is covered under the 
Government?s Resettlement Policy Framework which was disclosed on July 8, 2002. The 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the project is being finalized and will be 
implemented according to the Bank?s safeguards policies. It was agreed between the 
GoM and the World Bank that the RAP will be implemented in pre-identified sections 
and that no investment will take place in areas that require the implementation of a RAP 
until that process has been concluded to the satisfaction of the World Bank.  Furthermore, 
the Financing Agreement stipulates that for the works category, no withdrawal shall be 
made until the RAP, in form and substance satisfactory to the Association shall have: (i) 
been adopted by the Project Implementing Entity, (ii) submitted for approval to the 
Association, (iii) disclosed by the Project Implementing Entity and (iv) implemented by 
the Project Implementing Entity, all in a manner satisfactory to the Association.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In November an December 2003, the Borrower carried out a public consultation during 
two months in the project site in order to share the main results from the EA and EMP. A 
non-technical summary of the EMP and the EA, translated in Malagasy, was disclosed 
and discussed with the potentially affected people.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/01/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/01/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/29/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Noroarisoa Rabefaniraka 
04/25/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
04/25/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Gordon Appleby 
04/26/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Nina Chee 
04/26/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
04/25/2007 
Comments:   
Page  6
