Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2253 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/30/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P096296 
Project Name: MG-Community Develop. Fund/ Additional Financing (FID IV) - 
Supplemental 
Task Team Leader: Nadine T. Poupart 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 13, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (35%);Primary education (20%);Sub-national government 
administration (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (15%);Roads 
and highways (10%) 
Theme: Other human development (P);Social safety nets (P);Decentralization (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project, which would remain unchanged, are to improve the use of and 
satisfaction with project-supported social and economic services provided thereunder amongst 
participating rural and urban communities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The current project components would also remain unchanged:  
 
Component 1: Transfers of funds to community associations:  This component transfers funds 
to community associations to finance community requested sub-projects (schools, health 
facilities, feeder roads, water points, markets, etc).  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Transfers of funds to communes.  This component transfers funds to commune 
governments to finance a sub-project which consists of a priority investment in the communal 
development plan.  
 
Component 3: Social Safety Net:   The component finance social safety net sub-projects 
implemented by accredited faith and non-faith NGOs and associations, with the objective of 
creating short-term employment and provide revenues for the most affected families. These 
activities are in the form of food-for-work or cash-for-work under the minimum wage.  
 
Component 4: Cyclone Emergency and Disaster Relief Activities: This component seeks to 
improve the living conditions of the most affected households by the cyclones. Although it is not 
anticipated that this component will be activated under the project, the component would remain 
as a precaution.  
 
Component 5:  Capacity Building Activities.  Under this component, the project finances: (i) 
training for operation and maintenance of infrastructures financed under the first two 
components; and (ii) short training on selected themes (such as hygiene, prevention of 
communicable diseases, IST and HIV/AIDS); and (iii) capacity building to commune 
governement staff   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Poor rural communes nation-wide. May include urban communes for component 3 (safety nets)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The environmental classification of the ongoing project is Category B. The additional financing 
would fund community subprojects similar in scale and scope to those implemented under the 
original project.  As part of the preparation for the Supplemental Credit to the Community 
Development Project, a mission was undertaken in May 2004 to identify possible environmental 
and social safeguard risks associated with subprojects being funded under the project and 
evaluate the capacity of FID to address the World Bank’s safeguard requirements .  The mission 
determined that the capacity of FID to implement safeguard requirements was weak and required 
strengthening.  Furthermore, it was found that the recommendations provided in an EA study 
carried out in 1999 for FID III had not been implemented satisfactorily.  In order to address these 
issues, several measures were undertaken including the following ones: (a) each FID Regional 
Office was assigned an Environmental Specialist; (b) the implementation manual was revised to 
comply effectively with new World Bank safeguard policies; and (c) additional training was 
provided to FID staff and implementing partners on safeguard compliance.   Implementation of 
these measures was supervised in June 2005, and found to be overall satisfactory. The team is 
therefore confident that future activities to be financed under the proposed Additional Financing 
will comply effectively with the Bank’s safeguard policies and the national requirements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Tania Mansour (ENV) 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Sub-projects to be financed under the supplemental credit will mainly entail rehabilitation 
and reconstruction of social infrastructure. As most of the proposed infrastructure is relatively 
small in scale, the potential adverse direct impacts related to the sub-projects are limited. Some 
potential safeguard risks identified with ongoing sub-projects include inadequate waste 
management procedures for health centers and schools and lack of erosion control measures 
being used for feeder roads, particularly in areas prone to erosion.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/24/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No additional safeguard-related studies are needed.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nadine T. Poupart 
03/29/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
03/29/2006 
Comments:   
