Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2812 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/15/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P105026 
Project Name: M&E Supplement - Governance and Institutional Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Guenter Heidenhof 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Managing for development results (P);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to assist the Government of Madagascar (GOM) in 
implementing its poverty reduction strategy which is set out in the 2003 Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper (PRSP), now the Madagascar Action Plan (MAP), by (i) rationalizing and 
modernizing budget and public expenditure management; (ii) improving accountability and 
transparency of government operations; and (iii) strengthening the capacity of public institutions 
to deal with complex change processes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Additional financing is sought for monitoring & evaluation of the MAP and key statistical 
surveys (US$ 5.0 million). This new project component aims at scaling-up the impact of project 
activities and at improving its development effectiveness. Financing would focus on two main 
areas (i) the development of a consistent monitoring & evaluation framework to assist MAP 
implementation and (ii) financial support for key statistical surveys which are considered critical 
for the MAP.  
 
The component comprises the following sub-components:  
 
Page  2
1) 
Development of a consistent monitoring & evaluation framework (US$ 2.5 million). 
Funding would focus on developing and implementing a consistent monitoring & evaluation 
strategy for the whole of government. A key element of this strategy is the National Strategy for 
Statistical Development which is currently being prepared.  This strategy will include the 
development of revised regulatory and procedural framework for government statistics which 
would integrate and coordinate all relevant government activities. In addition, the institutional 
responsibilities of the relevant government institutions (e.g. President's Office, Prime Minister's 
Office, Ministry of Plan, Ministry of Finance, Structural Adjustment Secretariat, and National 
Statistics Office) will need to be clarified.  Project funding will provide technical assistance to 
address these issues; it will also help modernize the relevant institutions.  Significant training and 
capacity building activities will complement these activities; they will focus on improving the 
operational efficiency of the aforementioned key institutions and of the sector ministries in the 
area of monitoring and evaluation.  This will include an upgrading of the capacity of local 
training institutions to design and deliver relevant training courses.  
 
2) 
Key statistical surveys to support MAP implementation (US$ 2.5 million).  Funding 
would assist government in conducting some key statistical surveys that are important for 
evaluating the progress of MAP implementation:  As a top priority the Government has 
identified the need to update its key economic and social data based on a new population census.  
The last census was completed in 1993; the economic, social, and administrative structure of 
Madagascar has profoundly changed since then. As a consequence, many of the existing baseline 
data is outdated.  The Government is in the process of soliciting support by development partners 
for the population census which is estimated to cost about US$18 million.  The project will 
support a complete cartographic survey of Madagascar which is a prerequisite for the census and 
would already provide important information about the socio-economic changes in the country. 
Support will focus on consulting services and equipment. Financing will also be provided for 
strengthen the capacity in the National Statistic Office to develop and implement additional 
statistical surveys which will provide important information for the implementation of the 
Government strategy such as the External Trade Index, the Consumer Price Index, the Industrial 
Production Index, and the Index of Industrial, Energy and Mining Related Production.  Project 
funding will include the financing of a limited number of government staff's salaries (i.e., 
enumerators and statisticians).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The additional financing would implement two components related to monitoring & evaluation 
framework in Madagascar.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Institutional capacity has been evaluated on a regular basis and found satisfactory   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/10/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
n/a   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Guenter Heidenhof 
03/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/15/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should 
project involve land acquisitioon, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
03/15/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
