Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/05/2006 
Report No.:  AC2298
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P074086 
Project Name:  Irrigation and Watershed Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  IJsbrand Harko de Jong 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P088887 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 12, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (50%);Agro-industry (30%);Crops (20%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Other trade and integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
55.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.20 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
7.40
7.40 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to sustainably increase agricultural 
productivity in four high potential watershed and their associated irrigation schemes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project comprises three technical components covering three strategic 
orientations. A fourth component includes Program Management. In accordance with the 
???growth poles??? approach, the project proposes four similar sub-projectsin the four 
regions concerned: Andapa, Marovoay, Itashy Region, and Lac Aloatra ??? Sahamaloto 
scheme.  
 
(i) Agricultural Development: to improve access to markets and to sustainably intensify 
and diversify irrigated and rainfed agricultural systems in the project???s watersheds.  
 
(ii) Irrigation Development: to improve management, maintenance and sustainability of 
irrigation services provision in four large-scale irrigation schemes through rehabilitation 
of irrigation infrastructure, capacity strengthening of stakeholders and clarification of 
roles and responsibilities, and establishment of an appropriate incentive framework.  
Page  2
(iii) Watershed Development: the sustainable management of the watershed including 
irrigated schemes, to preserve the natural heritage, to benefit from the production 
potential of the natural resource, and therefore contribute to improved living conditions 
and incomes of the rural population.  
 
(iv) Program Management: to use project resources in accordance with its purposes and 
procedures, to set up a political framework that is favorable to extending the project to 
the national level.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Madagascar has a high natural erosion rate, as a consequence of its soil types and heavy 
rainfall, often linked to cyclones. This high natural erosion rate has been exacerbated by 
deforestation of erosion prone fragile soils, frequent bush fires and unsustainable 
agricultural practices in the watersheds, which made most of the watershed soils infertile 
and marginal for agricultural and livestock production. Livestock grazing makes it 
necessary to frequently burn low quality pastures, which lead to strongly aggravates land 
degradation and manmade erosion in the watersheds. This pattern of severe land 
degradation has lead over the years to reduced agricultural production and increased 
poverty. This, together with increased land scarcity, in the four high potential sites, has 
increased the pressure on the watersheds and has lead to increased deforestation and 
pressure on the globally important biodiversity resources in the upper and lower 
watersheds in three of the selected project sites: Marojejy National Park, the South 
Anjanaharibe Special Reserve, and the Makira Conservation Site all located in the upper 
watersheds around the Andapa irrigation scheme; the Ankarafantsika National Park 
located in the upper Maravoay watershed; and the Lake Alaotra Ramsar site. In Itasy 
agriculture is practiced on very steep slopes, which are in other places are obligatory kept 
under a forest cover to minimize erosion. Slash and burn agriculture is still practiced 
mainly at the Andapa site. These unsustainable agricultural practices together have 
exacerbated the already high natural erosion rates. Downstream irrigation schemes have 
been over time exposed to increasingly severe sedimentation and flooding, severely 
hampering irrigated rice production and increasing poverty. The impact of the 
environment on the agricultural production systems is severe. This situation was made 
worse by the absence of adequate maintenance of these schemes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Madagascar Irrigation and Watershed Management Project has as an objective to 
reverse the trend of land degradation by rehabilitating, improving the management of and 
increasing the production in the existing irrigation schemes in the four selected project 
sites and by stabilizing or reversing land degradation in the watersheds through the 
promotion of more sustainable and higher productive agro-ecological practices. It is 
expected that these agro-ecological practices will reduce soil erosion and over time will 
reduce sedimentation in the downstream irrigation schemes. On a short term basis it is 
expected that these agro-ecological practices will significantly increase agricultural 
production of traditional and new crops in the watersheds and reduce poverty. One of the 
requirements for increased production will be the integration of agriculture and livestock 
(use of dung as fertilizer and organic soil conditioner). It is also expected that intensified 
agricultural practices will reduce or stabilize agricultural expansion and reduce the 
pressure on the remaining high biodiversity resources in the upper watersheds and on the 
marshlands in Lake Alaotra.  
 
It is expected that the project will have mostly beneficial environmental and social 
impacts. One of the project components is the watershed management component, which 
would normally be the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The 
environmental and social management measures have been almost fully integrated into 
the project component designs. The beneficial environmental and social impacts have 
been demonstrated by the Regional Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA) 
prepared by the borrower. The main positive environmental impact will be the 
improvement in environmental services of the watersheds through the adoption of agro-
ecological production systems and improved management of pastures, which will 
stabilize or reduce erosion rates, and increase agricultural production and incomes.  
 
However, intensified agricultural production needs more inputs in the form of chemical 
fertilizers and pesticides. The borrower has prepared a Pest and Pesticide Management 
Plan (PPMP) to mitigate the health and environmental impacts of increased pesticide use. 
Page  4
It is at present not clear if farmers will be able to afford and maintain the financing of 
increased inputs.  
 
Irrigation schemes in Madagascar are main sources of waterborne diseases, such as 
malaria and urinary and intestinal bilharzia and diarrhea. The four selected project sites 
are no exception. The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has included 
measures to reduce these diseases in order not to impair the production capacity of the 
farmers and improve their quality of life.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The major potential environmental risk would be that through the success of the project 
by increasing agricultural production in the watersheds, the influx of migrants from other 
areas of Madagascar would be stimulated. These migrants would increase the already 
high pressure on land in the four project watershed areas, which could lead to further 
deforestation in the high biodiversity sites, and further clearing of reed lands in Lake 
Alaotra for rice production. The increased influx of migrants into the fragile watersheds 
could also lead to increased use of steep hills for agricultural production, which could 
again increase erosion rates. This is why land zoning and the empowerment of farmers 
and farmer???s groups to manage these lands are of fundamental importance. The 
transfer of land management to these groups would regulate the natural resource base of 
the watersheds to newcomers and facilitate improved sustainable management of these 
resources.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Feasible alternatives are the no project alternative and the project without a watershed 
management component. The no project alternative would allow further deterioration of 
the irrigation schemes and the watersheds with consequent negative impacts on poverty, 
agricultural production and negative impacts on the globally significant biodiversity sites 
and over-time eventually likely abandonment of these agro-ecosystems. The alternative 
without the watershed management component would leave the irrigation systems 
exposed to large sediment loads, which would endanger the investments made in the 
irrigation schemes.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguard Instruments prepared by the borrower. The borrower prepared a Regional 
Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA), a Pest and Pesticide Management Plan 
(PPMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  
 
Borrower capacity and Implementation and monitoring of ESMP.  The borrower???s 
capacity to supervise the implementation and monitor the implementation of the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be strengthened. One of the 
Technical Assistance to financed under the project needs to be qualified in environmental 
Page  5
and social management and will be responsible for the adequate implementation and 
monitoring of the implementation of the ESMP as part of his or her responsibility.  
 
Parts of the ESMP will be implemented by service providers under contract. If needed 
the capacity of these service providers will be strengthened.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key Stakeholders. Key stakeholders are the farmers in the irrigation schemes and in the 
watersheds, the local Directorates of Agriculture, who will implement the program, other 
local government agencies and international conservation NGOs.  
 
Public consultation.   Public consultation has been carried out on the Terms of 
Reference of the Regional Environmental and Social Assessment and on the draft report. 
This is conform OP 4.01. Public consultation has also been carried out during the 
preparation of the RPF. This is conform OP 4.12.  
 
Disclosure.   The Regional Environmental and Social Assessment, the Pest and Pesticide 
Management Plan and the Resettlement Policy Framework have been disclosed at the 
four project sites, in the capital and in the Infoshop in Washington. The Executive 
Summary of the RESA has been sent to the Board.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/14/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/13/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/14/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/13/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/20/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/14/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/13/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/20/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  7
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr IJsbrand Harko de Jong 
04/27/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
04/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
04/27/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/27/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Frank Fulgence K. Byamugisha 
04/27/2006 
Comments:   
