Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2782 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P104983 
Project Name: Additional Financing for the Mineral Resources Governance Project 
Task Team Leader: Gotthard Walser 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (50%);Central government administration (40%);Oil 
and gas (10%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.80
0.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The additional financing has the same components, as the original credit (Credit 3754-MAG) - 
(i) strengthening transparency and governance in mining; (ii) key institutional reforms for the 
decentralized management of mineral resources; and (iii) promotion of private investments and 
value added in mining.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be processed in the form of an additional component to the existing operation, 
and will cover 5 new activities to scale up the current operation to cover an increase in the scope 
of the overall mining activities in the country since the project became effective:  
 
i) policy, legal and regulatory framework adjustments;  
 
ii) institutional restructuring and strengthening of the Ministry of Mines;  
 
iii) Support to integration of large-scale mining projects to regional development;  
 
iv) Improved environmental management and large-scale and small-scale operations;  
 
v)
Improved governance and management capacity in small-scale mining.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  2
The project implementation unit is based in Antananarivo. The project will cover already 
identified large-scale mining operations in Fort Dauphin, Tolear, andAmbatovy. On small-scale 
mining operations, the focus will be on governmental regional strategy.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has been successfully implementing the existing credit, the Mineral Resources 
Governance project, since 2003. The project has a number of safeguards issues, which the 
Borrower has been successfully addressing under the EMP of May 2003.  
 
The environmental classification of the ongoing project remains category B. A mission was 
undertaken in February 2007 to analyze the various environmental tools available in the current 
phase. The mission determined that: (i) the Borrower will lay out a structure responsible for 
management of environmental and social risks in the Mining sector (ii) an environmental manual 
will be available and used in the sector. A sectoral environmental assessment was carried out 
during the project Phase 2 preparation. The environmental structure in charge of managing the 
safeguards aspect of the Mining sector works under the supervision of the National office for the 
Environment, the department in charge of environmental assessments and Environmental impact 
studies in Madagascar under the supervision of the Environmental and Forest Ministry.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
During this preparation mission, it is proposed with the sector mining to lead an evaluation of 
the capacity of the environmental structure of the sector, an environmental audit on the 
management and an environmental analysis of the project components with the existing 
environmental management tools and their sufficiency. The results of this audit will give an 
institutional evaluation in the sector, an analysis of sufficiency and coherence of the 
environmental tools available in the sector, a proposal of measurements of mitigation and the 
recommendations on the management and the monitoring environmental in the sector.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/28/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This study will be carried out for review and approval by Bank by March 12, 2007, and 
disclosed before the project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gotthard Walser 
03/01/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/28/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
03/05/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
