Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2400
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P096296 
Project Name:  MG-Community Develop. Fund/ Additional Financing (FID IV) - 
Supplemental 
Task Team Leader:  Nadine T. Poupart 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (35%);Primary education (20%);Sub-national government 
administration (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (15%);Roads 
and highways (10%) 
Theme:  Other human development (P);Social safety nets (P);Decentralization (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.10
1.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the project are to improve the use of and satisfaction with project-
supported social and economic services provided thereunder amongst participating rural 
and urban communities.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Transfers of funds to community associations (US$6.8  Million) would 
remain unchanged. This component transfers funds to community associations to finance 
community requested sub-projects (investments) such as school buildings, health 
facilities, water supply, feeder roads, markets, slaughter houses etc.  
 
Component 2: Transfers of funds to communes (US$4.3  Million) would remain 
unchanged. This component transfers funds to commune governments to finance a sub-
project which consists of a priority investment in their communal development plan.  
 
Page  2
Component 3: Social Safety Nets (Shocks) (US$0.4 Million) would remain unchanged.  
This public workfare program is activated after a shock (weather, price, lean season etc.) 
has occurred.  Sub-projects are preferably those that will contribute to the prevention or 
mitigation of future shocks.  
 
Component 4:  Rehabilitation and reconstruction in response to natural disasters 
(US$1.6 Million):  This new component finances the reconstruction and rehabilitation of 
damaged infrastructure following natural disasters and replaces the component "Cyclone 
Emergency and Disaster Relief Activities".  
 
Component 5:  Capacity Building Activities (US$2.1 Million).   Under this component, 
the project would:  
 
a) scale-up it ongoing activities; they consist of training community associations and 
communes in project management, accounting, and procurement, etc. They also support 
the preparation of participatory communal development plans.  
 
b) finance new capacity building activities (US$1 million) requested by the Ministry of 
Decentralization and Regional Planning that will contribute to the establishment of the 
Local Development Fund.  
 
Component 6:  Project Administration and Supervision (US$2.8 Million) would remain 
unchanged. This funds administration and operating costs, training of staff, beneficiary 
assessments, impact evaluations, poverty studies, monitoring and evaluation, and 
financial and technical audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Poor rural communes nation-wide. May include urban communes for component 3 
(safety nets).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional financing would fund community subprojects similar in scale and scope to 
those implemented under the original project.  As most of the proposed infrastructure is 
relatively small in scale, the potential adverse direct impacts related to the sub-projects 
are limited. Some potential safeguard risks identified with ongoing sub-projects include 
inadequate waste management procedures for health centers and schools and lack of 
erosion control measures being used for feeder roads, particularly in areas prone to 
erosion.  
 
As part of the preparation for the Supplemental Credit to the Community Development 
Project, a mission was undertaken in May 2004 to identify possible environmental and 
social safeguard risks associated with subprojects being funded under the project and 
evaluate the capacity of FID to address the World Bank's safeguard requirements.  The 
environmental assessment produced by the mission determined that the capacity of FID 
to implement safeguard requirements was weak and required strengthening.  
Furthermore, it was found that the recommendations provided in an EA study carried out 
in 1999 for FID III had not been implemented satisfactorily.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There is potential for cumulative impacts associated with improved access to natural 
habitats and forests via rural roads resulting in habitat degradation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to address the above issues, several measures were undertaken including the 
following ones: (a) each FID Regional Office was assigned an Environmental Specialist; 
(b) the implementation manual was revised to comply effectively with new World Bank 
safeguard policies (a separate volume on environmental procedures was produced); and 
(c) additional training was provided to FID staff and implementing partners on safeguard 
compliance.   Implementation of these measures was supervised in June 2005, and found 
to be overall satisfactory.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include communes and community associations. The training that will 
be provided to these implementation partners will include modules on safeguard policies 
and best practice.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/29/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/09/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/09/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nadine T. Poupart 
06/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
06/13/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Tania Mansour 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
 
Comments:   
