Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/20/2006 
Report No.:  AC2565
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P100966 
Project Name:  Second Community Nutrition 
Task Team Leader:  Montserrat Meiro-Lorenzo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 12, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 21, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (80%);Primary education (20%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Child 
health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives (DO) of the Project, which remain unchanged, are to 
improve the nutritional status of children under the age of three, pregnant and lactating 
women, and school-aged children. The Project also aims to ensure long-term 
sustainability of nutrition outcomes by improving the quality and quantity of food intake 
by children at home. The Project is implemented by SEECALINE, an executing agency 
operating since 1993 which has demonstrated capacity in effectively supporting poor 
communities and in monitoring nutritional status through contracting local NGOs whose 
capacity has been built by the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project current design, after previous activity amendments, is as follows:  
 
Component 1: Community Nutrition Program, including: (i) growth monitoring and 
promotion for children under three; (ii) vitamin A supplementation for children under 
three and lactating women; (ii) referral of severely malnourished children at health 
services; (v) information, education and communication (IEC) and community 
mobilization; (vi) support to community-based activities aimed at improving nutrition, 
Page  2
hygiene and sanitation in villages; and (vii) training of community nutrition workers and 
social workers.  
 
Component 2:  School Nutrition Program: (i) iron/folate supplementation for enrolled 
primary school children; (ii) deworming of enrolled and non-enrolled children aged 3-14 
years; (iii) IEC as well as nutrition and hygiene promotion in the classroom; (iv) 
monitoring of the iodization of salt; (v) support to school-based activities aimed at 
improving nutrition and hygiene in the school environment; and (vi) training of primary 
school teachers in nutrition and hygiene.  
 
Component 3: Institutionalization of the PNN, which would include the activities to 
make operational the PNN. Specifically activities under Component three would include 
training and technical assistance and goods to: (a) increase capacity of the CNN to carry 
out its policy setting and strategy definition role; (b) increase the capacity of selected 
executing agencies to define and manage nutrition prevention and curbing activities; (c) 
development and implementation of the national monitoring and evaluation system for 
nutrition activities (SIN), and the National Food and Nutrition surveillance system 
including the early malnutrition warning system (SAN); and (d) increase capacity of the 
ONN to perform its intersectoral coordination, monitoring and evaluation, research, and 
resources mobilization mandates.  
 
Component 4: IEC, Training and Project Management, including: (i) IEC, training, and 
MIS; and (ii) project coordination and management.  
 
The implementation arrangements under the this Additional Financing would be the 
same as for the ongoing Project. SEECALINE will continue to operate in a decentralized 
fashion while gradually transferring the competencies to the ONN, on a region by region 
basis, starting through a pilot in two regions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented in high risk comunes in all the 110 Districts of the 
Country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Montserrat Meiro-Lorenzo 
10/19/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
10/19/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
10/19/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
10/19/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
10/19/2006 
Comments:   
