Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2561 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/23/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P100966 
Project Name: Second Community Nutrition-Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Montserrat Meiro-Lorenzo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 12, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 21, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (80%);Primary education (20%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Child 
health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the Project, which would remain unchanged, are to reduce chronic malnutrition 
among children under three and to improve the nutritional status of school-aged children, 
pregnant and lactating women in targeted project areas. The project consists of four components, 
which also remain unchanged and which have been rated satisfactory over the entire life of the 
project.  However, on the basis of the lessons learned, activities financed with the additional 
resources would focus particularly on reaching pregnant and lactating women and children under 
two, as well as transferring day to day implementation and follow-up responsibilities gradually to 
the commune level. Finally, and within the context of the transition from the SEECALINE?s 
Project to the National Nutrition Program, the Project?s management unit would continue to 
transfer its competencies to the recently created National Nutrition Office (ONN).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Community Nutrition Program, including: (i) growth monitoring and promotion 
for children under three; (ii)  vitamin A supplementation for children under three and lactating 
women; (iii) referral of severely malnourished children at health services; (iv) information, 
Page  2
education and communication (IEC) and community mobilization; (iv) support to community-
based activities aimed at improving nutrition, hygiene and sanitation in villages; and (vi) training 
of community nutrition workers and social workers.  
 
Component 2:  School Nutrition Program: (i) iron/folate supplementation for enrolled primary 
school children; (ii) deworming of enrolled and non-enrolled children aged 3-14 years; (iii) IEC 
as well as nutrition and hygiene promotion in the classroom; (iv) monitoring of the iodization of 
salt; (v) support to school-based activities aimed at improving nutrition and hygiene in the school 
environment; and (vi) training of primary school teachers in nutrition and hygiene.  
 
Component 3: Intersectoral activities, including: (i) in the health sector, support to the MOH to 
contribute to the cost of the training program on the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness 
(IMCI); (ii) in the agriculture sector, support to a few pilot projects aimed at disseminating 
technical guidelines on improved diversification and storage of agricultural and food products.  
 
Component 4: IEC, Training and Project Management, including: (i) IEC, training, and MIS; 
and (ii) project coordination and management.  
 
The implementation arrangements under the requested Additional Financing would be the same 
as for the ongoing Project, and they are working well. SEECALINE will continue to operate in a 
decentralized fashion while gradually transferring the competencies to the ONN, on a region by 
region basis, starting through a pilot in two regions.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will cover selected communes in all the regions of the national territory.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/19/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Montserrat Meiro-Lorenzo 
10/20/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
10/20/2006 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PNC and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environment or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
10/20/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
