Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/28/2007 
Report No.:  AC2875
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P105026 
Project Name:  M&E Supplement - Governance and Institutional Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Guenter Heidenhof 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Managing for development results (P);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the efficiency and transparency of 
government and public services in line with the Madagascar Action Plan (MAP).   
 
3. Project Description 
Additional financing will cover the monitoring & evaluation of the MAP and key 
statistical surveys (US$ 5.0 million). This new project component aims at scaling-up the 
impact of project activities and at improving its development effectiveness. Financing 
would focus on two main areas (i) the development of a consistent monitoring & 
evaluation framework to assist MAP implementation and (ii) financial support for key 
statistical surveys which are considered critical for the MAP.  
 
The component comprises the following sub-components:  
 
1) 
Development of a consistent monitoring & evaluation framework (US$ 2.5 
million). Funding would focus on developing and implementing a consistent monitoring 
&
evaluation strategy for the whole of Government. A key element of this strategy is the 
National Strategy for Statistical Development which is currently being prepared.  This 
strategy will include the development of revised regulatory and procedural framework for 
government statistics which would integrate and coordinate all relevant government 
Page  2
activities. In addition, the institutional responsibilities of the relevant government 
institutions (e.g. President's Office, Prime Minister's Office, Ministry of Plan, Ministry of 
Finance, Structural Adjustment Secretariat, and National Statistics Office) will need to be 
clarified.  Project funding will provide technical assistance to address these issues; it will 
also help modernize the relevant institutions.  Significant training and capacity building 
activities will complement these activities; they will focus on improving the operational 
efficiency of the aforementioned key institutions and of the sector ministries in the area 
of monitoring & evaluation.  This will include an upgrading of the capacity of local 
training institutions to design and deliver relevant training courses.  
 
2) 
Key statistical surveys to support MAP implementation (US$ 2.5 million).  
Funding would assist government in conducting some key statistical surveys that are 
important for evaluating the progress of MAP implementation:  As a top priority the 
government has identified the need to update its key economic and social data based on a 
new population census.  The last census was completed in 1993; the economic, social, 
and administrative structure of Madagascar has profoundly changed since then. As a 
consequence, many of the existing baseline data is outdated.  The government is in the 
process of soliciting support by development partners for the population census which is 
estimated to cost about US$18 million.The project will support a complete cartographic 
survey of Madagascar which is a prerequisite for the census and would already provide 
important information about the socio-economic changes in the country. Support will 
focus on consulting services and equipment. Financing will also be provided for 
strengthen the capacity in the National Statistic Office to develop and implement 
additional statistical surveys which will provide important information for the 
implementation of the Government strategy such as the External Trade Index, the 
Consumer Price Index, the Industrial Production Index, and the Index of Industrial, 
Energy and Mining Related Production.  Project funding will include the financing of a 
limited number of government staff's salaries (i.e., enumerators and statisticians).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The additional financing elements would be implemented mainly in the capital 
Antananarivo. It would focus mainly on consultancy services and the procurement of 
equipment.  Some minor rehabilitation of the building of the Statistical Office in the 
capital might be included in the context of the installation of a computerized network 
system.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
n/a   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Guenter Heidenhof 
03/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
03/28/2007 
Comments:  Helga Muller,Sector Manager, AFTPR, has given her clearance by email dated March 
28, 2007, to the TTL. 
