Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3242 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/09/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P103950 
Project Name: Governance and Institutional Development Project II 
Task Team Leader: Guenter Heidenhof 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (90%);Law and justice (10%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Macroeconomic 
management (S);Tax policy and administration (S);Managing for development results 
(S);Access to law and justice (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The PGDI II will be closely linked to the new development strategy of the Government. To 
emphasize the continuity of the Bank support it is proposed to maintain the same Project 
Development Objective (PDO) as for the existing PGDI which is ?to improve the efficiency and 
transparency of government and selected public services in Madagascar in line with the 
Madagascar Action Plan (MAP)?.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The new project will build on the existing support under the PGDI.  Its will enhance and further 
deepen the first generation reforms under the PGDI I in the areas of public finance reforms, the 
strengthening of capacity and the improvement of public sector service delivery, the 
reinforcement of the rule of law and the fight against corruption, and the improvement of 
transparency and social accountability.  With an estimated lending amount of US$30.0 million 
PGDI II will have the following components:  
Page  2
?
A
public finance reform component will focus on further improving the budget 
preparation and execution process with the objective to simplify relevant procedures and 
institutional arrangements (estimated volume US$15.0m). It is also anticipated to further 
strengthen the internal and external control mechanisms to provide adequate oversight.  The 
introduction of the new procurement regulations will be consolidated through targeted support to 
sector ministries to better institutionalize the new regulations in the day-to-day operations.  
Finally, the project will provide support to the reform of the revenue agencies, in particular the 
tax administration to streamline and modernize its operation.  
 
?
A
second component will focus on increasing the efficiency of government operations 
(estimated volume US$10.0m). It will provide assistance to improve the delivery of selected 
public services (e.g. judiciary services, primary education, health and nutrition service, pension 
services).  It will support public institutions in designing and implementing change processes; in 
this respect it will continue to provide support for leadership development and change 
management, capitalizing on the positive experience of PGDI I.  The project will also strengthen 
capacity development in the public sector, in particular in the areas of development planning, 
public financial management including procurement, and monitoring & evaluation. It will 
provide assistance to enhance the capacity of local training institutions to deliver in-country 
training. The project will support institutional development and capacity enhancement at the 
level of the regions to complement ongoing decentralization reforms. It will scale-up the Bank?s 
support for monitoring & evaluation through targeted assistance to improve the procedural and 
institutional framework for the implementation of the MAP.  This will include support for key 
statistical surveys.  
 
?
A
third component will focus on consolidating legal and judicial reforms as well as 
government activities aimed at reducing fraud and corruption (estimated volume US$3.0m).  
This will include support for the introduction of service standards in jurisdictions throughout the 
country and the simplification of judicial proceedings.  The regulatory and institutional 
framework for the fight against fraud and corruption will be further developed, e.g. by the 
establishment of a Serious Fraud Office to complement the existing independent Anti-Corruption 
Bureau.  The project will also provide support for the design and implementation of new 
conflict-of-interest regulations.  
 
?
A
final component aims at improving transparency and social accountability (estimated 
volume US$2.0m).  This will include the scaling up of support for participatory monitoring 
mechanisms which were initiated under the existing PGDI, including capacity building activities 
to sensitize civil society.  The support will be closely linked to existing Bank activities under the 
mining and the growth-poles projects.  In addition, the project will provide assistance to 
fundamentally reform the regulations governing access to information.  
 
The project will be designed as an investment project which will continue to be implemented by 
the President?s Office.  It is anticipated to gradually move towards a sector-wide approach to 
implement public finance reforms.  To this end, a technical assistance fund will be set up under 
which the public finance reform component would be implemented. The fund which will be 
initially supported by the World Bank and the European Union will be managed by the Ministry 
of Finance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Antananarivo, Madagascar   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Implementation performance under the existing PGDI confirms the good capacity of the 
borrower.  The implementation arrangements will be same under the new PGDI II   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/10/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
n/a   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Guenter Heidenhof 
10/30/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/06/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
11/05/2007 
Comments:   
