Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/26/2007 
Report No.:  AC2859
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P104983 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for the Mineral Resources Governance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gotthard Walser 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 26, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (50%);Central government administration (40%);Oil 
and gas (10%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.80
0.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The additional financing has the same components, as the original credit (Credit 3754-
MAG) - (i) strengthening transparency and governance in mining; (ii) key institutional 
reforms for the decentralized management of mineral resources; and (iii) promotion of 
private investments and value added in mining.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be processed in the form of an additional component to the existing 
operation, and will cover 5 new activities to scale up the current operation to cover an 
increase in the scope of the overall mining activities in the country since the project 
became effective:  
 
i) policy, legal and regulatory framework adjustments;  
 
ii) institutional restructuring and strengthening of the Ministry of Mines;  
 
iii) Support to integration of large-scale mining projects to regional development;  
 
iv) Improved environmental management and large-scale and small-scale operations;  
 
v)
Improved governance and management capacity in small-scale mining.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project implementation unit is based in Antananarivo. The project will cover already 
identified large-scale mining operations in Fort Dauphin, Tolear, and Ambatovy. On 
small-scale mining operations, the focus will be on governmental regional strategy.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTS4) 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not directly support mining activities.  Thus, the main risk of the project 
is the promotion of small-scale or large scale mining activities that might not meet 
international standards on environmental and social management.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Same as 1.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
An alternative would be to have private sector engage in self-regulation.  Given the 
potential impacts of both, large-scale mining and also artisanal/small-scale mining 
activities, the current approach is the most environmentally responsible.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has been implementing the current EMP (disclosed in May 2003) since 
2003.  The borrower has conducted an evaluation of the EMP implementation 
("ACTUALISATION DU PLAN DE GESTION ENVIRONNEMENTAL DU 
Page  3
PROGRAMME DE GOUVERNANCE DES RESSOURCES MINERALES") and 
disclosed it in-country on March 23, 2007 and at the InfoShop before appraisal (March 
26, 2007).  
 
The proposed additional financing will reinforce the measures already put in place under 
the original credit to regulate small-scale mining activities and extend them to large-scale 
mining.  In particular, the project will focus on capacity building efforts to increase 
Ministry staff regulatory abilities to monitor potential environmental impacts in the 
mining sector.  
 
In addition, the Borrower will fund an independent audit before 30 September 2007, to 
assess the level of compliance of the mining sector with international environmental and 
social management standards and with national regulations, and identify measures that 
the Government would implement to ensure full compliance.The proposed additional 
financing would fund the implementation of the measures recommended by the audit.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders are the staff of the Ministry of Mines and the Ministry of the 
Environment.  
 
Furthermore, the project will support consultations with populations living in the areas 
surrounding large-scale mining activities in Fort Dauphin, Tulear and Ambatovy areas 
regarding mining-related issues that might impact them, and ensure that safeguard 
procedures are put in place.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/11/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  4
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gotthard Walser 
03/23/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
03/23/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
03/26/2007 
Comments:   
