Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2265
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P057761 
Project Name:  INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES 
Task Team Leader:  Paivi Koljonen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (40%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (25%);General energy sector (15%);Sub-national government 
administration (15%);General information and communications sector (5%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing (S);Decentralization (S);Public 
expenditure, financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.30
1.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to improve household welfare and strengthen 
economic growth in market centers and surrounding rural areas through the provision of 
core infrastructure services. Specifically, the project will (i) finance coordinated priority 
investments in roads, water supply and sanitation, electricity and telecommunications 
within the five corridors with economic growth potential selected for participation in the 
project; and (ii) assist the Government of Malawi in developing a coordinated approach 
to planning and implementing infrastructure development in these areas.  
 
The project will support the development of productive sectors and the delivery of 
selected public services in five economic corridors in Malawi's three main geographical 
regions, focusing on market centers. The main productive sectors of interest are 
agriculture, mining, and tourism. In addition to households and businesses, improved 
electricity and water supply services will benefit shools, teacher development centers, 
hospitals, clinics, etc. that do not yet have one or more of these services. The project will 
promote synergies between single-sector and multi-sector investment projects as well as 
Page  2
support greater coordination between central and local government agencies in 
infrastructure service planning and development. Essentially, it will extend the benefits of 
bulk infrastructure development in individual infrastructure sectors to key areas outside 
major cities, in order to meet the combined infrastructure needs for business and social 
service development. Furthermore, the project will likely have an impact beyond the 
benefits of the investments in the five economic corridors by providing a model for 
feasibility, project design and implementation applicable to coordinated development of 
infrastructure services in economic regions outside of those participating in the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project's components will form part of coordinated infrastructure packages to address 
the varying needs of the districts of each of the five economic growth corridors that the 
proposed project will cover. These packages will begin to address the infrastructure 
imbalances between urban and rural areas. Their composition will reflect the priorities of 
the districts located in each of the economic growth corridors. While the national 
government, in consultation with district authorities, has selected the economic corridors 
where the project will operate, the investments themselves will be demand-driven. The 
proposed project has the following components:  
 
Component A - Electrification ($4.7 million): This component will finance the 
construction of power lines connecting the market centers to the national grid as well as 
transformers, poles, low-voltage distribution networks and consumer meters. Also, the 
component will use low-cost distribution technologies wherever possible based on the 
results of the detailed design studies that will take place at the outset of project 
implementation. At the same time, it will finance measures to reduce the cost of 
connection to electricity. The component will provide public lighting in the market 
centers which will extend the benefits of electrification to people who will not receive 
household connections. All schools and clinics in the market centers, along with housing 
for teachers and health workers, will receive connections to electricity supply.  
 
Component B - ICT ($1.5 million): This component will provide subsidies needed under 
an output-based aid (OBA) scheme to improve access to telecommunications and 
information services in the project areas. Under the OBA scheme, private operators will 
receive a determined amount of subsidy after making an agreed amount of investment. 
The options open to entrepreneurs include the provision of rural telephone connections to 
communities, using public phones and privately operated kiosks as well as connections 
for interested households and businesses. The component plans to expand Internet access 
and ICT services through establishing small-scale, multi-purpose community tele-centers 
in the project areas. In addition, under a grant from the Public-Private Infrastructure 
Advisory Facility, a consultant will review and update the Government's 1999 Universal 
Access Policy and help the Government hold a stakeholder workshop to discuss and 
validate the policy.  
 
Component C - Water Supply and Sanitation ($9.9 million): The project will finance the 
establishment of a water association to oversee each system, and a local utility operator to 
handle routine operations and maintenance, plus construction of a water supply scheme 
Page  3
serving each market center. In total, 150,000 people in 24 market centers will obtain 
improved water supply through the project. The type of improved water supply will vary 
based on the location. Market centers which usually have a dense core, will receive piped 
water. More sparsely populated fringe areas will receive public standpipes and 
handpumps. In addition, schools, clinics and other social institutions will receive water 
and sanitation services. The specific layout of the distribution system within the service 
area will take place in consultation with users and physical planning authorities.  
 
Component D - Roads ($16.5 million): This component will finance the rehabilitation of 
about 150 km of secondary and tertiary roads and the construction of 350 km of feeder 
roads to improve transportation accessibility to and from the project corridors in general, 
and the market centers in particular. The component will not cover major pavement 
realignments in order to avoid unncessarily high standards that would affect costs. The 
rehabilitation work will entail spot improvements, including sectional re-gravelling, 
strengthening/replacing drainage structures, provision of additional drainage, and minor 
adjustment to road widths if necessary. Periodical maintenance activities will also form 
part of the component.  
 
Component E - Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building ($3.15 million): This 
component will provide technical assistance and training support, including 
environmental training, to the various governmental agencies and the private sector 
engaged in infrastructure service delivery. Also, in line with current efforts at greater 
decentralization of planning authority, the project will provide this support to the district 
authorities in each of the economic growth corridors, who will be key partners in project 
implementation. The component will also finance the project's management costs. It will 
also support activities associated with the screening of project areas for potential 
environmental and social impacts. These include the  preparation and implementation of 
related Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs), if required. Finally, the project will finance the costs of the project's monitoring 
and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project will be implemented in the following economic corridors: (i) 
Rumphi-Nyika-Chitipa; (ii)Ntcheu-Tsangano-Mwanza; (iii) Mangochi-Cape McLear; 
(iv)Zomba-Phalombe-Mulanje; and (v) Bangula-Tengani-Nsanje-Makoko. The selected 
economic corridors represent Malawi's three main geographical divisions - north, central, 
and south. The main economic activities center around agriculture. The selection of the 
economic corridors took place during project preparation in consultation with District 
Assemblies, taking into account a number of factors, including population, existing 
businesses and social services, poverty levels, and potential demand for the infrastructure 
services that the project will provide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential safeguard issues related to the planned construction and rehabilitation activities 
are likely to include (a) water pollution due to the generation of wastes and additional 
waste water; (b) noise and air pollution as well as an increase in vector diseases which 
would negatively affect the surrounding population; and (c) increased pressures on 
natural resources as the population density increases in the growth areas where water 
supplies and other services become available. Furthermore, there is concern over the 
potential spread of HIV/AIDS in project areas where construction crews are active.  
 
In addition, given Malawi's geographical location, the potential pollution of 
international waterways would be another safeguards issue to be addressed by the project 
as required under OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The future activities in the economic corridors will not incur any indirect and/or long 
term impacts because any potential negative impacts will be identified, assessed and 
mitigated before the construction and rehabilitation activities commence, and HIV/AIDS 
training will be provided to the construction crews.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since the exact locations of the future investments were not known prior to appraisal, 
project implementers will discuss potential alternatives as part of the environmental and 
social screening process to be applied at the time the investments are planned.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To ensure that the future investments are implemented in an environmentally and socially 
sustainable manner, the Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  
 
The RPF outlines policies and procedures to be applied in the event that priority 
infrastructure investments involve land acquisition and the potential loss of livelihoods 
and assets.  
 
The ESMF outlines a four-step environmental and social screening process for 
investments to be applied by qualified personnel at the district level, and outlines 
Malawi's procedures for public consultations and disclosure. The ESMF also includes a 
generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to serve as guidance in the development 
of more detailed EMPs for priority investments once the project design and construction 
details are known. Consistent with the recommendations of the ESMF, and as discussed 
with the relevant parties during appraisal, the project will support an Environmental 
Training Program with a focus on building capacity at the district level, at the community 
level, and among the implementing agencies. A copy of the proposed Environmental 
Training Program will be included in the Project Implementation Manual.  
 
To ensure that HIV/AIDS issues are taken into consideration at the construction sites, 
the project will support (a) the recruitment of qualified consultants; (b) the development 
of a short HIV/AIDS training program; and (c) the provision of relevant training 
materials.  
 
In order to meet the requirements of OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways, the 
Bank, on behalf of the Borrower, has sent notification letters to Malawi's riparian 
countries, informing them about the project and its potential impact on international 
waters. The Bank has received no objections from the riparian states, and on May 1, 
2006, the Country Director requested and received approval for further processing of the 
Project from the Regional Vice President, thereby completing the notification process as 
required under OP 7.50.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Government has consulted the key stakeholders (representatives of Area Executive 
Committees, District Executive Committees, the business community, the Ministry of 
Irrigation and Water Development, ESCOM, police officers, hospital staff, post office 
staff, village headmen, holiday resort owners, tourist operators, park officers, and various 
rural growth and market centers) in the five economic corridors, particularly in the 
context of the preparation of the ESMF. In doing so, the consultants carried out a 
literature review, field investigations/surveys, and public consultations, and subsequently, 
they discussed the outcome of these consultations with government officials as well as 
members of the various area and district executive committees, and presented the 
preliminary findings at two stakeholder workshops in Blantyre and Mzuzu.  
Page  6
According to the results of the consultations, the stakeholder felt that, for example, (i) 
the proposed project will play an important role in the process of uplifting people's 
livelihoods; (ii) public awareness campaigns are necessary to sensitize the beneficiary 
communities to general environmental and social practices; and (iii) there should be 
deliberate efforts to encourage the maximum participation of women in project planning, 
design and implementation.  
 
The ESMF and RPF have been disclosed by the Government of Malawi on February 22, 
2006, and at the Bank's Infoshop on February 27, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/22/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/22/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  7
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Paivi Koljonen 
06/13/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
06/13/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
06/13/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
06/14/2006 
Comments:   
