                                                                                                 40946


                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                     Report No.:

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:September 18,2007

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Malaysia                                I Project ID:PI06857
ProjectName: Kota Kinabalu CompostingProject
Task Team Leader:Bekir Onursal
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 29,2007          Estimated Board Date: NIA
ManagingUnit: EASRE                                Lending Instrument: CarbonFinance
Sector: Environment
Theme: Climate Change Mitigation, Municipal Solid Waste Management
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
        Equity:        3.57million
        Borrowing:     4.16 million
        Financing gap: 0.95 million
        Total:         8.68million
Environmental Category:B


B. Project Objectives [fromsection 2 of PCN]:
1. The project objective is to avoid methane (a greenhouse gas) emissions from the Kayu
Madang Sanitary Landfill in Telipok, Malaysia by diverting the MSW to a sorting and
composting plant, which will recover the recyclable portion of the waste and convert the highly
biodegradableportion of the waste into a compost to be marketed as soil conditioner.

2. The project has benefits in terns of reduction of GHG emissions, contribution to sustainable
development, and improvingthe local environment. More specifically:

        The project will avoid methane (a GHG) emissions generated from landfilling of MSW
        by diverting MSW to the sorting and composting facility. The estimated annual GHG
        emissionreduction through this project is about 105,000tons of COz-e.1


'Based on the approvedbaseline methodologyAM0025Nersion 07, "Avoided emissionsfrom organic waste
through alternativewaste treatment processes".

        The project will benefit the economy by recovering and recycling various grades of
        plastic materials, paper, and non-ferrous and ferrous metals; and producing compost as a
        by-product, which is to be marketed as soil conditioner. As the first cornmercial-scale
        MSW composting initiative in Malaysia, this project has a good potential for setting a
        model to address the growing MSW problem for the rest of the country.2 In addition, as
        the landfill will receive only a fraction of the MSW, the Kota Kinabalu City Hall is
        expected to have savings in waste disposal costs. Moreover, the project will allow
        employment of at least 100people.

        The project will be beneficial to the local environment as it will extend the lifespan of the
        Kayu Madang Sanitary Landfill, and significantly reduce the leachate and methane
        generation as well as the risk of fire at the landfill.


C. Project Description [fromsection 3 of PCN]:
3 . This proposed project will direct approximately 480 tpd of MSW~from the City of Kota
Kinabalu and four nearby districts to a sorting and composting facility that is owned and
operated by the project sponsor - MS SMART Recycling Sdn Bhd (SMART Recycling). The
proposed project concept of sorting and composting of MSW was selected by the Kota Kinabalu
City Hall. The main factors for selecting it were: (i) the extension of the lifespan of the Kayu
Madang Landfill; (ii) potential savings in the landfilling cost by the City Hall; (iii) potential for
significantreduction in the generation and treatment requirements of the leachate at the landfill4;
(iv) the reduced risk of fire at the landfill; (v) the contribution to sustainable development in
terms of recovery and marketing of recyclable products (compost as well as various grades of
plastics, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, and paper); (vi) creation of better local employment
opportunities5; and (vii) the potential for significant GHG emission reductions from the landfill
that would bring in ER revenues and attract private sector participation. In selecting this project
concept, the following project alternatives were also considered: (i) Business-as-usual with all
MSW from the City of Kota Kinabalu being disposed at the Kayu Madang Landfill, (ii) capture
and flaring of methane from the Kayu Madang Landfill to achieve GHG emission reductions,
(iii) cornrnunity-based composting initiatives, and (iv) Combustion of MSW. For any of these
alternatives, a landfill would be required in order to receive, at a minimum, inert materials from
the MSW or ash (in case of MSW incineration).

4. This project will adopt a technology developed by the Egyptian Company for Solid Waste
Utilization (ECARU). MSW is first manually pre-sorted to remove large objects (e.g. big
cardboards, tires, boulders) and glass. The remaining portion of the MSW is transferred via skid
loaders onto conveyor belts to the sorting plant to separate, manually and mechanically, the
recyclable components (various grades of plastics and metals, and paper), biodegradablewaste,


 The model established through this project will be replicated in Malaysia if adverse local impacts during
composting (e.g. odor emissions) are successfullyprevented or mitigated and a market for the compost is created.
 MSW originates from residential and commercial sources. No manure or sewage sludge is mixed with MSW.
Collection and transportation of MSW to the project site is provided by the City Hall.
 In addition, preventiodcontrol measures for the leachate/stormwaterwill be implemented at the sorting and
compostingplant.
5This project has created about 100jobs at the sorting plant and will create additionaljobs at the compostingplant.

and inert materials. The recyclable components, which constitute approximately 10.6% of the
feed to the sorting plant, are marketed. The biodegradable waste is directed to the composting
plant, which uses windrow technology to produce compost to be marketed as soil conditioner. In
addition, the composting plant processes commercial food waste, yard waste, and market waste
collected by the City Hall. Piles of organic waste are formed and composted under controlled
oxygen content (through use of mechanical windrow turners for aeration), moisture, and
temperature. Up to 63% of the MSW received by the sorting and compostingplant is expected
to be composted to produce a marketable product. The inert portion of MSW is disposed of at the
Kayu Madang Sanitary Landfill.


D. Project location and salientphysical characteristicsrelevantto the safeguardanalysis
(if known):
5. This project is located within the boundaries of the currently operating Kayu Madang
Landfill in Telipok, a town located approximately 30 krn northeast the City of Kota Kinabalu in
the State of Sabah, Malaysia. The Kayu Madang Landfill was originally designed as a sanitary
landfill within a 160-acresite (including weighbridge system, labor quarters, leachate collection
and treatment system, access roads, buffer zones, etc) owned by the Kota Kinabalu City Hall.
Within this site, 105acres were designated as the landfill area. The landfill was commissionedin
January 1997, following preparation of an EIA by the Kota Kinabalu City Hall and approval by
the Department of Environment (DOE) of the Sabah State. The cost of operation and
maintenance of the landfill is financed by the Kota Kinabalu City Hall as the City Hall is
responsible for solid waste collection, transportation and disposal services in the City of Kota
Kinabalu.

6. As per agreement between SMART Recycling and the Kota Kinabalu City Hall, SMART
Recycling was provided approximately 7-acres of land to set up and operate a 500 tpd sorting
and composting plant within the landfill site for a period of 10 years, from 2005 to 2015.
Approximately 3.2 acres were designated for the sorting plant and administrative buildings, and
the remaining 4 acres for the composting plant. The sortingplant started operation in April 2006,
and the compostingplant is expected to be constructed in early 2008 and be operational by April
2008.


E. Borrower's InstitutionalCapacity for SafeguardPolicies:
7. The Project Sponsor's institutionalcapacity for safeguards policies needs to be strengthened.
This strengthening will be conducted in conjunction with the implementation of the
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for supervising and monitoring the progress and
effectivenessof the required mitigation measures during the construction and operation phases of
the sorting and composting plant.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
    Ms Vivianti Rambe-Environmental Specialist (EASRE)
    Ms SulistiowatiNainggolan -SocialDevelopment Specialist (EASIS)

11. SAFEGUARD POLICIESTHAT MIGHT APPLY
-SafeguardPolicies     Triggered (pleaseexplain why)                        Yes          No           TBD
I

-Environmental    Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                     X
This project is proposed to be a Category B project as its potential environmental impacts are
well defined, site-specific,minor and easily manageable. The net global and local environmental
impacts are expected to be highly positive. The potential environmental impacts associatedwith
the sorting and composting facility include wastewater generation, odor emissions, industrial
health and safety, and safetyissues associated with the accessroad.

         Wastewater management. Presently, the sortingplant area is standing on a concrete floor
         and guarded under a roof, with some measures in place for the collection of stormwater
         from the roof and subsequent storage for reuse. To prevent wastewater generation, a
         similar construction scheme in the waste receiving and byproduct storage areas of the
         sorting plant will be used. In the composting plant, measures to prevent and/or control
        wastewater generation will also be adopted. For example, a concrete pad with appropriate
         slopes to the sides will be constructed in the entire composting plant area for ease of
         draining rainfall; leachate generation from the windrows will be prevented or minimized
         through proper moisture control; any leachate generated from the process areas will be
         collected and recirculated to the windrows; and during the rainy days, windrows will be
         coveredby geotextilesheets.

         Odor emissions. Odor emissions occur at both the sorting and composting areas. As
         there is no population center within at least 2 km from this plant, the odor impacts on
         people off-sitewill be negligible. However, the City Hall staff quarters at the landfill site
         are approximately 100meters away from the sorting and composting plant, and the odor
         impacts to the residents and the plant personnel will be assessed in the EA and
         appropriate mitigation measures will be implemented. For example, good housekeeping
         measures will be implemented to prevent accumulation of waste at the sortingplant, and
         odor emissions from the composting area will be minimized through good process
         contr01.~Tree plantation in the buffer zone between staff quarters and the plant areas
         may also be used to mitigate odor impacts. All site personnel are (and will be) provided
         with masks and will be properly trained to wear them. The use of masks will be enforced
         by plant management.

         Industrial health and safety. In addition to masks, all site personnel are (and will be)
         provided with clean work clothes (at least once a week), shoes and gloves to avoid
         contact with MSW. In addition, workers in safety-prone areas (e.g. underneath the
         conveyor areas) will be provided hard hats. All site personnel will be trained to use the
         personal protection equipment, and the use of such equipment will be enforced by plant
         management. First aid supplies and equipment, and facilities for personal hygiene
         (including separate employee showering, change rooms with lockers, and sufficient
         numbers of properly maintained toilets for men and women workers) will be provided. In

 6"Odors are produced when conditions inside the compostpile become anaerobic through a lack of oxygen.Well-
 operated composting facilities should produce minimal objectionableodors." From Hoomweg, Daniel et al.,
 Comvostin~and its A~vlicabilityin Develovin~Countries, Working Paper SeriesNo. 8, World Bank, March 2000.

SafeguardPoliciesTriggered (please explain why)                      Yes           No      1   TBD
       addition, an air-conditioned lunch room with adequate capacity to hold all plant workers
       on a rotationalbasis will be provided.

       Access road. The access road to the plant, which is narrow and unpaved, presents risks
       for truck traffic and smooth delivery of MSW to the plant, especially during the rainy
       season. The access road will be widened and paved.

The compost produced from this plant is expected to be used as a soil conditionerto rehabilitate
degraded lands and to construct and maintain gardens, parks, and green spaces. The compost
will be analyzed to ensure compliance with standardsbefore application.

To identify and assess potential environmental impacts of the project and corresponding
mitigation measures, the project sponsor has engaged a consultant to prepare an EA for the
sorting and composting plant. The consultant will also conduct a due diligence environmental
audit for the Kayu Madang Landfill, which is linked to the project. As part of the EA, an
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared to include specific provisions to be
implemented during the construction and operation phases of the plant. In addition, alternative
composting options will be analyzed to justify the selection of windrow composting technology.
The EA will also list mitigation measures and present a monitoring plan on adverse social
impacts, and prescribe a grievance resolution mechanism. Bank procedures for public
consultation will be used (twice with project-affected groups and local NGOs-the             first time:
before the TORfor the EA is finalized; and the second time: when the draft EA is prepared). The
EA will be disclosed in Kota Kinabalu and at InfoShop prior to project appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP4.04)                                                        X
As project activitieswill take place on the existing landfill site,the project will not affect any
protected areas, known natural habitats,or established or proposed criticalnatural habitats.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
The project will neither procure pesticides nor will result in increased use of pesticides.
Forests (OPIBP4.36)                                                                 X
As project activities will take place on the existinglandfill site, the project will not affect any
forest areas or related natural habitats.
Physical CulturalResources (OPIBP4.11)                                              X
All civil works will take place on the existinglandfill site. The project will not affect siteswith
archeological,paleontological,historical, religious, or unique natural values.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
This policy is not triggered as the project site offers employmentopportunitiesto "individuals",
and there is no "group" involvement of any IP communities. The current labor force at the
sortingplant is approximately70% Malaysian (mostlyfrom the local areas in the State of Sabah)
and 30% from neighboringcountries. The project sponsor complieswith Kota Kinabalu City
Hall's requirementthat at least 50% of the workers at the sorting and compostingplant be from
the State of Sabah (Sabahnian).
Involuntary Resettlement(OPIBP4.12)                                                               X
The applicabilityof OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement Policy) will be determinedpending
assessment of the impacts of odor emissions from the plant on the residents of the CityHall staff
quarters and the effectivenessof the associatedmitigation measures. If these mitigation measures

 SafeguardPolicies Triggered(pleaseexplain why)                                       Yes              No         I    TBD
 are not practical or acceptable to the local residents, then these residents will be given an
 opportunityfor resettlement in accordancewith OP 4.12. The project will not acquire land as the
 project activitieswill take place on the existing Kayu Madang Landfill site. The project will not
 displace economic activities as local communitieswho depend on the landfill for their incomes
 and livelihoodswill be able to continue to do so as part of the project.
 Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                                            X
 The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
 performance of an existingdam or a dam under construction, as defined in this policy.
-
 Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                                       X
 There are no known project activities involving internationalwaterways as defined in the policy.
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                                                X

 Public Disclosure (BP 17.50)
 The EA will be disclosed locally (in local languages)in Kota Kinabalu and in the InfoShop (in
 the English language) prior to departure of the appraisal mission.

 111. SAFEGUARD PREPARATIONPLAN

 A. Target date for the Quality EnhancementReview (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
     would be prepared: N/A.

 B. For simpleprojects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
     ISDS: October 19,2007

 C. Time frame for launching and completingthe safeguard-relatedstudiesthat may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing7shouldbe specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
         EA and Due Diligence studieswere launched on July 24,2007 (theproject sponsor
         engaged a consultant based on TORSagreed between the project sponsor and the Bank
         project team).
         The finalized EA is planned for disclosure locally in Kota Kinabalu and at InfoShop on
         October 19,2007.

 IV. APPROVALS
   Signed and submitted by:                                                  -rnUu&&          /
   Task Team Leader:                             Mr Bekir Onursal /;{            -  -
                                                                                   .
                                                                                           4
   Approved by:                                                          V

   Regional Safeguards Coordinator:            I Mr PanneerSelvam                                    I
     Comments:
   SectorManager:                              I Mr Rahul Raturi
     Comments:




 7 Reminder: The Bank's DisclosurePolicyrequires that safeguard-related documentsbe disclosedbefore appraisal(i) at the

 InfoShopand (ii) in-country, at publicly accessiblelocations and in a form and languagethat are accessible to potentiallyaffected
 persons.

