Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3117 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/28/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Malawi 
Project ID: P102176 
Project Name: MW-Public Sector SWAp 
Task Team Leader: Ross Worthington 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 17, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Administrative 
and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The proposed project development objectives (PDOs) are to build a viable and effective 
system of local governance through; (i) the design and implementation of an effective and 
equitable intergovernmental fiscal architecture; and, (ii) the enhancement of capacity of all forty 
Local Assemblies (LAs) in public financial management and the management of service 
delivery.  
 
2. 
The project is expected, by project-end, to create LAs whose: (i) budget processes will 
interface with the national budget development, execution and monitoring system; (ii) financial 
management operations will conform to all relevant public finance legislation; (iii) expenditure 
systems will interface with national IFMIS, HRMIS and procurement systems allowing greater 
expenditure monitoring and control; (iv) public accountability will be enhanced through more 
timely and professional auditing; (v) reporting to the public on LA finances and budget execution 
will be improved so that ordinary citizens can understand budget allocations and executions; and, 
(vi) in national government entities involved in fiscal decentralization and facilitating LA 
Page  2
operations, particularly financial operations, having better functioning linkages to LAs in budget 
development, executionand reporting, financial administration and auditing.  
 
3. 
A monitoring and evaluation plan will be prepared to track achievement of project?s 
objectives and targets on a regular basis. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the project will be 
done principally using the Government?s own M&E systems which have been the target of 
considerable capacity building over the last three years. The government?s PRSP, the Malawi 
Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS) M&E framework monitored by the Ministry of 
Economic Planning and Development (MEPD) to measure progress in those thematic and sub-
thematic areas in which the project will operate, will provide data on project impact. The 
project?s M&E plan and strategies will include performance indicators based on the MGDS and 
the National Decentralization Policy (NDP). This approach of basing the M&E framework on the 
Government?s two major policy documents for decentralization will ensure that the framework 
remains focused on decentralization priorities, does not become overly complex and is results 
oriented.  
 
4. 
Project primary target beneficiaries will be all Local Assembly Administration 
Secretariats and those cross-cutting government agencies involved in financial and human 
resources management. Ultimate recipients of project outcomes will be the users of the public 
services provided by Local Assemblies who would benefit from greater transparency, efficiency, 
and accountability in the management of core public resources at the local government level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
5. 
 Despite the formal framework for decentralization, including fiscal decentralization, 
being constitutionally mandated and relatively well defined, its implementation has been 
fragmented and uncoordinated. This has resulted in LAs that cannot carry out their legislative 
responsibilities because of significant institutional and capacity constraints, particularly low and 
unpredictable funding through the IFA and weak financial management systems. The project is 
conceived as being part of a programmatic approach to capacity building in financial and general 
management in subnational and national government, either through a SWAp or some other 
pooled arrangement. The proposed operation, which has only minor civil works (e.g. 
rehabilitation of existing buildings) and no environment impacts - would have the following 
components.  
 
5.1 Component 1: Design and Implementation of the System of Fiscal  
Intergovernmental 
Relations ($16 million)  
 
6. 
 This component will review and redesign the existing intergovernmental fiscal 
architecture (IFA) and provide a capacity building fund for LAs and IFA related central 
agencies. This will support the development of capacity to manage decentralized financial 
management responsibilities, including accounting, audit, procurement, assets, payroll and 
associated human resource management (HRM) and ICT functions. The component objectives 
would be to: (i) undertake a comprehensive analysis of the design, operation and effectiveness of 
the legal framework of the existing intergovernmental fiscal architecture (IFA), to complement 
the fiscal review of the IFA already being done; (ii) to implement the recommendations of the 
IFA fiscal and legal reviews; (iii) to develop the financial and general management capacity of 
Page  3
LAs so they can effectively manage functions devolved under the Local Government Act (LGA) 
and NDP; and, (iv) to develop capacity in national functional counterparts to the Assemblies - 
National Local Government Finance Committee (NLGFC), Accountant General?s Department 
(AGD), Central Internal Audit Unit (CIAU), Ministry of Finance Budget Division (MOFBD) and 
Ministry of Local Government and Regional Development (MOLGRD) where necessary to 
implement and operate the IFA and its associated financial management functions.  
 
7. 
This component would have three subcomponents which focus on; (i) a review of the 
legal framework of the intergovernmental transfer system; (ii) implementation of the 
recommendations of the fiscal and legal reviews of the IFA; and, (iii) a Fiscal Decentralization 
Capacity Building Facility that builds the capacity to manage the IFA and implement the 
financial management components of the NDP as noted above.  
 
8. 
 The review of the legal framework of the IFA will complement the review of the fiscal 
components of the IFA. The recommendations of these two reviews will then form the basis for 
implementing a revised IFA which should provide greater predictability and volume of funds to 
LAs. The Fiscal Decentralization Capacity Building Facility subcomponent will utilize most of 
the component?s funds and support capacity development activities for LA Secretariat staff, and 
their national functional counterparts where necessary, to implement and operate the financial 
management (including management of the budget cycle, IFMIS , HRMIS , internal audit,  
procurement and assets), ICT  systems and related general management systems required of LAs 
to manage their own operations and to effectively interface with national government systems 
and functions that form part of the IFA or which result from increased fiscal decentralization. 
Interventions under this subcomponent will be coordinated with the GOM?s planned rollout of 
IFMIS, HRMIS, e-procurement, computer assisted audit and other public finance projects over 
the next four years. This component would provide support through the provision of technical 
assistance, capacity building programs, equipment, software and other material necessary to 
support the proposed capacity building interventions.  
 
5.2 Component 2: Local Assemblies Fiscal Operations Grants Facility ($6 million)  
 
9. 
 The component objective would be to support all LAs to achieve minimal physical 
standards for their operational environment so they could function effectively. The component 
would have two subcomponents; (i) a basic needs based grant made on the basis of the gap 
between the existing operational environment in each LA and the GOM standard for equipping 
LA offices (70% of the component funds); and, (ii) a performance based grant for which LAs 
become eligible one year after the basic grant, based on improvements in operational 
performance (30% of the component funds). Many LAs operate from buildings in poor physical 
condition, with inadequate electrical, information and communications facilities, furniture, 
public service areas and similar basic administrative infrastructure. These deficiencies would be 
addressed by investing in administrative infrastructure and hardware needed for them to 
efficiently perform their duties through the provision of one-off grants to ensure that the 
minimum operating environment is put in place. This component will draw on the experience of 
similar Bank funded grant schemes which have operated in Zambia, Zimbabwe, South Africa, 
Uganda, Pakistan and Bangladesh, in the development of its funding and operational guidelines 
Page  4
to ensure that grants made under this component are equitable, justifiable and enhance 
performance.  
 
5.3 Component 3: Support for Project Implementation and Operations.($3 million)  
 
10. 
 The component objective would be to support the preparation and implementation of the 
project through a modality that best suits the capacity of the implementing agency to carry out 
these functions. A Program Management Unit comprised either of; (i) civil servants; or, (ii) of a 
mix of civil servants and contracted staff for specialist positions such as in procurement and 
financial management (in which there is a labor market shortage), in the Department for 
Rationalization and Public Sector Reform (DRPSR) in the Office of President and Cabinet 
(OPC) are the most likely options.  
 
11. 
 The component focus would be on the administration, coordination, monitoring and 
evaluation, and supervision of the project in association with stakeholders, including the 
Association. This component would provide support through the provision of technical 
assistance, furniture, equipment, software and other material necessary to support the 
management of the implementation and operation of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
12. 
The focal coordination point for project preparation and implementation will be the new 
Department for Rationalization and Public Sector Reform (DRPSR) in OPC. This department 
has been established to lead and coordinate, as appropriate, all major public sector reforms 
including revitalization of the NDP in association with MOLGRD, MEPD and MOF. These three 
ministries will be represented on a project steering committee to be chaired by OPC. It is most 
likely that a Program Management Unit, comprising a mix of civil servants and consultants in 
key areas such as financial management and procurement, will manage the project within 
DRPSR.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
13. 
Not applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/25/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ross Worthington 
08/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/22/2007 
Comments:  No SGP Specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN & ISDS. Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antonius Verheijen 
08/22/2007 
Comments:  I concur with the rating of "C" for this project. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
