Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1678 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/16/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Malawi 
Project ID: P096336 
Project Name: National Water Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Robert J. Roche 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 6, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (75%);Sanitation (25%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (P);Access to 
urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
CANADA: CANADIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
(CIDA) 12.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
16.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
16.00 
 
NETHERLANDS, GOV. OF THE  (EXCEPT FOR MOFA/MIN.OF 
DEV.COOP.) 30.00 
 OPEC 
FUND 
8.00
82.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project would be improved water resources management and 
increased access to sustainable water supply and sanitation services for people living in cities, 
towns and villages.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would support improved water resources management and expanded water 
supply and sanitation services in cities, towns and villages. It would build capacity, through 
improved monitoring, regulation, incentive structures, public/private partnerships, and 
coordination. The Ministry of Irrigation and Water Development (MIWD) and five water boards 
Page  2
are rightly proud of what they achieved under NWDP I. There is widespread support for a 
follow-on project to further drive sector development. Two types of investment programs have 
proven effective for the water sector in Africa: (i) an IDA Specific Investment Loan plus parallel 
investments by other donors, or (ii) budget support through PRSC operations. The proposed 
project would be designed to utilize budget support mechanisms. The IDA contribution would be 
determined in consultation with the MIWD, MOF and other donors. The specific objectives, 
scope, and success indicators for the IDA-financed part of the investment program would be set 
out in the Project Appraisal Document. The main components of the MIWD's proposed 
investment program are as follows:  
 
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation - Blantyre and Lilongwe Water Boards  
 
=>Establish public limited operating companies in Blantyre and Lilongwe, an asset holding 
company, and a water regulator.  
 
=> Improve operational efficiency including better financial management, improved cost 
efficiency, and reduced unaccounted-for-water in both cities. Use service contracts to strengthen 
management.  
 
=> Rehabilitate existing plant and equipment, and expand water distribution in Lilongwe.  
 
=> Improve water intake, increase pumping/treatment capacity, and expand off-peak storage 
and water distribution in Blantyre.  
 
=> Improve water supply to low-income communities in both cities.  
 
=> Develop future water sources for both cities.  
 
=> Prepare strategic sanitation plans to address solid waste, excreta disposal and drainage in 
both cities.  
 
Town Water Supply and Sanitation - Regional Water Boards  
 
=> Improve efficiency and expand water supply in some of the largest, fastest-growing towns 
including Mzuzu, Zomba, Kasungu, Mzimba and Mangochi.  
 
=> Develop water sources in towns where hydrogeologic conditions are difficult.  
 
=> Expand water supply facilities in smaller towns based on appraisal of business plans that 
include management arrangements, tariff analyses, financial projections, and expansion plans.  
 
=> Develop market center water supplies as part of integrated infrastructure services. The 
Regional Water Boards will support the new IDA-financed Infrastructure Project following 
NWDP2 implementation arrangements.  
 
=> Establish a regulatory framework for financial resource allocation, operational efficiency, 
water quality, and tariff setting and adjustment.  
 
=> Improve sanitation planning and services in towns including on-site systems,sewers, and 
septage treatment/disposal facilities.  
 
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation  
 
=> Build capacity of district assemblies to prepare and implement Rural WASH (water, 
sanitation and hygiene) Programs and local service providers to assist villages to establish and 
sustain community-managed water supply facilities.  
 
=> Establish community-managed water supply systems including hygiene and sanitation 
promotion, and construct boreholes fitted with handpumps and spring catchments.  
 
=> Establish water associations and local operators, and construct rural piped systems serving a 
number of towns and villages, including hygiene and sanitation promotion.  
Page  3
=> Refine policy and legislative framework for improved national planning, resource 
allocation, regulation, and public-private partnerships.  
 
Water Resources Management  
 
=> Prepare enabling legislation for the National Water Policy.  
 
=> Improve water resources management in selected sub-basins including water source 
development, water conservation, and erosion control.  
 
=> Strengthen the Water Resources Management Board and the Ministry of Irrigation and 
Water Development to improve its planning, monitoring and environmental capability.  
 
=> Re-establish a surface and groundwater monitoring system, and a management information 
system.  
 
=> Based on the results of the Integrated Water Resources Management Study of Lake Malawi 
and the Shire River that was carried out under NWDP1, a detailed design of the proposed level 
control structure at Liwonde and a preliminary design of a low flow pumping scheme at the 
mouth of the Shire River, and an independent social/environmental assessment of both facilities 
will be carried out in NWDP2. Depending on the results of these studies, the detailed design of 
the low-flow pumping scheme may be financed under NWDP2.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be located in villages, towns and cities throughout Malawi, and in the Shire 
River downstream of Lake Malawi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project relies heavily on environmental and social management capacity created 
under previous sector specific projects, particularly, the National Water Development Project. In 
addition, local government recipients of funding under this program would receive technical and 
financial assistance to implement the requisite environment and social mitigation and monitoring 
measures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered by the proposed project by the rehabilitation and expansion of water 
supply facilities in villages, town and cities. Since site specific investments will not be identified 
prior to appraisal, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework, which will be disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
In preparing the ESMF, the consultants will ascertain whether any of the planned project 
activities are likely to have negative impacts on natural and/or critical habitats in the project area, 
and make appropriate recommendations.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
There is a remote chance that cultural artifacts may be discovered during excavations related 
to the construction of pipelines and other water facilities. The Environment and Social 
Management Framework will address this issue and construction contracts will specify actions 
that contractors must take if a possible cultural artifact is unearthed.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As the exact project sites are unknown, and several of the planned project activities are 
expected to require land for their implementation, the project will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) which will outline the policies and procedures to be applied in the event that 
land acquisition takes place.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
OP 7.50 is triggered because the proposed project will finance the abstraction of water from 
surface and ground water within the greater Zambezi water basin. Therefore, Malawi?s co-
riparians will be notified as specified by this operational policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
=> The ESMF and RPF will be disclosed in Malawi and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to 
appraisal.  
 
1. Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF):  
 
(launch) November 2006; (complete) February 2007  
 
2. Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF):  
 
(launch) November 2006; (complete) February 2007  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
=> The notification process of riparian states has commenced and will be completed prior to 
appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert J. Roche 
11/16/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
11/16/2006 
Comments:   
