Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/28/2007 
Report No.:  AC2723
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P096336 
Project Name:  Second National Water Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Robert J. Roche 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (75%);Sanitation (25%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (P);Access to 
urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
African Development Bank 
15.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)12.00 
 
EC: European Commission 
20.00 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
20.00 
 
NETHERLANDS, Govt. of THE  (Except for MOFA/Min of Dev. Coop 
30.00 
 
UK, Govt. of 
5.00 
 OPEC 
FUND 
10.00 
 
UN Development Programme 
1.00
123.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Increased access to sustainable water supply and sanitation services for people living in 
cities, towns and market centers, and improved water resources management.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A. Urban Water Supply and Sanitation  
 
A1: Priority investments: Priority investments would include investments in production 
and transmission. For Blantyre, urgent investments will be carried out to solve the 
existing water crisis, including improvement in water intake, increase in 
pumping/treatment capacity, and expansion of off-peak storage and water distribution. 
Page  2
For Lilongwe, construction of the a substitute pipeline, procurement of customer meters, 
and network extension will be carried out.  
 
A2: Piloting of institutional arrangements to serve the low income/peri-urban areas: 
Three main institutional modalities for serving the low income areas will be piloted, 
including; (i) BWB/LWB managing water supply services in low income areas on their 
own; (ii) BWB/LWB outsourcing only the management of water kiosks to local service 
providers; and (iii) BWB/LWB outsourcing the management of the distribution network 
and all outlets (kiosks and household connections) to local service providers.  
 
A3: Development of future water sources: Full feasibility studies and detailed design 
will be carried out for the works for developing new raw water sources for Blantyre and 
Lilongwe in the medium to longer term based on the demand assessment up to year 2025. 
These documents are expected to be used for future projects funded by any source upon 
completion.  
 
A4: Strategic sanitation plan: Blantyre and Lilongwe face significant challenges related 
to sewerage, solid waste, excreta disposal, and drainage, particularly in their low 
income/peri-urban communities. This component would support BWB and LWB to 
implement a comprehensive sanitation program which will deliver both improved access 
to sanitation as well as hygiene promotion through adoption of the ?sanitation marketing? 
approach.  
 
Component B: Town and Market Center Water Supply and Sanitation  
 
B1: Town Water Supply and Sanitation:  Under this component the three RWBs will 
expand water supply facilities and improve operational efficiency in some of their largest, 
fastest-growing towns including Mzuzu, Zomba, Kasungu, Mzimba and Mangochi and in 
other smaller towns. Consultants will be contracted to assist the RWBs to assist them to 
prepare business plans and to refine business plans and to design and supervise 
construction. To qualify for investments business plans must include management 
arrangements, tariffs, financial projections, phased expansion plans and 
social/environmental safeguards. Investment proposals will be appraised by the MIWD 
based on the cost effectiveness of the proposed design, the long term financial viability of 
the scheme, and ability to avoid/mitigate negative social/environmental impacts.  
 
B2: Market Center Water Supply and Sanitation: The project will finance the 
development of community-managed water supplies in market centers. Similar to larger 
towns, to qualify for investments, business plans must be prepared that set out the 
proposed management arrangements, tariffs, financial projections, phased expansion 
plans and social/environmental safeguards. Investment proposals will be appraised by the 
MIWD based on the cost effectiveness of the proposed design, the long term financial 
viability of the scheme, and ability to avoid/mitigate negative social/environmental 
impacts. Consultants will be contracted to plan, design and supervise construction, and in 
parallel assist the local utility managers to operate the system efficiently including billing 
Page  3
and collection, accounting, production and distribution management, and non-revenue 
water reduction.  
 
B3: Groundwater Development:  In many towns water supply services are limited by the 
yield of boreholes. Under this sub-component groundwater sources in towns with supply 
gaps and difficult hydrogeologic conditions will be developed.  
 
B4: Capacity Building: This sub-component will include training and development of 
personnel to improve their job skills to effectively manage their water supply systems. 
Support will be provided to the RWBs in continuing implementation of the HIV/AIDS 
awareness building, promotion of testing, and prevention.  
 
Component C: Water Resources Management  
 
C1: Enabling Legislation for National Water Policy:   The project will develop and 
support the promulgation of enabling legislation to enable the implementation of the 
National Water Policy of 2005, which will provide for the establishment of the required 
institutional framework for proper water resources management in the country.  
 
C2: Water Resources Investment Strategy: An integrated water resources investment 
strategy is urgently needed in Malawi which identifies, through a multi-sector economic 
analysis, the water resources development and infrastructure needs of the country to 
provide the infrastructure platform required for growth in the different water using 
sectors.  
 
C3: Lake Malawi Level Control: The outflow from Lake Malawi has been known to 
cease due to natural lake level fluctuations as it did in 1915 and almost again in 1996.  
The resulting social and environmental impacts would be catastrophic given Malawi?s 
reliance on electricity generated by hydropower dams on the Shire River, the importance 
of the fish catch in Lake Malombe for food, and the dependence of wildlife habitats 
within the national parks and reserves along the Shire to a base flow. Following previous 
feasibility studies, the project will finance a detailed engineering design and independent 
environmental assessments for a level control structure at Liwonde, and a preliminary 
design for a low-flow pumping scheme at the mouth of the Shire River.  
 
Component D. Sector Management  
 
D1: Management of SWAP: MIWD intends to establish a unit within the Ministry that 
can support its technical departments in administrative aspects of a sector investment 
program. It will support the technical departments in investment planning, donor 
coordination, accounting, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, and information 
technology and communications. The unit will provide support functions for all donors 
that are contributing to the National Water Development Program, including the IDA-
financed NWDP2. Over time the Unit would gain the expertise needed to support a 
pooled investment program.  
 
D2: Implementation of a Sustainable Reform Plan: An institutional framework for 
ensuring good governance and accountability for the urban water services would be 
Page  4
established through formation of a regulatory framework, clarification in roles and 
responsibilities of the various sector stakeholders and decision makers, and 
implementation of a delegated management model possibly through a deeper private 
sector contract.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in the urban areas of Lilongwe and Blantyre and in 
towns in the southern, northern and central regions of the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project will not have large-scale, significant environmental and social impacts. 
Likely adverse impacts will include soil and water pollution, soil erosion, loss of land 
and/or economic assets, loss of vegetation, increased generation of waste water, noise, air 
pollution, and traffic accidents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not incur any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts as a result of its 
planned investment activities because appropriate steps have been taken to address 
potential adverse environmental and social impacts at the planning stage.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since this project has been prepared in the context of Malawi's Water Sector Strategy, 
and is building on a previous successful Bank operation, alternatives were not discussed.   
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In an effort to identify, assess and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts of future investments, the Borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF). The borrower's capacity to implement safeguard policy recommendations needs to 
be strengthened. Therefore, the project will support a Training Program for the Training 
of Trainers. Training topics include the screening process, the use of checklists, 
preparation of terms of reference, Malawi's environmental policies and laws as well as 
the Bank's safeguard policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders include the Regional Water Boards, Blantyre and Lilongwe Water 
Boards, District Executive Committe Members in the targeted cities, towns and districts; 
Water User Associations, Local Operators, Ministry of Irrigation and Water 
Development, Ministry of Energy, Mines and Natural Resources/Environmental Affairs 
Department; and villagers.The ESMF was prepared during field visits in consultation 
with officials from the Water Boards, Town and District Assemblies, members of 
fishermen associations, villagers, land officers, and potentially affected persons. They 
viewed the project as very beneficial to their quality of life. Their suggestions have been 
reflected in the ESMF which was disclosed in Malawi on March 19, 2007, and at the 
Bank's Infoshop on March 23, 2007. The ESMF makes provisions for stakeholder 
consultations as part of the environmental and social screening process for sub-projects.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/23/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/23/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert J. Roche 
03/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
03/28/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
03/28/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
03/28/2007 
Comments:   
