Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC2757
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P103773 
Project Name:  Business Environment Strengthening Technical Assistance (BESTAP) 
Task Team Leader:  Constantine Chikosi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTPS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);Export development and competitiveness 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 EUROPARTNERS 
BANK 
3.70
3.70 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The key objective of the project is to support capacity development and investment 
climate reforms as prerequisites for the acceleration of economic growth. One of the 
medium term outcomes in Malawi's CAS is an improved climate for private business. 
This project is one instrument by which the Bank seeks to achieve this outcome. This will 
be achieved by (a) reducing the regulatory burden and costs of doing business,(b) 
improving service delivery to the private sector and access to finance for SMEs, and (c) 
by strengthening support for technical and business management skills, thereby 
improving productivity and competitiveness at the firm level.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have the following four components:  
 
(a) 
Strengthening Private Property Institutions and Business Facilitation:  This 
component will provide support to the efforts being made by GoM to (i) streamline the 
regulatory environment for business (ii) improve access to commercial justice by 
establishing a dedicated Commercial Court (iii) improve service provision and the 
business and land registries.  
Page  2
(b) 
Strengthening Private Sector Development Support Institutions and Services: To 
improve the volume and quality of service delivery to the private sector, and as part of 
the efforts to strengthen the business environment, this component would involve 
building capacity in some key public sector institutions directly supporting the private 
sector: e.g. (i) Malawi Investment and Trade Center (MITC) (ii) establishment of a Public 
Private Partnerships (PPP) unit in the Ministry of Finance (iii) Strengthening the capacity 
of the Department of Private Sector Development (iv) supporting the establishment of a 
sustainable platform for public private dialogue through the Malawi Confederation of 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry.  
 
(c) 
Promoting Access to Finance and Enhancing Productivity of SMEs: This 
component will include (i) IDA participation in promotion of an SME development fund, 
involving the private sector with a contribution by Government (discussions have already 
been initiated with GoM on this) (ii) a matching grant scheme for enterprise development 
through management training and skills development for productivity enhancement and 
(iii)  TA for the merger and restructuring of the Malawi Rural Finance Corporation and 
the Malawi Savings Bank into viable finance institutions.  The provision of business 
development services (BDS) will assist this objective by helping entrepreneurs improve 
their preparation and presentation of bankable SME projects. The component will also 
support micro and small enterprises in improving their level of skills (for entrepreneur 
and workers) through a matching grant or similar fund. Such an instrument would be 
based on the principle of a matching contribution from the entrepreneur or worker 
seeking training, thereby ensuring a degree of commitment to the training, and funds 
disbursed - which could be for a variety of specifically described purposes for activities 
to be funded under this component - would be accompanied by a hand-holding 
component, whereby the fund managers would assist in identifying relevant training 
courses and opportunities.  
 
(d) 
Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support: Under this component 
IDA will provide (i) procurement, financial management, M&E and coordination services 
for the project, (ii) project management and business advisory services for the matching 
grant scheme (MGS) and (iii) operational costs and goods necessary for project 
implementation support and the functioning of MGS business advisory services.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Ministry of Trade and Private Sector Development  
 
Gemini House  
 
Capital City  
 
Lilongwe 3, Malawi   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Constantine Chikosi 
04/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Demba Ba 
04/10/2007 
Comments:   
