Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/05/2006 
Report No.:  AC2242
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P098792 
Project Name:  Malaria Booster Program for Health SWAp 
Task Team Leader:  Ramesh Govindaraj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Health (80%);Central government administration (10%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project Development Objectives:  
 
The project development objective of the Health Sector Support Project has not been 
revised and is to improve the effectiveness, efficiency and quality of the essential health 
care delivery system provided to the poor, women and children through:  
 
a.  Improving human resources management and development.  
 
b.
Ensuring the provision of the Essential Health Package.  
 
c.  Strengthening the essential health package support and  
 
referral systems.  
 
The specific objectives of the Additional Grant are:  
 
a. Monitoring and evaluation systems strengthening by design and implementation of a 
robust and sustainable monitoring and evaluation system that provides regular 
information and feedback to managers and policy makers to improve results-based 
decision-making in the Malawi Health Sector wide Approach.  
Page  2
b.  Augmentation of the existing physical, financial, technical and human capacity at all 
levels of the health system for monitoring and evaluation of malaria and health services 
delivered through the Health Sector wide Approach.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is designed within the context of the original PDOs of the HSSP (see above).  
Specifically, the Additional Grant will contribute to the implementation of the Malawi 
Malaria Strategic Plan 2005-10 by expanding specific activities of the first and third 
components of the HSSP, namely:  
 
(i)     Supporting extension of quality health care coverage by the provision of the 
Essential Health Package (EHP) - through M&E systems strengthening by design and 
implementation of a robust and sustainable M&E system that provides regular 
information and feedback to managers and policy makers to improve results-based 
decision-making in the NMCP and the Malawi Health SWAp; and  
 
(ii) 
Strengthening essential health package support and referral systems by 
augmentation of the existing physical, financial, technical and human capacity at all 
levels of the health system for monitoring and evaluation of malaria and health services 
delivered through the SWAp.  
 
Component 1 
–
Design and implementation of a robust and sustainable monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) system.  This component will: (a) improve the management of malaria 
control interventions; (b) use malaria outcomes as a ‘tracer’ or proxyindicator for 
monitoring changes in the quality and coverage of the delivery of the essential health 
package; and (c) strengthen the monitoring, and hence the management, of the Health 
SWAp, as a whole.  It will include substantial support to the HMIS (and HMIS Unit), so 
that it evolves from a system that concentrates on routine health data collection to one 
that coordinates data collection and analysis from all sources (including non-HIS data) 
for management decision making for all levels, identifies additional key indicators and 
their data sources, assesses the quality of services, manages the timeliness and quality of 
data, and uses data for decision-making to promote institutional strengthening.  
 
At the central level this work will involve:  (a)(i) reorganizing the present HMIS Unit 
into a Monitoring, Evaluation and Research Unit (MERU) with the ability to commission, 
coordinate, and supervise all monitoring, evaluation and research relevant to the SWAp; 
and (ii) consolidating and disseminating the collected information and strengthening the 
ability of the MOH and the districts to use M&E data for policy formulation, program 
planning and resource mobilization; (b) assuring that available resources are effectively 
used to measure key outcomes of the malaria program and health outcomes of other 
programs, for example Integrated Management of Childhood Illness IMCI and Safe 
Motherhood; and (c) conduct selected studies and surveys, including impact evaluations, 
to assess key outcome indicators of the NMCP and SWAp which will be used to inform 
management and policy decisions. At the district level, activities will strengthen 
community and facility level data collection, support district M&E teams and the current 
Page  3
zonal and district review system, and enable supportive supervision for M&E, placing 
emphasis on integrated data analysis for management decisions.  
 
Component 2 - Augmentation of the existing physical, financial, technical and human 
capacity for M&E.  This component is divided into two subcomponents:  
 
2.1 Central 
operations 
–
will strengthen institutional capacity for implementation of 
an effective M&E system for SWAp using key malaria outcome indicators as tracers. 
This includes comprehensive analysis of HMIS resource gaps (physical, financial 
technical and human), extension of technical support, piloting of information technology 
tools, planning and phased building of staff capacity. The logistics management 
information system (LMIS), Health Facility Assessments and other Quality Assurance 
procedures will be supported under this subcomponent.  Furthermore, the capacity of the 
MOH to conduct impact evaluation will be strengthened.   
 
2.2 
District operations – will strengthen district and zonal capacity for an effective 
integrated decentralized M&E response for malaria through the SWAp.  It will include 
preparation of effective district M&E technical leadership, comprehensive staff training 
at all levels (including Village Health Committees and Health Surveillance Assistants), 
adaptation, distribution and use of appropriate data management tools, provision of 
additional equipment for operational support and harmonization of data collection 
activities of  HMIS, Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR), human 
resources for health, reproductive and child health and disease programs.  
 
For further details on the components, see the Results Framework in Annex 1.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Malawi nationwide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTEG) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Since this is additional financing to an existing project as part of which the safeguards 
requirements have been met and documents disclosed. Redisclosure is not required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
N/A 
Page  5
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ramesh Govindaraj 
04/06/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
04/06/2006 
Comments:   
