Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2014 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Malawi 
Project ID: P098792 
Project Name: Malaria Booster Program for Health SWAp 
Task Team Leader: Ramesh Govindaraj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Health (80%);Central government administration (10%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project is expected to contribute to the implementation of the Malawi Malaria 
Strategic Plan through an expansion of two of the three components of the HSSP, i.e. a) Ensuring 
the provision of the EHP (through M&E systems strengthening), and b) Strengthening the 
support and referral systems (through M&E capacity building) relevant to this package of 
services.  
 
Accordingly, the sub-PDOs for the proposed Additional Financing, consistent with the HSSP 
PDOs, are:  
 
1. 
Improving management and decision-making in the Malawi Health SWAp through the 
design and implementation of a robust and sustainable monitoring and evaluation system that 
provides regular information and feedback to policy makers on: (a) the adequacy of resources 
for, and optimal approaches to, delivering specific malaria control interventions; and (b) the 
effectiveness and quality of health service delivery (particularly the delivery of the EHP) through 
the SWAp, using malaria and malaria outcomes as “tracers”; and  
Page  2
2. 
Strengthening the physical, financial, technical and human capacity at all levels of the 
health system to monitor the delivery of quality malaria control and health services through the 
SWAp.  
 
Principal outcome(s):  
 
•
Improved health M&E systems, including effective demand side assessments, enabling 
the effective monitoring of the health sector SWAp and the NMCP.  
 
•
Enhanced capacity at all levels of the health system to undertake M&E and amend the 
SWAp implementation plans (including the NMCP), as appropriate, using the M&E results.  
 
•
Improved monitoring and evaluation of the malaria control program and of specific 
malaria control interventions within the context of the SWAP, including the identification of 
technical, human and financial gaps in the malaria response, and the optimal ways to deliver 
individual malaria interventions (ITNs, treatment, etc.).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The World Bank’s Malaria Booster Program is focused on outcomes, and provides flexibility to 
countries to define the best approach for supporting their respective national malaria control 
programs. In Malawi, there is a consensus that the Booster program can make a significant 
contribution to the monitoring and evaluation of malaria interventions, and of the overall SWAp, 
and that this represents the best use of the available IDA funds. To reiterate, then, the proposed 
project will be in the form of additional financing to the ongoing World Bank financed HSSP, 
which supports the development of an essential health package of services through a sector-wide 
approach. The project will expand the scope of two components of the existing HSSP project, 
namely:  
 
•
Component 1: Delivery of the Essential Health Package, which will be expanded, inter 
alia, through the strengthening of the M&E systems for the SWAp, including both supply side 
and demand side assessments; and  
 
•
Component 2: Health Sector Support and Referral Systems, which will be expanded 
through the strengthening of the central and district level M&E capacities, which are expected to 
lead to improved planning, budgeting and delivery of the EHP (including the malaria control 
interventions) through the sectoral SWAp.  
 
Specifically, the Malaria Booster Program will scale up the HSSP’s (and SWAp’s)impact and 
development effectiveness by strengthening M&E, as a means to scaling up malaria 
interventions and realizing the desired malaria targets and broader health sector outcomes. The 
core elements for the proposed project are: (i) Strengthening the M&E systems for malaria 
control and the delivery of health services through the SWAp; (ii) Assessing, through an impact 
evaluation, the extent and appropriateness of the integration of the national malaria program into 
the SWAp; (iii) Identifying and addressing technical, human and financial gaps for effective 
malaria control; (iv) Capacity building of central and district level health staff in M&E; and (v) 
Provision of TA/support to resolve bottlenecks in the delivery of malaria/health services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Malawi nationwide   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project is additional financing to the existing Health Sector Support Project. The safeguard 
requirements under the original project have all been fulfilled. Additionally the project will only 
support monitoring and evaluation and will not finance any additional malaria control 
interventions that would require additional safeguard measurements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ramesh Govindaraj 
02/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
02/06/2006 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
