Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3066 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/14/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Maldives 
Project ID: P104743 
Project Name: Maldives Pension Administration Project 
Task Team Leader: Robert J. Palacios 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Compulsory pension and unemployment insurance (50%);General public 
administration sector (30%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme: Other social protection and risk management (P);Social safety nets (P);Health 
system performance (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
14.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The broad development objectives of the project are to support the development of a new 
pension system that will provide old age income security to the population of the Maldives. More 
specifically, the project will  
 
?
Develop a financially sustainable pension scheme for providing old age income security  
 
?
Provide a safety net and alleviate poverty for the old or near old who will not have been 
covered by the contributory pension scheme  
 
?
Develop an efficient mechanism for expanding pension and other social protection 
programs to cover private sector workers in the long run (in line with the stated intentions of the 
GOM)   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed activities under this project will reflect the objectives stated above and would 
cover the following three components:   
Page  2
Component A:  Technical assistance and capacity building for the new Pension Authority 
(US$1.5 million)  
 
The activities in this component fall into two broad categories:  
 
?
Policy analysis/legal drafting  
 
?
Institution and capacity building  
 
Component B: Reduction of unfunded pension liabilities through buyout of past service liability 
(US$12 million)  
 
As the old pension scheme for civil servants is replaced, transitional provisions that convert 
pension credits accumulated under the old scheme will be implemented.  The plan is to convert 
these unfunded obligations of government to workers into special bonds that would be deposited 
into the new, individual accounts of all workers under age 65 to be redeemed upon retirement.  
This would imply a multi-decade transition that would come to an end only by the time that the 
youngest active civil servant at the time of the reform finally retired.  The objective of this 
component is to reduce these liabilities and to shorten the period of transition through a ?buy-
out? whereby past service is compensated directly through a deposit into the individual accounts 
of younger civil servants.  
 
Component C: Public Awareness Campaign (US$0.5 million)  
 
Activities under this component will consist of two primary elements: (a) design and 
implementation of the overall public information campaign, and (b) planning of the efficient 
communication campaign with members of the new pension system.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be implemented throughout the Maldives. No resettlement or land acquisition 
will take place.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower?s institutional capacity is limited.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/30/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert J. Palacios 
08/08/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
08/07/2007 
Comments:  Project is transferred to SASHD for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
08/08/2007 
Comments:  This is approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
