Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3153 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/26/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Maldives 
Project ID: P108078 
Project Name: Maldives Environmental Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Richard Damania 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 10, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (50%);Central government administration (50%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Biodiversity (S);Climate change 
(S);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary objective of the project is to build capacity for environmental protection and 
enhance the level of mainstreaming of environmental management with development activities 
in the Maldives by (i) strengthening environmental management skills of government staff and 
other stakeholders, (ii) building a sound knowledge base to better address the environmental 
risks facing the country and (iii) mitigating the immediate and visible threats to nature-based 
tourism arising from the growing quantity of solid waste that has accompanied economic 
prosperity and tourism.  Together these will contribute to improving the long-term sustainability 
and resilience of the tourism-dependent growth profile of the economy.  
 
Specifically, the project would achieve the following objectives:  
 
a) 
Build and strengthen the capacity of relevant institutions to formulate and carry out 
effective environmental protection and regulatory programs suited to the needs of the Maldives;  
 
b)
Design and implement a sustainable, community-based solid waste recycling and 
resource recovery program in selected islands which will entail the establishment of one or more 
Page  2
Regional Waste Disposal Facilities (RWDFs) and Island Waste Management Centers (IWMCs) 
(the number and location of which will be likely determined during project preparation) to 
reduce the risk of contamination from solid wastes over a 20-year horizon (See Note 1) ;  
 
c) 
Based on a strategic analysis of the status and protective role of the coral reefs, build the 
capacity of the Maldives to diagnose and improve conditions of the coral reefs surrounding the 
key atolls of the archipelago and initiate pilot activities to protect these from multiple 
hazards;and  
 
d)
Conduct a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) for the Maldives with special 
focus on tourism (its impacts and vulnerabilities), climate change and adaptation strategies.  
 
Further details will be defined and adjustments made during preparation.  
 
Note (1): The number and nature of interventions will be identified later on in preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would have three components: (1) a Strategic Environmental Assessment 
of the key risks with the objective of providing baseline information for strengthened 
environmental management; (2) capacity building for environmental management; and (3) a 
regional solid waste management program.  
 
Component 1: Strategic Environmental Assessment of Key Environmental Risks and 
Strengthening Environmental Management Systems: (US$ 3.5 million)  
 
The project would support a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) as an approach to 
environmental impact risk assessment that looks beyond specific projects and examines the 
environmental consequences of programs and policies.  It would consider the cumulative effect 
of multiple projects such as hotels, landfills or other facilities that may have limited impact 
individually, but significant impacts in the aggregate. It would assess the effectiveness of current 
management systems and identify strengths and gaps.  It would bring together stakeholders in the 
development process, and take a medium- and long-term approach to decision making.  The 
assessment would help to select the most appropriate regulatory model within the given context 
and establish systems to ensure proper accountability and environmental stewardship.  Growing 
public awareness of environmental problems and the particular phase of development in the 
Maldives (that is, achieving middle-income country status in the near future) make the SEA an 
appropriate instrument at this time.  Inputs to the SEA and documents resulting from it would be 
used as the basis for an educational campaign aimed to raise public awareness about 
environmental risks and the urgent need to develop solutions (refer to item c below).  
 
The assessment would focus on the following aspects:  
 
a) 
An analysis of the current and future impacts of climate change and an assessment of 
alternatives for adapting to these changes. A broad level climate risk assessment commissioned 
by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has recently been undertaken at a wide 
geographic scale (See Note 2). However, management of climate risks calls for more fine-
grained assessments based on site-specific downscaling.  Accordingly, the SEA would support 
more detailed island or atoll-level risk assessments with a focus on the inhabited islands.  This 
Page  3
information would be used in guiding the design and location of infrastructure and investments 
and is of particular relevance for identifying safe islands for population consolidation.  
 
b)
A
coral reef protection program is important for sustaining growth because of the 
strategic importance of reefs as both an economic and an environmental asset.  The assessment 
would aim to provide essential baseline information that is needed for improved marine 
management.  This would include benthic habitat mapping of priority coral reefs, assessments of 
reef health and the causes (if any) of degradation such as physical damage, ocean temperature 
rise, hyper nutrition, or others.  This should be completed within two years, and as data become 
available, the information would be integrated in the current  Coastal and Reef Management 
System.  Of particular importance would be a study of the tradeoffs involved to strengthen the 
decision-making process. Possible measures to be supported under the project could include the 
identification of hotspots and areas at risk, protected areas, regulatory needs, approaches to 
reducing dive pressure on reefs through regulation and self-regulation, and diversion of marine 
sewage outfalls away from reefs.  
 
c) 
An environmental education program/communication campaign aimed at catalyzing 
support for environmental good-practices and raising awareness.  This would include decision 
makers, tourists and local inhabitants and would aim to explain the benefits of sound 
environmental practices and to discourage inappropriate activities.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building for Environmental Management: (US$ 3.5 million)  
 
The Ministry of Energy, Environment and Water (MEEW) has a broad mandate, but its 
capacity to manage growing environmental pressures does not match the needs of a fragile 
environment on which much of the economy depends. Support for capacity building would need 
to take into account the fact that it would be difficult to build a large, permanent cadre of 
environmental specialists. The stress should be on developing (i) a core of competent specialists 
and generalists in MEEW and other ministries (e.g. fisheries and tourism) to guide the 
environmental assessment and decision-making process; (ii) a cadre of service providers to carry 
out monitoring and field surveillance activities making full use of modern technology to carry 
out their job, and (iii) a network of private citizens and stakeholders (e.g. fishermen, hotel and 
dive operators, boat operators and others) with the training needed to serve as the "eyes" and 
"ears" of the Ministry.  
 
Project support would be aimed at human resource development programs integrated with 
action programs already prioritized by the government.  Training would be oriented primarily 
around these objectives and linked as much as possible with action programs both in the public 
and private sectors.  Training would consist of a combination of: (i) in-country formal training, 
(ii) informal in-service training with specialist trainers brought to help develop human resources 
and (iii) specialization with graduate or post-graduate courses abroad financed through a stream 
of funding for overseas training and education, and (iv) twinning programs focused on 
environmental management, coastal/marine resources management and solid waste management. 
A
certification program would be designed and put in place and the existence of a cadre of 
experts will be verified by the number of people attaining certification.  
 
Component 3: Regional Solid Waste Management Program: (US$ 5 million)  
 
Page  4
Solid waste remains a highly visible environmental problem that, left untended to, could 
undermine the reputation of Maldives as a pristine tourist location. The SWM component would 
aim at developing and implementing a regional program in line with the National Solid Waste 
Management Policy which is to be introduced by the Government shortly.  The proposed 
program will be a regional pilot in selected atolls that will be identified during project 
implementation.  It will build upon the experience and lessons of ongoing SWM activities of the 
Bank?s Post-Tsunami Emergency Relief and Reconstruction project and those of other donors 
(ADB, Red Cross and UNDP)(See Note 3).   Two important lessons have emerged from these 
operations.  First, there is a need for programs to show sensitivity to local conditions, which vary 
widely across atolls.  Second, strong consultation and community buy-in remains the key to a 
successful operation.  
 
The primary focus would be in regions that are currently underserved by waste management 
facilities.  Community participation will be an integral element of solid waste management at the 
island level to ensure sustainability of the system.  Alternatives to the current systems of 
collection, transport and disposal would be examined from the perspective of their feasibility and 
sustainability.  Preliminary studies will use Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) techniques to 
understand the social structure and physical layout of communities, patterns of leadership and 
relations with formal and informal island networks, economic activities, transportation, current 
patterns of waste disposal, willingness to pay for improved SWM, entry points for community 
mobilization, and the kinds of incentives to which individuals and communities are likely to 
respond. Community-based recycling and resource recovery will be promoted at IWMCs in 
order to reduce the volume and pollution potential of the residual waste requiring transport to 
regional disposal facilities.  RWDFs would be located in uninhabited islands taking account of 
environmental risks.  The facilities will be designed and constructed to reduce the risk of 
contamination from solid wastes over a 20-year horizon.  Special attention would be paid to 
medical and toxic wastes which would require special handling and management.  
 
The project would likely finance: (i) the construction of IWMCs in participating islands, (ii) 
collection equipment and transport facilities of waste within islands, (iii) infrastructure for 
community-based composting for the organic fraction of the waste, (iv) transfer and transport 
facilities for the residual waste requiring final disposal, and (v) the construction of one or more 
RWDFs, aimed at helping to solve the growing SWM problems in a long-term sustainable 
fashion. An appropriate cost-recovery system and the right mix of public and private 
management would be a key objective of this component.  This component will complement the 
European Union-financed South Ari Atoll Waste Management initiative ongoing under the 
Bank?s Post-Tsunami Emergency Relief and Reconstruction project currently under 
implementation that involves establishing solid waste centers on 16 different islands and a 
regional disposal facility.  
 
Note (2): UNDP 2006. Developing a Disaster Risk Profile for Maldives. (3) The Bank project 
has benefited from a European Community Grant which is financing, among other things, 
technical assistance, civil works and provision of equipment for the establishment of Island 
Waste Management Centers on selected sites and capacity building/training to enhance 
operational and management capacity to carry out environmental monitoring and reporting.   
 
Page  5
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project would have components with country-wide interventions.  The SEA would 
seek to identify key environmental risks and strengthen environmental management systems 
throughout the Maldives. The environmental capacity building component would have a similar 
reach.  On the other hand, the solid waste management component would be limited to a specific 
region.  Final selection of the region would be made during implementation, but it is likely that 
this component would cover selected atolls in the Northern part of the Maldives that are not 
presently served by waste management services.  Since the soils in the Maldives are 
predominantly coral sand, permeability is high.  The islands also have a thin lens of freshwater in 
groundwater aquifers, which are highly vulnerable to contamination and are known to be 
contaminated and salinized in many areas of the country.  The soil and groundwater situation 
would require special attention to prevent contamination when designing IWMCs on the islands 
and the RWDFs.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While the legislative and regulatory framework for environmental management in the Maldives 
are satisfactory, environmental monitoring and enforcement are both weak.  There are few staff 
with tertiary level educational qualifications in the environment and natural resource 
management in the Ministry of Energy, Environment and Water (MEEW) and experience with 
modern techniques of environmental management is limited.  The proposed project would 
actively support capacity building in environmental management in the country.  However, 
considering the constraints in tertiary education in the Maldives, it would be difficult to build and 
retain a large permanent cadre of environmental specialists in the country.  Therefore, the project 
would place emphasis on developing (i) a core of competent specialists and generalists in 
MEEW and other ministries (e.g. fisheries and tourism) to guide the environmental assessment 
and decision-making process; (ii) a cadre of service providers to carry out monitoring and field 
surveillance activities making full use of modern technology to carry out their job, and (iii) a 
network of private citizens and stakeholders (e.g. fishermen, hotel and dive operators, boat 
operators and others) with the training needed to serve as the "eyes" and "ears" of the Ministry. 
An integrated system with civil society participation would serve as a valuable complement to 
improve regulation, monitoring and enforcement of environmental standards.  
 
All project components that may have adverse environmental impacts would be subject to 
proper environmental analysis and assessments to ensure that the adverse environmental impacts 
are minimized.  Considering that the regulatory agencies are located in Mal?, the project would 
ensure that civil society and the island administration will play a key role in assuring that 
environmental impacts from project activities are kept to a minimum.  It is anticipated that at the 
end of the project period, there will be competent environmental professionals at MEEW and its 
associated agencies so that compliance with environmental guidelines and standards will be 
improved throughout the country.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSEN) 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDN) 
 
Page  6
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Overall, the proposed project activities would result in improved environmental management 
in the Maldives.  However, a Safeguards Category of A is proposed for the project since the 
component on the Regional Solid Waste Management Program would involve community-based 
waste recycling and resource recovery facilities in the islands which could involve composting of 
the organic fraction of the waste as well as the establishment of regional waste disposal facilities 
for residual municipal solid waste, medical and toxic wastes disposal.  The construction and 
operation of these facilities could have environmental impacts.  An Environmental Assessment 
(EA) will be conducted in accordance with OP/BP 4.01 to identify and mitigate potential adverse 
environmental impacts.  
 
Based on the lessons learned from the existing Island Waste Management Centers 
(IWMCs), community participation is essential for effective operation and long term 
sustainability of the IWMCs.  Community consultations and their involvement in selection of 
recycling and resource recovery activities at the IWMCs have been shown to be the only way to 
assure effective management of these facilities.  Consequently the specific activities to be 
undertaken at IWMCs would be decided by the involved communities during project 
implementation.  The type of regional disposal facilities (i.e., the level of engineering needed for 
containment of pollution) and specific locations can be decided only after the activities 
undertaken at the IWMCs have been selected by the respective island communities.  Therefore, 
an environmental assessment cannot be carried out during project preparation.  A Strategy and 
Framework for Environmental and Social Safeguards Management (the Framework) will be 
prepared in lieu of a project-specific EA.  This will serve as a road map and template for 
undertaking project specific EAs once the specific works have been identified.  Scoping of the 
social and environmental issues and problems, as well as potential mitigation measures, would 
be included in the Framework.  The Framework will also contain precise time-bound action 
plans to assure compliance and articulate the criterion and due-diligence processes for the 
selection of target areas for the regional disposal facilities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The strategic assessment of the Coral Reefs may identify urgent rehabilitation works 
requiring project support.  This would trigger OP/BP 4.04, Natural Habitats, depending on the 
specific activities that would be carried out.  Since specific interventions to protect the coral reefs 
will be known only after the strategic assessment, the Framework will provide a template to 
undertake an environmental assessment and preparation of Environmental Management Plans 
(EMPs) for these interventions as well.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
While it is not anticipated that there will be any involuntary resettlement under the proposed 
project, a final determination of whether this policy needs to be triggered will be made during 
project preparation   
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/29/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Framework -February 10, 2008. 
Public Disclosure of the Framework - February 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Damania 
10/11/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/18/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
10/26/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
