Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2865 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P105155 
Project Name: Agricultural Services and Producer Organizations Project 
Task Team Leader: Olivier Durand 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%);Crops (15%);Agricultural marketing and trade (15%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed additional financing will allow for scaling-up institutional reforms successfully 
promoted during the project, especially in terms of improving agronomic research performance, 
promoting demand-driven extension services and empowering producer organizations.  Without 
changing its development objectives and its implementation modalities, the project will expand 
its activities in the field of technology transfer to achieve more tangible results and increase its 
impact on the ground.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is organized in four components: (A) reforming public services and reorganizing the 
Ministry of Rural Development; (B) improving the efficiency, relevance and sustainability of the 
national agricultural research system; (C) improving the efficiency, relevance and sustainability 
of the national agricultural extension system; (D) empowering producers and promoting their 
organizations.  
 
Page  2
The objective of the proposed additional financing is to scale up project achievements beyond 
institutional reforms, promoted so far towards demand-driven and accountable agricultural 
services, by increasing and broadening ASPOP impact in terms of technology transfers to 
producers.  The emphasis will thus be put on consolidating and expanding technology transfer 
mechanisms between research, extension and POs.  This is consistent with the ASPOP 
development objective, especially the sub-objectives of "consolidating and expanding the 
technology generation and transfer system on a demand-driven basis".  
 
Technology transfer activities will target the following specific areas: seed production (potatoes 
plant multiplication); livestock (goat milk production); small scale village irrigation; water 
management (vegetable production); productivity increase (cowpeas production); post-harvest 
operation (small scale processing and improved storage techniques).  Innovations will concern 
production techniques, water management practices and post-harvest technologies used at the 
farm level, as well as public equipments, technologies and infrastructure managed by producer 
associations or water user associations.  Financing mechanisms and implementation 
arrangements set up by ASPOP will be used to confirm their relevance and efficacy. This will 
contribute to strengthen research/extension/POs linkages for a better and broader technology 
dissemination.  
 
The additional financing will also give the opportunity to consolidate key activities specific to 
each component.  The Ministerial component (A) will complete the design of public services 
reorganization, including the redistribution of human resources among regional and central 
levels.  Then implementation will be undertaken in the framework of the next PRSC.  The 
research component (B) will complete some key strategic and demand-driven research programs 
and will strengthen its regional collaborative programs through an initial contribution to the West 
African Agricultural Productivity Project (WAAPP).  The extension component (C) will expand 
the test for the transfer of extension activities to private operators and will develop new 
approaches of on-farm field trials as a contribution to strengthen research/extension/POs 
linkages.  
 
The producer organizations component (D) will move forward with capacity-building for 
farmer leaders by supporting the elaboration of 3-year and multi-donor action plans for regional 
agricultural chambers.  The financing mechanism for capacity-building projects for grassroots 
POs will be renewed but eligibility criteria will be revised to stimulate the preparation of more 
impacting, income-generating and productivity-oriented projects.  New capacity building 
programs will be developed to support national POs, especially the newly formed cotton 
producer cooperatives in the perspective of the cotton sector privatization.  
 
No major changes would be introduced but the proposed activities will initiate major changes 
that will be introduced in the design of a future operation (transfer of support to public services 
into budgetary support; consolidation of the different demand-driven financing mechanisms into 
a
national agricultural development fund, etc.). Implementation arrangements will remain 
unchanged.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a national program.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Mali is familiar with the Bank's Safeguard Policies, based on experience 
with other Bank-funded projects, in which the Government successfully met the safeguard  
 
requirements. In the agriculture and rural development sector, the Ministry of Agriculture has 
acquired a sound experience in environmental impact assessment and pest management plan with 
three major Bank-funded operations dealing with environmental issues and agricultural 
productivity: the National Rural Infrastructure Project, the ASPOP and more recently the 
Agricultural Competitiveness and Diversification Project.  
 
The appraisal mission will review the existing Environment management Plan, including its 
Pest Management Plan, to check if it is still appropriate and up to date. Its application so far by 
the Ministry of Agriculture and producer organizations will be assessed as well. If needed, 
recommendations will be provided for a better monitoring and a strict application of safeguards 
policies as the project will expand its technology transfer activities and productive investments.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy will be triggered due to the implementation of sub-projects for productive 
investments in the framework of technology transfer activities. The existing Environmental 
Management Framework prepared for ASPOP will be reviewed during appraisal to confirm if it 
is still appropriate and recommendations will be formulated to ensure strict application during 
the implementation of this additional financing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
As part of the Environment Management Plan mentioned above, the ASPOP has a Pest 
Management Plan in place. The appraisal will review the implementation status of this plan and 
will provide if needed recommendations to ensure its strict application during the additional 
financing period as the project will expand its activities in the field of technology transfer and 
small scale productive investment projects.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/02/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An environment and social impact assessment report was disclosed in the Infoshop on 
January 26, 2001 and published in Mali for public disclosure on February 13, 2001. This 
report is still relevant, no revision will be made. However, a review and assessment of the 
effective implementation of the existing safeguard instrument, namely the  Environmental 
and Social Management Framework assorted with a Pest Management Plan, will be carried 
out before the effectiveness of this additional financing.  The results and lessons learned from 
this evaluation are intended to help implement safeguard measures better.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier Durand 
03/30/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/30/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
03/30/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
