Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC2902
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mali 
Project ID:  P105155 
Project Name:  Agricultural Services and Producer Organizations Project 
Task Team Leader:  Olivier Durand 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 6, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%);Crops (15%);Agricultural marketing and trade (15%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.80
3.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the ASPOP project is to establish an institutional framework conducive 
to the efficient delivery of agricultural services to producers, by supporting the 
decentralization of core public services, promoting private sector participation and by 
empowering producer organizations.  
 
The proposed Additional Financing would allow for the scaling-up of institutional 
reforms undertaken successfully during Project implementation so far, particularly in 
terms of improvement of agronomic research performance, promotion of demand-driven 
extension services, and empowerment of producer organizations.  The Project would 
expand its activities in the field of technology transfer to achieve more tangible results 
and increase its impact on the ground.   
 
3. Project Description 
The rationale for the proposed Additional Financing is the need to scale-up Project 
technology transfer activities based on research results and institutional reforms 
implemented by ASPOP.  This Additional Financing would thus allow the Project to 
increase its impacts on the ground while consolidating linkages established between 
research institutions, extension services and producer organizations.  This is consistent 
Page  2
with the ASPOP development objective and its sub-objective of "consolidating and 
expanding the technology generation and transfer system on a demand-driven basis".  
 
The original Project design - with four components - remains unchanged. However, the 
Additional Financing will introduce technology transfer scale-up initiatives to increase 
the scope of Project activities and increase impacts on the ground.  The proposed 
initiatives aim at translating into concrete outcomes all the efforts put so far in 
institutional reforms and capacity building. The idea is to demonstrate how the 
collaboration developed between research, extension and POs can now translate into 
tangible improvement of productivity and farmers' incomes by disseminating new 
technologies developed by research institutions. Based on producer interests and research 
products available and ready for dissemination, the five following areas have been 
selected: (i) biotechnologies, (ii) livestock and poultry production, (iii) improved 
varieties, (iv) water management, and (v) crop diversification.  
 
ASPOP capacity building activities will be pursued to consolidate institutional 
development. Linkages between research, extension and POs are now stronger and 
operational but still require continuous efforts to enhance further more research 
performances, contractual arrangements with private providers of agricultural advisory 
services, and POs empowerment to help them maintain a fair and constructive dialogue 
with other stakeholders.  
 
Beyond technology transfer scale-up initiatives, activities to be conducted under each 
component have been appraised as follows:  
 
-
Component 1 - Public services reforms: The first year of implementation is crucial to 
undertake the necessary studies and audits to finalize the new organizational framework 
of the four Ministries at the central and decentralized levels. Implementation will then be 
transferred to budgetary support as it involves core public functions and not directly 
productive investments. The Additional Financing will give the opportunity for the 
agricultural sector to undertake a public expenditure review and to elaborate a medium 
term expenditure framework.  This component includes the financing of the project 
coordination unit which is responsible, under the direct supervision of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, for financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, as well 
as coordination between components.  
 
-
Component 2 - National Agricultural Research System: Research institutions need also 
to maintain their medium and long term strategic research programs to be able to monitor 
agricultural evolutions, to maintain collections of varieties, to develop new technologies 
or to answer farmers' preoccupations.  As the same time, the demand-driven research 
program financing mechanism will be renewed to sustain collaborations between 
researchers and farmers, and promote new innovations in rural areas.  
 
-
Component 3 - National Agricultural Extension System: This component will mainly 
finance the execution, under performance-based contracts, of extension activities required 
to the achievement of the proposed technology-transfer scale-up initiatives. 
Page  3
Implementation modalities will continue to use the various contractual approaches with 
extension agents or private providers.  
 
-
Component 4 - Producer organizations: Specific capacity-building activities are still 
required to ensure producer organizations stay involved and increase their weight in 
decision-making mechanisms regarding identification and elaboration of research and 
extension programs. Along with the PCU, their role will be crucial in ensuring proper 
coordination in the execution of the technology transfer scale-up initiatives.  The scope of 
matching grants for micro-projects initiated and implemented by POs will be expanded to 
promote a larger scale of innovations, especially to match the technology transfer scale 
up initiatives.  This will cover production techniques, water management practices and 
post-harvest technologies used at the farm level, as well as public equipments, small-
scale irrigation and infrastructure managed by producer associations or water-user 
associations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project interventions are nationwide and will focus on areas suitable for rainfed 
agricultural practices.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The original project was classified as a Category B project and was subject to an 
environmental impact assessment. Additional activities under the proposed additional 
financing will not raise the project category. They will be undertaken based on guidelines 
and recommendations set by the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
which includes also a Pest Management Plan. Project implementation will not result in 
any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect or long term impacts are foreseen   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No other alternatives are envisaged as no adverse impacts are foreseen. On the contrary, 
project activities will include the dissemination of good agricultural practices and will 
pay attention to sustainable land management.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
This environmental impact assessment is still relevant and no revision will be made. A 
review of the effective implementation of the existing safeguards instrument, namely the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework combined with a Pest Management 
Plan, has been carried out during the appraisal of this Additional Financing.  The results 
and lessons learned from this evaluation will be used to implement more efficiently the 
safeguards measures during the Additional Financing period and will serve as guidance 
for the next operation, whose scope will be broader and more focused on productivity 
increase. Additional capacity building activities will be undertaken to strengthen national 
skills in carrying out environment impact assessment both in public services, especially 
the Ministry of Environment, and in the private sectors, with a particular attention to 
professional associations and producer organizations. Costs related to supervision of 
mitigation measures by the Ministry of Environment have been included in the project 
budget. It will thus be able to further develop its supervision at the regional en local 
levels.  
 
The Government of Mali is familiar with the Bank's Safeguard Policies, based on 
experience with other Bank-funded projects, in which the Government successfully met 
the safeguard requirements. In the agriculture and rural development sector, the Ministry 
of Agriculture has acquired a sound experience in environmental impact assessment and 
pest management plan with three major Bank-funded operations dealing with 
environmental issues and agricultural productivity: the National Rural Infrastructure 
Project, the ASPOP and more recently the Agricultural Competitiveness and 
Diversification Project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Ministry of Agriculture is the overall entity in charge or coordinating project 
implementation. Implementing agencies include research institutions, extension services 
and producer organizations. Consultation among project partners will be done in the 
framework of the steering committee, which includes the Ministry of Environment as a 
full member for compliance with safeguard policies.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/26/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/07/2001 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/26/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/07/2001 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  6
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier Durand 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
 
Comments:   
