Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2007 
Report No.:  AC2829
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mali 
Project ID:  P090075 
Project Name:  Second Transport Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Siele Silue 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (15%);Ports, 
waterways and shipping (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Other environment and natural resources management (S);HIV/AIDS (S);Injuries and 
non-communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.60
11.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to provide better access and transport services to 
rural and urban communities especially by improving key rural infrastructure in Mali and 
urban transport infrastructure in Bamako.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project comprises three components: the first component aims at improving 
rural access to promote growth-supporting rural and agro-industrial business activities. 
The second component will help improve key urban transport infrastructure in downtown 
Bamako. The third component will address and include all activities related to capacity 
building, institutional strengthening, environment and social management; and project 
implementation, evaluation and monitoring.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will intervene nationwide as follows:  
 
Page  2
Earth roads: Two earth roads will be constructed: (i) The Kita-Bafoulabe road is located 
in the West of Mali along the railroad from Bamako to the border of Senegal and (ii) the 
Bandagara- Douentza road is located in the Center of Mali.  
 
Rural roads: The PST2 rural roads are located in two areas of Mali: The first one is the 
cotton areas of Sikasso, Segou and Bamako where CMDT (Compagnie Malienne de 
Developpement des Textiles) has its activities. The second one is located in the South and 
West of Mali between Bamako, Kita and the border of Guinea. 400 km of rural roads will 
be identified anywhere in the country according to specific criteria agreed upon before 
the project appraisal.  
 
River infrastructure: A study was commissioned to identify suitable sites along the 
Niger River in consultation with river transport operators (pinnassiers), and the 
population beneficiaries. The activities consist of small reconstructions of wharves on 
existing sites at Dioro, Konna, Diafarabe and Tenekou to load and unload people and 
goods. There will be no dredging involved.  
 
Urban transport: The bus lane will be located on Boulevard du Peuple, which is a large 
artery in Bamako. One existing lane currently used by cars and other vehicles will be 
reserved to buses and minibuses. The circular road will be constituted by a series of 
sections of existing roads surrounding the center of Bamako.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Road works may impact on soil, water, air quality, flora and fauna. Rural roads 
improvement may impact on wild flora and fauna given the possibility that some roads 
lead to national parks or reserved areas. Street vendors and other road encroachers will be 
Page  3
displaced by the construction works for the Urban transport component. There are 
potential impacts resulting from civil works on the rich cultural and historical heritage in 
the road network, particularly along the Bandiagara Douentza Road.  
 
OP 4.04  has not been triggered at the appraisal stage ISDS but is part of infrastructure 
subprojects screening, approval, implementation and monitoring processes.  
 
As required under the World Bank procedures for Category B project, a number of 
safeguard instruments were prepared during the preparation of the Mali-TSP-2, 
including: (i) an ESMF and RPF for transport infrastructure whose environmental and 
social characteristics were unknown at the time the studies were conducted; (ii) specific 
ESIAs and RAPs for road segments with detail design layout and social and 
environmental characteristics. All these instruments were disclosed in-country and at 
Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential indirect impacts can be summarized as follows:  
 
-
Workers and local communities near construction sites can be effected by exposure to 
dust and noise, if proper mitigations measures are not observed;  
 
-
serious problem of waste management;  
 
-
Traffic increase and disruption, increase risks of accidents because of lack of 
application road security and safety measures;  
 
-
Potential of STD transmission due to lack of proper sensitization campaigns of 
workers and local communities in construction areas and inappropriate methods of waste 
disposal.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESMF formulated standards, methods and procedures specifying how unidentified 
future subprojects whose location, number and scale are unknown will systematically 
address environmental and social issues in the screening and categorization, siting, 
design, implementation, operational phases and maintenance of the subproject lifecycle. 
The ESIAs outlined specific environmental mitigation measures commensurate to 
identified impacts and the institutional arrangements to implement and monitor those 
measures.  
 
For the urban transport component, a Social Study and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) 
detailing the compensation packages and reinstallation strategies of displaced vendors 
and kiosks was prepared by the Government and approved by the Bank. The severity of 
impacts on the affected groups is limited because (i) these are mainly small businesses 
that encroached on the road reserves; (ii) the affected groups are not vulnerable, but are 
well organized in powerful associations and are involved in the RAP process; (iii) no one 
Page  4
will lose is shelter or house, which is by experience sometimes the most difficult impact 
to cope with by the affected households;  (iv) the resettlement strategy is to reinstall 
displaced businesses in situ (empty spaces and dedicated adjacent pedestrian roads to 
mitigate or minimize the impacts on incomes.) All in all, the affected persons will operate 
in a more structured environment after the displacement.  Furthermore, a communication 
expert/NGO will be recruited to facilitate community consultation with the affected 
parties, and provide advice on preventing or managing social tensions during the 
implementation of the RAP.  
 
However, for rural roads whose social specifics are unknown at this time, the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for the Transport Corridor Improvement 
project was updated by the Government and approved by the Bank.  It will guide 
potential land acquisition and compensation during project implementation.  
 
Together, all these instruments provide measures to mitigate, avoid, or compensate for 
the negative environmental and social impacts. In addition, they outline provisions for 
implementing and monitoring recommended measures. The instruments also contain 
institutional capacity strengthening measures for efficient implementation of project 
safeguard measures.  
 
The TSP-2 is the third Bank-funded transport project in the country, and as such there 
are reasonable capacity and experience within the sector and among the various 
stakeholders involved to attend to project environmental and social issues.  In addition, 
an Environmental Specialist is in the National Coordination Unit (NCU) to oversee the 
implementation of environmental and social impact mitigation measures and ensure that 
the project is in compliance with national and Bank safeguard policies.  He will work in 
close collaboration with the National Road Department (DNR) and National Department 
for Pollution and Nuisances Control (DNACPN) to systematically monitor the 
implementation of project mitigation measures. A ratified convention or protocole 
d'accord already exist between the parties involved that systematizes this collaboration.  
 
Further, all civil works, both for construction and rehabilitation activities, will be 
contingent on broad-based and sustained consultation with local communities alongside 
the road sub-projects and unloading bays. Mitigation measures for sparing cultural and 
historical resources along with other environmental clauses will be properly implemented 
by contractors, as specified in bidding documents.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Mali TSP2 is multi-sectoral in nature involving rural road sub-sector, urban 
transport, river transport, agriculture and rural development (ARD), health and the private 
sectors.  
 
The project stakeholders include the National Road Department, the National Transport 
Department, Urban Traffic Regulation Control Department, National Department for 
Pollution and Nuisance Control, the Mayors of the District of Bamako, Commune 2 and 
3. Other important stakeholders consulted during the project preparation include: (i) the 
resettlement committee for the urban component, composed mainly of representatives of 
Page  5
business and retail association of project affected people operating alongside the ring 
road; (ii) CMDT and OHVN in the agriculture sector; (iii) AGETIER and AGEROUTE 
involved in road infrastructure construction and maintenance, respectively.  
 
All project environmental safeguard instruments have been prepared, in full compliance 
with Bank and national safeguard policies, by international and local consultant firms, 
namely TECSULT and  CIRA-Sarl, following a broad consultation framework, involving 
relevant stakeholder groups, both public and private as well as civil society and local 
communities.  
 
Prior to disclosure in-country and InfoShop, a workshop was held to present the draft 
safeguard instruments before the above stakeholder groups. This was designed not only 
to seek their input in the improving the safeguard documents, but also to foster ownership 
on their part during project implementation. The final draft of the report greatly 
benefitted from stakeholders' comments and suggestions.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/17/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/17/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  6
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Siele Silue 
03/12/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
 
Comments:   
