Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1422 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/19/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P093991 
Project Name: Education Sector Expenditure Program II 
Task Team Leader: William Experton 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 6, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (70%);Secondary education (20%);Tertiary education (10%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Within the MDGs? framework, the overall objective of the Mali Education Sector Expenditure 
Program (ESEP) is to ensure that all Malian children complete their primary schooling in a 
quality basic education and that the education system provides the country with the human 
resources necessary to its development. More specifically, and in the context of decentralization, 
the objective of phase II of ESEP is improving access and achievement in education in a 
sustainable and equitable way in order to give all children 6 years of quality education and to 
train qualified human resources needed by the economy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This second phase of the APL would be a three-year SWAP. The Government of Mali requested 
that donors should harmonize their procedures regarding support to the education sector as 
recommended by the Paris declaration of February 2005. A group of donors, including the 
Netherlands, Canada, Sweden, Norway together with the World Bank (representing about 55% 
of external financing) already started working on an education budget support which would 
complement the financing provided by other donors under their specific rules (AFD might join 
the budget group later). A particular attention would be paid to improving and supporting the 
decentralization of the education system.  
Page  2
For ESEP II, it is proposed to prepare four main components:  
 
a)  Improvement of access and completion in basic education through (i) increasing the number 
of qualified teachers by building 2 new teachers? training institutions, implementing a new 
teachers? training curriculum, improving the management and productivity of teacher training 
institutions, promoting more girls into the profession, developing on the job training and 
performance monitoring; ii) improving pedagogy in classrooms trough the implementation of a 
new curriculum at grade 1-6 (which includes school health, prevention of HIV AID and genital 
excision)  the provision of a minimum of two textbooks to all children, the financing of a 
standard pedagogic package, an increase in learning time, pedagogic support to teachers from the 
CAP; iii) improve access to basic education by building, rehabilitating and equipping schools, 
and contracting more teachers in the public sector and at the community level. A financing 
instrument would be proposed to allocate funding directly to municipalities or to community 
schools according to standards. Regional allocations would be defined annually according to 
MTEF and indicators to correct disparities. A chart would define the obligations of the schools 
that would be formally inspected by MEN decentralized services (CAP); and iv) improvement of 
school management by strengthening the leadership of school directors, parents? involvement 
and performance monitoring.  
 
b) Development of secondary, technical and vocational education through i) a reform of the 
institutional framework and financing of secondary education, technical and vocational training 
by controlling access to secondary education, implementation of a new regulatory framework 
organizing school financing, autonomy and management, curriculum development, evaluation 
system, diploma accreditation, role of the private sector, promotion of girls? participation, 
quality control and performance monitoring; ii) the improvement of General Secondary 
Education by teachers? training, new curriculum, construction, rehabilitation and equipment of 
secondary schools and a more effective management; and iii) the improvement of technical and 
vocational training by the implementation of a financing instrument and new statute which 
would promote the autonomy and stimulate the development of market-oriented training 
institutions, teachers? training, construction, rehabilitation and equipment of training institutions.  
 
c) Design and implementation of a sustainable development policy for higher education and 
scientific research through i) a reform of the institutional framework and financing of higher 
education; ii) the promotion of private higher education; iii) promotion of short-term 
professionalized programs; and iv) the implementation of a competitive research fund.  
 
d) Strengthening governance of the education sector at central and local levels by: (i) 
developing and enforcing policies, norms and standards at decentralized level and performance 
monitoring; (ii) strengthening decentralization with regional budget allocation and transfer of 
resources to local governments; and iii) strengthening of a technical support provided to local 
government by  MOE deconcentrated administration, strengthening of school management at 
primary and secondary education levels with increased parents? involvement.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country Wide (minicipalities and communities)   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Several guidelines will be included in the procedure manual of the program to ensure better 
construction management, better learning environment, child friendly elements of the schools, 
and health and hygiene on school premises.  
 
School sites would be located in areas already approved for this purpose.  
 
For community schools, communities are expected to arrange for the physical infrastructure. It 
could be existing building in the villages. Ususally site donated by the village/local community 
are free of environmental hazards.  
 
For Municipal schools site selection are guided by relevant municipal regulation. The choice of 
site is generally done through a school mapping exercise and is supervised by a local engineer.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The main environmental and social issues relates to the planned constructions of technical 
training centers and schools.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The main environmental and social issues relates to the planned constructions of technical 
training centers and schools.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/07/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/15/2006 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William Experton 
05/22/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/22/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr William Experton 
05/22/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
