Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC2299
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mauritania 
Project ID:  P100078 
Project Name:  2nd Mining Sector Cap.Building Supplemental 
Task Team Leader:  Gotthard Walser 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 6, 2006 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Oil and gas (100%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Other environment and natural 
resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Petroleum Supplemental has the same objectives as the original Credit, PRISM2.  
 
Credit 3810-MAU in the amount of SDR13.1 Million (US$18 Million equivalent) was 
approved on June 11, 2003 and became effective on October 17, 2003.  PRISM2 has the 
following development objectives:  
 
•
Build-up and consolidate the Government’s long term institutional and technical 
capacity to manage the country’s mineral resources, including social and environmental 
management;  
 
•
Promote private investments in the minerals sector;  
 
•
Improve mineral sector contribution to national and regional socioeconomic 
development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The petroleum TA is designed as an additional component, which will be added to the 
existing PRISM2 operation.  The focus of the operation will be on the petroleum-
producing regions of Mauritania and on sector agencies (i.e. Ministry of Energy and 
Patroleum - MEP and Societe Mauritanienne des Hydrocarbures - SMH).  
Page  2
The additional component will have five sub-components: (i) Improvement of the legal, 
regulatory and contractual framework; (ii) Capacity building; (iii) Environmental 
management of the petroleum sector; (iv) Data management/petroleum Cadastre and 
Information System; (v) Sector strategic assessments.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will conduct most of its activities in Nouakchott, dealing with sector 
institutions. Indirectly, Petroleum supplemental activities will cover off- and on-shore 
areas for oil exploration and exploitation, but without a significant impact, since the 
Project is a technical assistance credit.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTEG) 
Ms Salamata Bal (AFTS4) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project, as such, will not cause direct environmental impacts, since it is a Technical 
Assistance operation.  For this reason, a free-standing EA is not being produced during 
project preparation.  The operation will focus on building capacity in Mauritania for 
management of environmental and social issues associated with private sector 
development in the petroleum sector. Preliminary identification of these issues indicates 
that these issues will trigger the following safeguards policies:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), the Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12) and the 
Natural Habitats Policy (OP/BP 4.04).  
 
These policies have therefore been triggered for this additional component of PRISM2, 
but safeguards instruments to address them - primarily a Sector Environmental and Social 
Assessment and a Resettlement Policy Framework (SESA and RPF) - and the necessary 
Page  3
implementation capacity will be developed during implementation of the component (see 
Sections II.A.4 and 5 below).  Cooperation with other stakeholders (i.e. Ministry of 
Environment, PRECASP, etc) will be a key element of capacity building.  
 
A
Scoping Mission to be conducted prior to appraisal will define in detail the form and 
content of the SESA and RPF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Objective of the Supplemental is to develop environmental regulations, and to develop 
environmental management capacity in Mauritania. Throughout implementation, the 
project team will coordinate with environmental sector agencies and with the PRECASP 
team.  
 
An environmental scoping mission will be carried out before appraisal, to spell out 
specific sector related environmental issues to be addressed under the project and further 
refine the project design, including the Sector Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) which will be done immediately after the Additional Financing has been 
approved by the Board, as part of project implementation  The approximate timeframe 
required for the SESA is estimated to be up to 12 months, including recruitment of the 
consultant and carrying out the study.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
PRISM2 will work closely with the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum, private sector 
representatives, and representatives of civil society (mobilized with the assistance of the 
EITI TF, already in place).  
 
Results of the scoping mission will be shared with stakeholders during a workshop.  The 
scoping mission report will be disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop in the form of a 
technical environmental annex to the project document 30 days before Board date. The 
SESA and RPF will be prepared in consultation with stakeholders and will be disclosed 
in-country and in the InfoShop when they have been completed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/30/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/31/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/28/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  5
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gotthard Walser 
04/28/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
04/28/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Salamata Bal 
04/28/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
04/28/2006 
Comments:   
