Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2492 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/18/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mauritania 
Project ID: P102031 
Project Name: MR - Financial Sector Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader: Sherri Ellen Archondo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 18, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTFS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Banking (100%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the proposed Project is to improve the soundness and efficiency, reach 
and depth of the Mauritanian financial system so that it can contribute more significantly to 
private sector led economic growth and poverty reduction.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Among the principal challenges facing the Government are: (i) expanding the scope of financial 
intermediation with the development of efficient and competitive banking and non-bank 
financial institutions; (ii) improving the environment for commercial banks by strengthening 
supervisory and market oversight, payment systems and monetary and foreign exchange 
management; and (iii) improving the business environment through legal and judicial reform and 
other measures.  The Project components will be built on lessons learned from the FSCBP.  As a 
result, it is recognized that: (a) genuine stakeholder participation in policy reform design will be 
critical; (b) selectivity in project design will be essential; and (c) institutional change, particularly 
where capacities are limited, will require long-term action.  The Project, therefore, will be 
comprised of three components (two technical and one administrative).  
 
Page  2
Component 1:  Financial Sector Development and Enhancing Financial Sector Intermediation.  
 
The first component of the proposed operation will support the efforts of the Government to 
develop a solid and efficient financial sector and to increase access to financial services. This 
will entail, in particular the following activities: (a) the strengthening of regulation and 
supervision of financial institutions and financial markets through (i) revision of the banking law, 
(ii) revision of microfinance law, (iii) capacity building at the Central Bank and (iv) 
centralization of supervision of all financial institutions within BCM; (b) the development of a 
payment system, (c) the strengthening of financial institutions and development of measures to 
improve competition within these financial institutions (i.e. commercial banks, microfinance 
institutions, insurance companies, social security institutions), and (d) the development of new 
products and new institutions, such as those devoted to leasing, factoring, venture capital and 
lending to small and medium-size enterprises.  
 
Component 2.  Improving the Business Environment and Legal framework.  
 
The second component will provide support to the MoJ and BCM to facilitate commercial 
banks in making sound new credit-decisions by improving the Mauritanian lending environment.  
Several short and longer-term actions are envisaged to improve the legal/judicial environment, 
including: (i) the adoption of implementing decrees to the Commercial Code, (ii)  revisions to the 
Code of Civil Procedure so as to simplify judicial procedures; (iii) the enhancement of the scope 
and reliability of the credit registry; (iv) the training of judges in commercial dispute resolution; 
(iv) reform of the land regime, the development of commercial courts and introduction of 
arbitration procedures.   Other measures are likely to emerge from the ongoing ICA.  
 
Component 3.  Project Implementation.  
 
The FSTAC project will be one part of the economic and judicial reform program.  Each 
beneficiary will implement any activities in their respective sectors and be responsible for 
preparing the terms of reference.  MAED will be responsible for overall coordination of the 
project and responsible for financial management, procurement, reporting, monitoring and 
evaluation, audit and public information, which will include a communication strategy.  It is not 
anticipated that any supplemental salaries will be financed, but wherever necessary, technical 
assistance (on a punctual basis) will be sought to strengthen the team.  This will enable a transfer 
of skills.  A high level Steering Committee will be comprised of the focal points from BCM, 
MoJ, MoF and MAED. It will be supplemented by several representatives of the private sector.  
These implementation arrangements will support Government?s efforts to coordinate and 
effectively oversee technical assistance supporting development of the financial sector through 
appropriate legislative reform, registry office improvements and judicial system training.  Clear 
performance targets will be established with intermediate goals established to be able to measure 
performance in short-term intervals.  This will help maintain the momentum of the reforms.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project supports the achievement of the financial sector capacity building in 
Mauritania on a country-wide basis.  It is a technical assistance project which will support 
activities at BCM, MAED, MoF and MoJ in Noukchott.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
There is no safeguard-related issues in this project. The sector agrees to accept transfer of 
safeguards responsibilities for this project.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sherri Ellen Archondo 
04/09/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/09/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antony Thompson 
04/09/2007 
Comments:  Sector Manager AFTFS 
