Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1911 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/24/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mauritius 
Project ID: P091828 
Project Name: MU-Environmental Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader: Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 11, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (70%);Railways (30%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Public expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (S);Regulation and competition policy (S);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
70.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
35.00
105.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The program development objective is to reduce or at least stabilize traffic congestion in the Port 
Louis conurbation.  This will benefit all people traveling in the area by reducing (or stabilizing) 
journey times and increasing their reliability.  It will also benefit businesses by reducing the 
frequency of missed appointments and late arrivals.  It will help all people living and working in 
the area by reducing vehicle emissions, noise, and nuisance, and thereby contribute to improved 
health and quality of life. Finally, it will assist the less well-off members of society, who cannot 
afford to purchase cars, but suffer from the long travel times imposed on buses by traffic 
congestion.  
 
Key performance indicators and targets include:  
 
Page  2
Travel time during morning peak commuting times does not increase above 25 to 30 minutes 
for traffic entering Port Louis from the south and west and above 20 minutes for traffic entering 
from the north.  
 
Ridership on the light rail transit system averages 93,000 per day during itsfirst year of 
operation and rises thereafter at a rate no less than that of population growth in the conurbation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The program will comprise five components: (a) major investments in mass transit and 
transportation infrastructure; (b) investments in traffic management; (c) urgent measures; (d) 
capacity building, and policy and institutional reforms; and (e) program management.  The 
project will be the first of a series of projects envisaged to support implementation of the 
governments 12-year transport program, financing the first four years of the transport program 
(2006-10).  
 
Details of the component activities of the project (phase 1 of the program) follow:  
 
A. 
Preparation of major investments in mass transit and roads.  Depending on the results of a 
financial viability study and the decision of the government, this component will support 
preparation of the major investment of the program.  In addition, this component will finance 
land acquisition, engineering services and measures to address potential environmental and 
social impacts of the major investments. This phase will fund only the following investment 
works: traffic management, bus lines restructuring, buses improvement, completion of missing 
links (road maintenance, upgrading and completion of existing alignment), and parking 
management.  Phase 2 of the program (to be financed with a follow-on project) will fund major 
investment works such as mass transit system and Port Louis bypass.  
 
B. 
Investments in traffic management.  The second component will support the development 
of traffic restraint measures such as an electronic road pricing scheme, road maintenance and 
upgrading, the construction of a new road aimed at reducing traffic congestion, reforms of 
parking policy and investments in urban parking facilities (to be owned, financed, and operated 
by the private sector); traffic management measures; signs, signals, and road markings; road 
safety measures, and sidewalks and drainage, and reorganization of bus lines.  
 
C. 
Urgent investments.  The third component will finance installation and coordination of 
priority traffic signals, a new bus lane along the M1 expressway, upgrading of bus services and 
the bus fleet, and other related activities.  
 
D. 
Sector policies, capacity building, and institutional strengthening.  This component will 
support the introduction of reforms to ensure that policies and institutions contribute to the 
government?s objective to reduce traffic congestion in the conurbation without damaging its 
economy.  Under consideration are reforms of parking policy, of policies that encourage 
employers to pay for the travel of their employees, of policies guiding land use and urban 
development, and of regulations governing bus services.  This component will also help through 
training and technical assistance to build the capacity of government entities so that they are able 
to manage and guide the urban transport sector into the future.  
Page  3
E. 
Program and project implementation, management, and monitoring.  This component will 
support expertise for program and project management to ensure that the program and project is 
implemented efficiently, effectively and in compliance with World Bank financial management, 
procurement, and safeguard policies.  It will finance a comprehensive social assessment, an 
environmental impact assessment, development of a resettlement policy framework, and other 
studies as needed.  It will also support the preparation and management of the overall urban 
transport program in the Curepipe-Port Louis conurbation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will address transportation issues in the Curepipe-Port Louis conurbation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower?s institutional capacity for safeguard policies is high.  Tourism and fishing are key 
sectors of the Mauritian economy and both depend on sound environmental management for 
long-run sustainability.  Mauritius?s environmental agencies have good capacity for carrying out 
environmental impact assessments and for monitoring compliance with the country?s laws aimed 
at protecting the environment and social groups. Mauritius also has good institutional capacity to 
develop a resettlement policy framework and action plan, and to implement its provisions.  Its 
government is responsive to the desires of the public, and has many times in the past halted 
public projects that faced strong opposition from those who would be negatively affected. 
Mauritius also has strong capacity to comply with the Bank?s fiduciary safeguards. A 
comprehensive assessment of Mauritius?s institutional capacity for environmental and social 
safeguards will be carried out as part of project implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTS1) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts on human populations or 
environmentally important areas.  It focuses on preparing the studies required for the major  
investments (mass transit system and bypass), including a full environmental and social impact 
assessment of the major works proposed to be constructed during phase two of the program.  
Any potential negative impacts of the minor works that will be undertaken during phase one will 
be identified prior to undertaking the work, and measures required to prevent, minimize, 
mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts and improve environmental performance 
incorporated into the design of the works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Although the works to be constructed under the project are not expected to trigger this 
safeguard, the environmental and social impact assessment will explicitly examine this issue and 
determine whether or not it applies.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Although the works to be constructed under the project are not expected to trigger this 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
safeguard, the environmental and social impact assessment will explicitly examine this issue and 
determine if the policy is triggered.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Although the works to be constructed under the project are not expected to trigger this 
safeguard, the environmental and social impact assessment will explicitly examine this issue and 
determine if the policy is triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will include some land acquisition, which may require involuntary resettlement 
of homes or businesses.  A resettlement policy framework will be prepared by September 2006, 
setting out the principles that will govern involuntary resettlement to ensure that people affected 
will be able to share in project benefits.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/26/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts on human populations or 
environmentally important areas.  It focuses on preparing the studies required for the major 
investments (mass transit system and bypass), including a full environmental and social 
impact assessment of the major works proposed to be constructed during phase two of the 
program.  Any potential negative impacts of the minor works that will be undertaken during 
phase one will be identified prior to undertaking the works, and environmental management 
plans will be prepared, that will outline measures required to prevent, minimize, mitigate, or 
compensate for adverse impacts and improve environmental performance incorporated into 
the design of the works.  The environmental and social impact assessment will determine 
whether safeguard policies on natural habitats (OP/BP 4.04), forests (OP/BP 4.36), and 
cultural property (OPN 11.03) are triggered. If it is determined that any of these policies are 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
triggered, then specific environmental management plans will be prepared and disclosed 
before appraisal of phase two.  
 
A
resettlement policy framework will be prepared prior to appraisal, setting out the 
principles that will govern the preparation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) if and 
when needed during implementation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
05/24/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/24/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
05/24/2006 
Comments:   
