Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3101 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/04/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mekong 
Project ID: P104806 
Project Name: Mekong Integrated Water Resources Management 
Task Team Leader: Toru Konishi 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P102141 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.10 
 Financing 
Gap 
19.30
23.40 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the project are to contribute to regional sustainable integrated 
water resources management (IWRM) for the Mekong River Basin through two interim 
objectives: (a) the implementation of the approved water utilization rules/procedures and further 
development of the regional tools to assess infrastructure impacts on water quality and quantity; 
and (b) support for policy development and capacity building at the national level towards 
regional IWRM.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would have four components: Support for the Enabling Regional Framework; 
Support for National Policy Development and Institution Building; IWRM Demonstration 
Activities; and Support for Multi-Stakeholder Participation in Regional IWRM.  Of these 
components, only Component 3 will involve physical investments with a cost estimated of about 
US$7 million for Lao, Cambodia and Vietnam.  Under this component, a series of national and 
regional demonstration activities would be carried out in order to establish the optimal model for 
Page  2
regional cooperation for concrete actions on the ground involving multi-stakeholders at various 
levels (e.g., the MRC, respective central governments line ministries, NMCs, concerned local 
government, communities and civil society organizations).  These demonstration activities would 
also provide the member countries with opportunities to implement the agreed 
procedures/guidelines and allow the MRC to demonstrate its relevance in supporting develop 
arrangements to respond to simulated emergencies related to water quality and navigation, and in 
implementing activities related to watershed management, habitat management, and flood and 
drought management. These activities would clearly be trans-boundary in nature or impact  and 
would be a clear demonstration of good IWRM in practice. This component would have two 
subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 3.1.  Trans-boundary demonstration activities.  This subcomponent would aim 
to nurture trans-boundary cooperation towards concrete actions in priority sectors particularly 
among three IDA countries (Lao PDR, Vietnam and Cambodia).  It would mainly focus on two 
areas: (a) Vietnam-Cambodia Delta; and (b) Champassak-Stung Treng districts (Cambodia-Lao 
PDR border) .  
 
In Champassak-Stung Treng, the project would support a program implementing the priority 
actions agreed by the concerned local governments in Lao PDR and Cambodia giving priorities 
to: (a) fisheries management; (b) tourism management; (c) dolphin pool habitat management; 
and (d) solid waste management.  Further, the program would support the government of Lao 
PDRs aspiration to designate the wetland in the area as a Ramsar Site and subsequently provide 
support for its management; the Cambodia side has already been designated as a Ramsar Site, 
and the government of Lao PDR is keen to designate it.  
 
Demonstration Activities for Vietnam. The activity would mainly support river bed and 
embankment rehabilitation on the Prek Thnot River.  The maintenance works for the river have 
been long neglected because of the disputes on the Cambodia and Vietnam border, causing 
serious flood problems in nearby villages.  As the disputes have been settled, both Cambodia and 
Vietnam are willing to restart rehabilitation works.  
 
Sub-component 3.2  National demonstration activities.  It has been agreed to support the four 
countries to carry out some IWRM water utilization activities which would have either trans-
boundary impacts or help set out a regional model for better management of the Mekong River.  
Considering the amount available and priorities of the countries, it has been agreed that the 
activities would mainly focus on the following:  
 
Cambodia and Lao PDR: Micro-scale water harvesting facilities, including small-scale water 
storage for communities to mitigate drought and alleviate poverty, implemented according to an 
integrated water-shed management approach.  
 
Vietnam:  Small-scale flood management, including embankment reinforcement.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would mainly support better management of water resources for the Mekong River.  
While some of the activities are for mainly technical assistance, under Component 3, regional 
and national demonstration activities would be carried out in the Mekong Basin.  At present, 
only locations of trans-boundary demonstration have been identified: Champassak and Stung-
Treng (Lao-Cambodia Border) and Cambodia-Vietnam Delta.  Locations for national 
demonstration activities would be identified during project preparation.  
Page  3
The demonstration activity in Champassak-Stung Treng would occur in an area of importance 
as: (a) major spawning grounds and migration routes for endemic Mekong fish species; (b) as an 
important habitat for the Mekong River Irrawaddy Dolphin; and (c) for its natural beauty and for 
recreation.  Project activities would aim to conserve these values in collaboration with the fishing 
communities. There is an established Ramsar site in Steng Treng, less than 10 km from the Lao 
border, and there are proposals to establish a Ramsar site in the Siphandon area in Champasak. 
Whether the project will work in either of these areas will be determined during preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Activities under Component 1 will be implemented by the MRC while Component 4 may be 
implemented by an independent organization from civil society.  The MRC through its 
secretariat (MRCS) has developed management tools and its own capacity to address 
environment and social safeguard.  Components 2 and 3 would be implemented by the countries.  
 
All four countries have fairly well-developed EIA policies and social safeguards policies to 
differing degrees, but implementation is uneven, and capacity is low, particularly in Cambodia 
and Lao PDR. Sufficient support to implement identified safeguards measures during 
implementation would be built into the design of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASRE) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSO) 
Mr Stephen Ling (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will involve small civil works and some potential for social impacts through 
resource access restriction under the demonstration activities. These activities will be minor in 
scale, subject to community consultation and agreement, and designed to produce overall 
environmental and social gains  
 
The environmental safeguard is proposed for Category B (partial assessment) due to the 
small nature of physical works and investment level (maximum of US$7 million for Lao, 
Cambodia and Vietnam) which will be identified through participatory process with key 
stakeholders in line with the MRC agreements.  The main objective of these sub-projects is to 
promote conservation and sustainable use of natural resources while most of the environmental 
impacts during construction could be minimized through good engineering practices and close 
supervision.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Certain demonstration activities will be carried out to in areas of natural aquatic habitats.  
These will be designed to improve environmental management, and in the case of Champasak ? 
Stung Treng, to enhance protection of significant and/or critical natural habitats. Activities will 
be designed with concerned government agencies as well as in consultation with civil society 
organizations and other stakeholders.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Since subproject sites have not been identified, it is not known at this time whether project 
activities will adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or 
unique natural values. Impacts to Physical Cultureal Resources (PCR) from civil works 
associated with demonstration activities will be avoided through use of appropriate screening 
procedures. Potential Champasak ? Stung Treng activities related to tourism, however, could 
potentially involve issues of PCR management. The need for further action under this policy 
remains to be determined.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Ethnic minorities live along some stretches of the river, although in general the areas close to 
the Mekong are populated by majority lowland peoples. The occurrence of ethnic minorities 
within demonstration activity sites will be assessed during preparation. The relevance of 
applying the policy to the accident risk management plans related to navigation on the Mekong 
River will be considered further   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Trans Boundary and National Demonstration Activities (Subcomponent 3.1 and 3.2) will 
involve minor land acquisition.  This project may also result in the restriction of access to 
resources via the conservation of wetlands in Ramsar sites in Champasak ? Stung Treng.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The size of the dams involved in demonstration activities is unlikely to trigger the policy.  
The screening mechanism incorporated into the EA/subproject selection process will determine 
the extent to which there are any safety of dams considerations.  The need for further action 
under this policy will be determined based on further assessments.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Project activities will occur within the Mekong river system.  The project would be jointly 
managed by the four countries in Lower Mekong Basin through the MRC.  The demonstration 
activities would be notified in due course to the two riparian countries China and Myanmar, 
which hold observer status at the MRC.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/30/2008 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EA/SA:  January 2008-March 2008.  
 
Before appraisal, the following safeguard instruments will be prepared:  
 
?
For all the physical sub-projects identified for implementation during the first year, an 
initial environmental and social impact assessment (EA/SA) will be undertaken, including a 
summary of ethnic minority groups along the lower Mekong river system in relation to the 
project activity areas.  Although adverse impacts are not anticipated, efforts will be made to 
mitigate the potential impacts as much as possible. This includes community consultation 
procedures and specific requirements to be included in the bidding documents and 
monitoring forms.  A separate EA will be carried out for the canal rehabilitation activity.  
 
If land acquisition and/or indigenous peoples are involved, Resettlement Plans (RPs) and/or 
Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) will be developed, including issues such as appropriate 
communication strategy and materials in local languages.  The scope of the plans will depend 
on the locations and size of the subprojects, and may involve specific stand-alone plans or 
regional plans.  A specific social assessment for the Champasak ? Stung Treng sub-project 
will focus on addressing the potential risks concerning access restrictions to natural resources 
and indigenous peoples.  
 
?
For the remaining sub-projects to be implemented in the following years, the following 
instruments will be developed: an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF),  
Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs), and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Frameworks 
(IPPFs).  
 
?
MRC will review all safeguards documents to ensure conformity with MRC rules. Project 
design will explore potential links with MRC regional EA frameworks and opportunities to 
commission a Strategic Environmental Assessment under national-level basin management 
plans in Lao and Cambodia.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Toru Konishi 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
10/04/2007 
Comments:  Jose Zevallos, Acting RSC 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
