Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3220 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/07/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P107134 
Project Name: Mexico Environmental Recovery of the Apatlaco River Basin 
Task Team Leader: Gustavo Saltiel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Sanitation (45%);Sewerage (45%);Solid waste management (10%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Water resource management 
(P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
120.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
10.00
130.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) for this project is to improve the ambient 
environmental quality of the Apatlaco River Basin, and the quality of life for Basin residents 
through the rehabilitation and extension of sanitary infrastructure and the strengthening of the 
institutions operating and maintaining it.  
 
The development objective outcome will be measured by: (i) reduction in pollution levels of the 
Apatlaco River; (ii) increase in share of waste disposed of in sanitary landfills; (iii) perceived 
improvements in quality of life by the population as depicted in annual surveys.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to achieve the project development objective, the project will, on the one hand, tackle 
the main sources of contamination through investments in sanitary infrastructure (wastewater 
treatment plants, sewer systems, sanitary landfills), and on the other, create the basis for the 
sustainable operation and maintenance of this infrastructure through targeted institutional 
Page  2
strengthening of the sector?s institutions. For that purpose, the following components are 
proposed.  
 
Component 1: Wastewater Treatment Investments  
 
Clearly the most important source of pollution in the Apatlaco River Basin is untreated 
wastewater from domestic and industrial sources. This component will support the rehabilitation 
and construction of wastewater treatment plants. The first year of investment will target the most 
urgent needs, such as through constructing priority treatment plants to address large untreated 
discharges. In parallel, Component 4 will support the preparation of a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment to help CEAMA set priorities for subsequent investments ? both in terms of types of 
activities, geographical scope and level of treatment needed.  
 
This component will not be limited to classical wastewater treatment plants, but may also 
include incentives for cleaner production technologies or other similar measures aimed at 
decreasing the volume and polluting charge of effluents being discharged into the Rio Apatlaco 
without treatment. In addition, this project will include the sewer mains connecting the new 
WWTP to the existing systems.  
 
Under this component, all works and studies will be conducted by CEAMA and may then be 
transferred to municipalities if they demonstrate their capacity (technical and financial) to 
operate and maintain the infrastructure. Initial operation of the new infrastructure may be left 
with the Contractors for a limited period of time to allow municipal operators to build their 
capacity in maintaining and operating it.  
 
Component 2: Solid Waste Management  
 
Poor solid waste collection and uncontrolled dumping has been recognized by the State 
administration as a major issue in the Apatlaco River Basin. The area includes a number of open 
dumps, some of them within the flowpath of the river?s tributaries. In addition, regular dumping 
of household wastes into urban waterways (Cuernavaca in particular) significantly impacts the 
landscape. While solid waste collection is a municipal competency, there is a strong technical 
rationale for seeking a final disposal solution that is inter-municipal, as only Cuernavaca 
generates sufficient waste to warrant an independent sanitary landfill. As such, this component 
will therefore support initiatives to encourage smaller municipalities to join forces to solve their 
solid waste problem, through the creation of one or more ?regional? sanitary landfills. This 
component will also include a strong communication campaign to raise collective awareness to 
the problems created by uncontrolled dumping of solid waste.  
 
This component would be executed by CEAMA.  
 
Component 3: Municipal Utilities Strengthening  
 
In Mexico, provision of water, sewerage and waste collection services is the legal responsibility 
of the municipalities. This component will therefore focus on strengthening the municipal 
service providers so that they can financially and technically operate and maintain the 
investments supported through other project components. This component will also improve the 
Page  3
capacity of those service providers to collect waste and wastewater through selected investments 
in the rehabilitation and / or the extension in sewer networks and solid waste collection 
equipment and infrastructure. Toward this aim, the component will fund efficiency improvement 
programs in water utilities to strengthen and bring them to reasonable levels of management, 
operational efficiency and financial viability, as well as selected infrastructure. Table 1 below 
shows typical activities to be financed under this component.  
 
Component 4: Strategic Basin Management  
 
The previous three components target mostly urgent problems and provide technical solutions 
to well-identified needs. However the long-term, sustainable recovery of the Apatlaco River 
Basin will require actions that tackle deeper institutional, economic and environmental 
challenges. This component will support a series of specific activities and pilots aimed at 
exploring longer-term solutions. Among others, this component will:  
 
?
Support the development of a clear long-term vision for river basin quality, through 
technical modeling, economic and financial evaluations and public consultations. This long-term 
process will build on on-going efforts by the National Water Institute of Technology (IMTA ? 
Instituto Mexicano de Tecnologias del Agua), based in Morelos, and become an iterative 
instrument to set priorities, evaluate trade-offs, and enable decisions on public environmental 
spending in the Basin.  
 
?
Establish a system to compensate for differences in economic costs and benefits that 
municipalities are receiving through the project, either through a compensation fund or through a 
basin-level operator for the infrastructure, financed under the project;  
 
?
Develop pilot programs to address issues threatening water quality such as deforestation 
through illegal logging in protected areas of the upper river basin or erosion stemming from poor 
agricultural practices in the lower basin.  
 
?
Strengthen CEAMA in its capacity to monitor environmental quality at the Basin level, 
among others through support for a certification to ISO 14000 standards of CEAMA?s operation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rio Apatlaco Basin, Morelos, Mexico.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower, BANOBRAS, has experience working with Bank projects but does not have Bank 
safeguards management capacity. The implementing entity, CEAMA, is the state environmental 
management agency, responsible for environmental regulation and management at the state 
level. As such, CEAMA does have good environmental management capacity, especially 
regarding environmental impact systems, but has no experience with the Bank safeguards per se. 
CEAMA currently has very weak social safeguards capacity. Project preparation activities are 
currently heavily emphasizing the strengthening of safeguards related skills, including 
supporting development of social management capacity in house. Likewise, project 
implementation will include substantial efforts to enhance CEAMA's capacity for environmental 
and social management, including that related to safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSUW) 
Page  4
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is proposed as a Category A project, given the scope of activites (especially those 
related to waste water treatment and solid waste). The team is supporting CEAMA in preparing a 
Category A-level Regional EA, which will include an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework outlining the specific procedures to manage potential expected impacts. The EA will 
also include an evaluation of the applicability of other safeguard policies to the project.  
 
The project is also expected to include a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) as a 
key activity during project implementation. Specific recommendations of the SEA will guide the 
selection of activites to be financed in later project stages. Likewise, the SEA will set forth 
institutional strengthening targets to be implemented through Component 4.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project aims to improve the environmental conditions of the Apatlaco River, thereby 
improving the quality of natural habitats. That said, project activities could theoretically impact 
existing natural habitats depending on their location. The project ESMF will include necessary 
screening criteria to avoid and/or minimize impact to such natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project may include pilot reforestation activites to improve water quality in the basin. 
This will be clarified during project implementation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Depending on the scope of project activities, pesticide managmenet could be involved. If so, 
the ESMF will include specific provisions to ensure that less-hazardous pesticides are used (e.g. 
not Category IA or IB), that pesticide safety equipment and technical assistance is provided 
through the project to ensure safe handling of such products.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
As the project will be supporting civil works activites, the ESMF will include "chance find" 
procedures setting forth the measures to be taken in the event that culturally significant materials 
are discovered during excavations.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The Apatlaco Basin is home to indigneous communities that would be expected to benefit 
through the project. An IPF is being prepared to ensure activites are culturally compatible.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
While not expected, civil works might result in minor resettlement. A Resettlement 
Framework is being prepared to outline the procedures that would be used in such a situation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/07/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/17/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EA is currently under preparation. An English-lanaguage summary is expected by late 
January 2008.  
 
Likewise the Resettlement Framework and IPF are expected by late Feburary.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gustavo Saltiel 
11/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna Wellenstein 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
