Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/22/2006 
Report No.:  AC2037
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P095323 
Project Name:  MEXICO INDIGENOUS PEOPLES DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Harideep Singh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 18, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(30%);General energy sector (20%) 
Theme:  Indigenous peoples (P);Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
1,630.20
1,630.20 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will contribute directly to reducing IP poverty relating to access to basic 
services (potable water, sanitation, electrification, and connectivity) in the five states of 
Oaxaca, Chiapas, Guerrero, Puebla and Veracruz.  It is expected to benefit about 2,700 IP 
communities with 1.2 million inhabitants through 8,000 infrastructure sub-projects in 
water, sanitation, electrification, rural roads, and feeder roads sectors.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of four components, with an estimated total project cost of 
US$1,749.0 million (US$1,750.2 million including up-front fee).  The Bank will finance 
US$118.8 million (US$120 million, including up-front fee of US$1.2 million); CDI, 
US$1,360.2 million; and the participating municipalities/states, US$270 million.  The 
project supports the implementation of a broad service delivery program of CDI in five 
states of Mexico: Oaxaca, Puebla, Chiapas, Veracruz, and Guerrero, with Oaxaca and 
Puebla participating in the first year of implementation and the other three states joining 
them from the second year.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: This component will pilot a new process for participatory identification 
of basic services infrastructure needs, which is presently being used in Oaxaca.  The 
process involves the following steps: (a) carrying out a pre-diagnostic for every 
municipality based on broad discussion with communities; (b) conducting an intensive 
participatory planning using facilitators and other agency representatives to evolve a 
municipal vision; (c) using a strategic planning approach with SWOT (strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) analyses to generate an integrated development 
plan for the municipality which is endorsed by all participants (community, municipality, 
state development departments) for implementation; and (d) carrying out a social 
validation exercise to obtain community acceptance of the plan through presentation and 
discussion at their General Assembly.  The process is very participatory, transparent, and 
effective, but more time-consuming than the processes in place today.  The project will 
finance this plan preparation initiative in about 100 municipalities at US$15,000 per plan, 
in Oaxaca, and any other state, which seeks this assistance.  Preference will be to focus 
this effort on larger municipalities with five or more communities.  
 
Component 2: Participatory Creation of Basic Services Infrastructure (cost: US$1,715 
million; Bank share: US$90 million; state/municipality contribution: US$270 million; 
CDI share: US$1,355 million): This has three discrete sub-components: (a) participatory 
preparation of comprehensive sub-project briefs; (b) participatory execution of the sub-
projects; and (c) participatory supervision of sub-projects during execution.  
 
Based on the initial prioritization of the sub-projects at the municipality level, a shortlist 
of sub-projects to be funded under the project will be prepared.  This list will consist of 
infrastructure in the potable water, sanitation, electrification and roads sectors.  
Comprehensive sub-project briefs will be prepared by municipality using the expert 
services of external consultants. These briefs will consist of detailed technical analysis, 
institutional assessment, financial viability analyses, weaving the safeguards issues 
relating to environment and resettlement into the subproject design and where required, 
recommending mitigating measures or resettlement compensation plans, and social 
analyses, including a detailed operation and maintenance plan and required capacity 
building for its effective implementation.  Various models for sustainable operation and 
maintenance of the sub-projects will be included in the Operational Manual which will 
offer alternatives for discussion with the IP communities.  The sub-project proposals will 
get prioritized and selected at the state level based on an agreed set of criteria which will 
include the following: quality of sub-project proposal, agreement on an operation and 
maintenance plan, and the level of counterpart contribution by the proposing 
municipality, among others.  All sub-projects agreed between the CDI and the state will 
get encompassed in a state level agreement.  The project will fund this activity relating to 
sub-project brief preparation, with the municipality following the required consultant 
procurement procedures. This sub-component is expected to cost about US$40 million 
(US$5,000 for each of the 8,000 sub-projects to be financed under the project). Bank 
share will be US$4 million at about 10% of the consultancy cost.  
 
Execution of sub-projects will be done through identified executing agencies 
(municipality, state or federal agency, or community), either directly or using external 
Page  3
contractors, following Bank procurement procedures.  In the agreement with the 
executing agency, there will be a clear indication of responsibility for compliance with 
the requirements indicated in the sub-project briefs, including those relating to 
environment management framework and resettlement policy framework. CDI will play 
an important role is providing assistance to the executing agencies, particularly the 
smaller municipalities which function as executing agency but require support to be 
effective in this role.  CDI will provide assistance in technical, social, environmental and 
procurement aspects, and to be able to offer these services, CDI itself will be 
strengthened.   While there are variations in sub-project costs, on average during 2005, 
each sub-project cost about US$200,000. With about 8,000 sub-projects proposed under 
the project during the five year period, total cost of sub-projects is expected at US$1.6 
billion.  Bank share will be 5% or US$80 million, with US$240 million as counterpart 
contribution from state/municipalities; CDI share is expected at US$1,280 million.  
 
Supervision of sub-projects will be carried out by the executing agencies, the 
communities themselves through their associations (comites de obras), and through 
external consultants retained at the state level.  The role of the supervision consultant will 
be particularly important in case of smaller municipalities which function as executing 
agencies and use external contractors, but have little capacity to supervise their 
performance, and in case of larger and complex sub-projects such as new or rehabilitated 
roads.  The cost of consultant supervision will be funded by the project and is expected at 
about 5% of sub-projects cost or US$75 million.  This will be shared between CDI 
(US$39 million), states (US$30 million), and the Bank (US$6 million).  
 
Component 3: Strengthening Participation Processes and Institutions (cost: US$15 
million; Bank share: US$13.8 million): The project will build capacity at four levels: (a) 
participating communities, mainly in aspects relating to sub-project execution, operation 
and maintenance, and awareness in terms of service use; (b) municipalities, mainly in 
aspects relating to sub-project execution based on the capacity assessments carried out 
under the project, procurement and supervision (through CDI teams), and in 
institutionalization of aspects relating to environmental management and resettlement of 
affected persons; (c) state level agencies consisting of state sector entities functioning as 
executing agencies for sub-projects (for environmental and resettlement aspects), 
SEMARNAT (for environmental management framework and its reflection in sub-
project briefs), and (d) CDI HQ (particularly in aspects relating to procurement, financial 
management and disbursement), and CDI delegation offices and coordinating centers (for 
generating an integrated package of services for IP across CDI departments, and 
assistance in procurement, financial management, and technical sector-related aspects). 
This activity would consist of seminars, workshops, help-desk services through CDI, 
consultancies for municipal capacity assessment, and external assistance for CDI 
strengthening.  The total cost under this component is expected at US$15 million, with 
US$13.8 million being funded by the Bank.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, and Monitoring & Evaluation, and Studies (cost 
US$17.5 million; Bank share: US$13.5 million): This will consist of funding any 
incremental operating costs relating to project management within CDI and procuring 
Page  4
equipment to strengthen CDI, M&E arrangement (household surveys, desk reviews, 
thematic studies), workshops for dissemination and sharing of project-related information 
and outcomes, and some sectoral studies. This component is expected to cost about 
US$15.0 million with Bank share at US$11.4 million (40% of CDI incremental operating 
costs of US$6 million or US$2.5 million; 80% of equipment cost of US$2.5 million; 
100% of US$7.5 million for M&E, and 100% of US$1.5 million towards studies).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
CDI's program for basic services creation (PIBAI) is being implemented in 28 states. The 
geographic and beneficiary targeting of PIBAI is based satisfaction of three criteria: (a) at 
least 29% or more indigenous language speaking population; (b) between 50-10,000 
inhabitants; and (c) situated in municipalities with high, or very high, marginalization 
index. The project will support the implementation of PIBAI in the states of Oaxaca, 
Chiapas, Guerrero, Veracruz and Puebla, focusing on the most marginalized 
municipalities with high IP concentrations, and relatively low per capita incomes. During 
the first year of implementation, only two states are expected to participate: Oaxaca and 
Puebla; the remaining three states will join in from the second year.  The project is 
expected to support about 8,000 sub-projects in about 2,700 communities with 1.2 
million habitants (95% IP).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSEO) 
Mr Reidar Kvam (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
I.  Environmental Aspects: The construction of major roads and transmission lines are the 
two main investment types which are likely to have both direct and indirect impacts. The 
direct impacts on forests and other natural habitats (of the road works themselves) would 
Page  5
be addressed through good environmental practices including: (i) careful road alignment 
(avoiding overly steep, unstable, or environmentally highly sensitive areas); (ii) proper 
engineering (including adequate drainage works, stream crossings that allow for fish 
passage as well as peak water flows, etc.); (iii) careful siting and management of 
construction camps, quarries, borrow pits, and waste disposal sites; and (iv) standard 
environmental rules for contractors (prohibiting hunting, washing vehicles in streams, 
lighting fires, and other inappropriate behavior). The construction of water and sanitation 
infrastructure poses less significant issues. However, proper siting and good 
housekeeping practices are proposed in case of such investments too to mitigate any 
direct or indirect impacts.  
 
The potentially serious adverse induced impacts (deforestation, unsustainable logging, 
and illegal hunting) will also need to be adequately addressed by the project. Although 
somew
hat lessened by the land use and governance structure of the “ejidos”, opening up 
new areas through new road construction have always posedpotentially significant risks 
to critical natural habitats.  
 
Construction activities also have the potential for affecting archaeological and pale 
ontological sites in Mexico. Screening criteria and procedures are included in the 
environmental and social framework designed for the project. Chance finding procedures 
are included in sector specific environmental manuals.  
 
Albeit minimal, there is a potential for displacement of population in some projects.  
 
II. Social Aspects.  Social impacts have been clustered around potential investments: 
roads, drinking water, sanitation and drainage, and electrification.  These are provided in 
an attachment to this document.  Specifically, there could be issues relating to 
involuntary resettlement and related conflicts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect impacts from rural road construction may cause unsustainable logging practices 
in forested areas.  To mitigate the risks of induced deforestation or unsustainable logging 
practices facilitated by improved road access, all participating communities and ejidos (as 
a
point of entry requirement) should present to CDI their written commitment (ratified 
during their General Assembly or similar legitimate decision-making process) that: (i) 
prior to undertaking any new logging, they will prepare a Forestry Management Plan 
approved by SEMARNAT, and (ii) prior to undertaking any significant deforestation or 
other conversion of natural habitats, they will obtain a Change of Land Use permit from 
SEMARNAT, as required under existing Mexican law.  
 
This up-front requirement would complement and reinforce the project’s use of 
Regional Environmental Assessments during implementation to ensure potential 
cumulative, regional land use implications of the PIBAI program are addressed. The 
EMF will also include the following provisions: (i) annual review of the portfolio to 
identify potential of cumulative impacts in any given region. If so, regional EAs will be 
Page  6
prepared during project implementation; (ii) if monitoring and follow-up activities 
identify logging facilitated by rural road construction, the communities involved would 
be encouraged to prepare Forestry Management Plans, as required by SEMARNAT; (iii) 
if Regional EAs identify the need for Land Use Plans, the project should provide 
assistance (as needed) to communities to enable them to comply with these requirements.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Siting of rural roads will include careful analysis of alignment alternatives to avoid 
passing through sensitive natural habitats. If possible, roads will be aligned along already 
existing paths.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
I. Action Plan for Environmental Issues  
 
Environmental Assessment.  CDI has prepared a comprehensive Environmental 
Management Framework to guarantee adequate due diligence along all steps of a project 
cycle. The framework establishes (i) screening criteria for identifying levels of 
environmental risk associated with each project; (ii)  the environmental responsibilities 
for each participating actor; (iii) environmental control points (at entry, bidding, 
supervision); (iv) environmental manuals for construction for each sector (road, 
electrification, water and sanitation); and (v) monitoring and reporting procedures. It also 
defines requirements for Bank prior review of most sensitive projects. The EMF includes 
provisions for Regional EAs to address potential cumulative impacts at the regional level.  
 
A
comprehensive capacity building program will strengthen environmental management 
in CDI, State delegations and municipalities. CDI will assign staff to environmental 
duties at headquarters and at state delegations.  
 
(ii) Natural Habitats and Forests.  The project will avoid causing (directly or indirectly) 
the significant loss or degradation of critical natural habitats (including critical forests) as 
indicated in II A 2 above. Sub-projects located in or near protected areas will include 
support to the protected area, the preparation of Management Plans for the protected area, 
if necessary. Regional EAs will identify additional measures if needed.  Potentially 
sensitive subprojects in the vicinity of critical natural habitats would also receive the 
highest level of environmental review, including prior review by the Bank.  
 
(iii) Cultural Property.  MÃ©xico has a rich archaeological and paleontological 
potential, and some new sub-projects could impact on this aspect.  Identification of 
potential impacts is included in sub-project screening criteria. EMF includes procedures 
for the preparation of protection plans, Chance finding procedures are included in 
environmental manuals for contractors.  
 
II. Action Plan for Social Issues  
 
Page  7
The actions proposed for social issues relating to each category of investment have been 
indicated in the attachment to this document.  Based on the grouping of issues relating to 
IP, involuntary resettlement, and conflicts, additional thematic actions have been 
proposed as follows:  
 
(i) Indigenous Peoples.  A separate IPDP has not been developed for the PIBAI project, 
nor is there a stand-alone component oriented towards indigenous groups.  The project as 
a
whole is targeted at indigenous groups, and the planning and implementation from 
CDI’s side is fully consistent with the World Bank’s Operational Policy 4.10, on 
Indigenous Peoples.  The social assessment report provides details on consultation 
processes, cultural appropriateness of the interventions, and other relevant aspects of the 
program.  
 
(ii) Involuntary Resettlement.  Operational Policy 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, 
applies to the project.  The discussions with CDI in this area have been extensive, since 
the PIBAI program in its origin based itself on voluntary contributions of land and other 
assets necessary for infrastructure works.  The Bank’s and CDI’s analysis of the situation 
demonstrates a fundamental dilemma between individual versus collective benefits:  
Field visits and other sources of information have identified that while in theory land 
contributions are voluntary, discussed and confirmed by community assemblies, in 
practice some individuals and families have been affected negatively through taking of 
land.  Given the communities’ emphasis on individual contributions towards the 
collective welfare, such contributions have been considered an acceptable cost offset by 
the benefit of getting the desired infrastructure.  It is also likely that for the individuals 
involved, the social cost of opposing the infrastructure would far outweigh the economic 
benefit from a formal compensation program.  Moreover, CDI has pointed out the need to 
avoid cumbersome, costly and bureaucratic arrangements at the local level where there is 
only limited capacity.  Importantly, the social assessment report also points out that 
attempts in the past at providing monetary compensation or payment for land and 
services have caused destabilization of existing community mechanisms for direct or 
indirect support to those affected, such as through allocation of other land plots from 
collectively owned land.  Because of these considerations, CDI’s preferred approach was 
to let the communities manage their own assistance mechanisms for those affected by the 
infrastructure program, without external “meddling”.  
 
However, it is also clear that while in many cases communities are able to manage this 
process through local customs and practices, “usos y costumbres”, there are also 
situations where such effective mutual support mechanisms do not function well.  Rather 
than having two or more separate approaches to dealing with access to land for the 
program, it has therefore been agreed that the Bank’s policyon Involuntary Resettlement 
will apply.  An enhanced program of local consultations, decision making, and avoidance 
of coercion or adverse impacts will be carried out.  Where needed, assistance or 
compensation to affected families will be provided.  This is described in detail in a 
separate resettlement framework which has been approved by CDI’s Consultative 
Council and cleared by the Bank’s regional Quality Assurance Team (QAT) in December 
2005.  
Page  8
(iii) Conflict Resolution Mechanism.  The project will not authorize civil works in 
communities where there are unresolved disputes that, owing to their magnitude, put their 
execution at risk.  A Conflict Resolution Mechanism, applicable to all potential project-
related conflicts, including resettlement issues, has been provided by CDI as a part of the 
resettlement framework.  This is being reviewed by the Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
I. Stakeholder analysis  
 
Based on the overall analysis of institutional actors, the social assessment includes a 
systematic stakeholder analysis.  This is not limited to beneficiaries or those directly 
affected by the project.  It also includes groups who may influence the outcome of the 
project, directly or indirectly.  As with the analysis of social diversity and gender, the 
social assessment highlights the heterogeneity of actors and interests in different states 
and settings.  For each of the stakeholder groups, the analysis contains a description of 
the stakeholders and their key characteristics, as well as their interest or stake in the 
project and their level of influence over outcomes.  The purpose of this is to identify 
winners and losers, champions and potential opponents.  Some of the broad categories 
groups analyzed are (i) communities; (ii) municipal authorities; (iii) state authorities; (iv) 
federal government; civil society organizations; (v) private sector; and (vi) others.  Each 
of these categories is broken down into specific actors. For example, among state-level 
stakeholders, the analysis discusses the governor, COPLADE, the Secretariat for Public 
Works, the state agency for indigenous affairs, sectoral agencies for water, roads, 
electricity, and procurement and financial management authorities.  
 
From the stakeholder analysis, the clear conclusion is that the PIBAI program is demand 
driven and enjoys broad support among many different actors.  The key risk factor lies 
with the interface between the community and the program in the form of contractors: 
The analysis points out that “ .. their interest is not with achieving the objectives of the 
program” from a poverty reduction or sustainability perspective.  Transparency and 
oversight in civil works is therefore essential, and the social assessment provides 
guidance on how communities can be assisted in this through access to information on 
budgets, norms and standards, as well as strengthening of the traditional institutions of 
local civil works committees and mechanisms for social auditing.  
 
It is interesting to note from the social assessment that civil society organizations have 
not played much role in the PIBAI program.  The analysis notes that CSOs are generally 
in favor of development for indigenous groups, but also that in some cases they try to 
maintain a patron-like control, and to oppose efforts at what they see as changing local 
culture.  From consultations with the communities themselves, it is however clear that 
better access to markets, education and health services is a cultural change that the 
communities themselves wholeheartedly support and embrace.  In discussions with CDI, 
the Bank has explored whether high quality CSOs may be involved in particular aspects 
of the program, such as local capacity building, contribution to conflict resolution 
Page  9
mechanisms, or participation in monitoring or supervision.  This is being considered, and 
may be piloted in selected areas.  
 
II. Mechanisms for Participation and Consultation  
 
CDI as an institution has developed a systematic participation and consultation 
framework.  For the PIBAI program, the social assessment report notes in the 
introduction that “Contrary to other government agencies which timidly open space for 
citizens’ and groups’ opinions and in development, for CDI the consultation and 
participation of stakeholders is a practice .. which is found at all levels.”  At the national 
level, this is reflected in the Consultative Council of CDI, which provides guidance and 
advice to the organization.  The PIBAI program is based on an extensive set of 
consultations held at local and national levels in 2003 and 2004, where nearly 2,000 
people participated in 38 different events.  
 
At local level, the project cycle for the PIBAI sub-projects has a systematic consultation 
and participation process built in at different stages. This includes:  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Expression of demand, discussed internally and submitted to the government  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Social auditing and control, through civil works committees and discussions in 
assembly  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Participation in design decisions, for example to prevent affecting sacred sites  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Formal handover of civil works, and community involvement in maintenance and 
upkeep  
 
ïƒ˜ 
Ongoing access to information throughout the project cycle  
 
A
particular aspect of community involvement is management and mediation of 
conflict.  The social assessment highlights several areas where there are intra- and inter-
community tensions.  CDI has started a capacity building program for their staff to 
manage conflict, and has played an active role in protecting indigenous groups’ human 
rights.  The social assessment report also identifies several other agencies and institutions 
that contribute to conflict resolution.  
 
As part of the consultations for the proposed project, CDI has organized consultations 
on different aspects of the program.  The proposed resettlement framework, which 
represents a change brought about through Bank interventions, was discussed at the CDI 
Consultative Council in December.  During project preparations meetings have been held 
with different stakeholder groups in Oaxaca, Puebla, and other states.  Additional 
consultations are scheduled for February (with stakeholders in Oaxaca, and academia in 
Mexico) prior to completion of appraisal, and in March 2006 (with the CDI Consultative 
Council) prior to completion of Negotiations or Board Presentation.  Details of these will 
be annexed the project documentation.  
 
The EMF has been presented and discussed with relevant stakeholders such as state 
delegations, technical agencies (roads, electrification, water and sanitation), state 
agencies, environmental agencies (SEMARNAT) and selected municipalities. The 
Page  10
framework will be subject to a wide dissemination and training exercise targeting all 
participating municipalities and agencies.  
 
A
second workshop to discuss the final EMF is planned for the weeks of February 20 
and 27 in which CDI will make a presentation to SEMARNAT, and environmental units 
of the federal executing agencies, namely, water, roads and electrification.  This will 
followed up with a third round of consultations in March 2006 (with the CDI 
Consultative Council) prior to completion of Negotiations or Board Presentation.  Details 
of these will be annexed the project documentation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/03/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/03/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Since this is an IP project, there is no need for an IPDP.  However, in the interest of 
transparency, the project team has disclosed the Social Assessment Report through the 
InfoShop on February 17, 2006, along with the other documents. A stand-alone report is 
being prepared indicating how the project is in compliance with OP/BP 4.10   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  11
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  12
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Harideep Singh 
02/17/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
02/17/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/17/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Juan Martinez 
02/17/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Laura Tuck 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr McDonald P. Benjamin 
 
Comments:   
