Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No. 36290 
Date prepared/updated: May 19, 2006    
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico   
Project ID:  P080104 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  Wind Umbrella (La Venta II) Carbon Finance 
Task Team Leader:  Demetrios Papathanasiou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 25, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFE 
Lending Instrument:  Carbon Offset 
Sector:  Renewable Energy 
Theme: Climate Change 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 0 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 0 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 0 
 
CF Amount (US$m.): 12.285 
Other financing amounts by source: (US$m.): 113.865 
Comisión Federal de Electricidad 
Environmental Category: B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [X ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X ] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X ] 
2. Project Objectives: 
 
The project aims to reduce greenhouse gases emissions from power generation in Mexico and 
promote investment in wind energy in Mexico to diversify the sources of power generation in the 
country.  
 
The project will contribute to the development of the international carbon market in Mexico 
through the supply of Emissions Reductions under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) 
as set forth under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. The project is expected to reduce about 4 
million tCO2e over a 20-year operation period. Key performance indicator is the creation of  
emissions reductions through the electricity generation of the power plant.  Secondary indicators 
of success concern future operations of the same type that will appear in the country 
(demonstration effect).   
 
This project supports the first large-scale investment in wind energy in the country and will 
create experience and knowledge in the development operation and maintenance of wind energy 
generation facilities. 
 
Page  2
2
3. Project Description: 
 
The proposed project will purchase 2.34 million metric tons of  CO
2
(tCO2e) Verified Emissions 
Reductions (VERs) from the La Venta II wind power plant.  The project would reduce 
greenhouse gases emissions because it generates electricity using wind energy with no associated 
GHG emissions and would replace electricity, which would otherwise be generated using fossil 
fuel alternatives. 
 
The La Venta II project consists of a wind energy power plant with a nominal capacity of 85 
MW and its associated interconnection system.  The plant would provide annually about 340 
GWh on average, resulting in an annual reduction of GHG of about 200,000 tons of  CO
2
(tCO2e).  The plant will be owned and operated by CFE and will be the first large-scale wind 
energy plant in Mexico, located in the Ejido La Venta, in the municipality of Juchitán de 
Zaragoza, in the state of Oaxaca. 
The owner of the La Venta II wind energy power plant is CFE, which would enter in an 
Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) with the World Bank.  The World Bank acts 
as trustee of the Spanish Carbon Fund and the Bio-Carbon Fund, for the purchase of GHG 
emissions reductions.  The project would reduce about 4 million tCO2e over its 20-year lifetime.  
The World Bank would purchase, on behalf of the Spanish Carbon Fund, Verified Emissions 
Reductions (VER) of 1.8 million tCO2e from the project for the period 2007-2016 and an 
additional 540,000 tCO2e for the period 2017-2019 on behalf of the Bio-Carbon Fund. 
 
The purchase of VERs under this project means that the emission reductions will be verified 
annually by an accredited organization and their statement will be transmitted to the carbon 
funds.  An advance payment to the sponsor will occur upon reception of the power plant from the 
contractor responsible for construction and the remainder will be paid annually in the period 
2007-2012 after subtracting the advance payment.
 
Wind Energy Power Plant and Interconnection Line  
Emissions reductions will be the result of CFE’s wind energy project to be located in the 
ejido
 la 
Venta, municipality of Juchitan de Zaragoza, a region known as the Istmo de Tehuantepec, state 
of Oaxaca.  CFE’s wind energy project will use wind turbine generators that transform the 
kinetic energy of the wind to generate electricity.  The project will install 98 wind turbines 
(Gamesa, G-52 850 kW) in four parallel lines oriented East to West, vertically to the prevalent 
wind direction.  The actual use (agricultural, livestock) of the fields where the turbines will be 
located will not change as the footprint of the actual wind turbines and associated infrastructure 
(access roads, interconnection lines, etc) is only about 20 ha when the total project area is 
estimated to be about 1300 ha.  CFE has entered into an agreement with the local community 
(Ejido La Venta) and individual landowners to pay a fee (rent) for the power plant.  The project 
will be connected to the national grid via an interconnection line of 230 kV with a length of 
about 18 km along existing roads. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
 
The project is located in the 
ejido
 La Venta, municipality of Juchitan de Zaragoza, a region 
known as the Istmo de Tehuantepec, in the state of Oaxaca. 
Page  3
3
CFE has presented to SEMARNAT, as required by the Mexican norms, a full Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) for the La Venta II wind energy project, prepared by the Instituto de 
Ecologia A.C. (available in Project files).  The EIA has been elaborated on the basis of a 
‘typical’ wind project in the area.  SEMARNAT received the EIA on April 22, 2004 and 
approved it on August 3, 2004.  
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Mr. Alonso Zarzar (Senior Social Specialist) 
Ms. Gabriela Azuela Elizondo (Senior Energy Specialist) 
Mr. Daniel Farchy (Junior Professional Associate) 
Ms. Tania Carrasco (Consultant, Social Specialist) 
Ms. Dora Patricia Andrade Salaverria (Consultant, Environmental Specialist) 
Mr. Carl Thelander (Consultant, Avian Impacts Specialist) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The project triggers 
O.P. 4.01
 (Environmental Assessment) and 
O.P. 4.04
 (Natural Habitats). 
The project sponsor complies with the requirements of O.P. 4.01 as follows: CFE has presented 
to SEMARNAT --as required by the Mexican norms-- a full Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) for the project.  The EIA was prepared by the Instituto de Ecologia A.C. (available in 
Project files).  SEMARNAT received the EIA on April 22, 2004 and approved it on August 3, 
2004, following consultations with a number of environmental experts in the country.  An update 
to the EIA based on the final project design was approved by SEMARNAT in December 2005.  
 
The EIA includes an analysis of impacts and presents measures to avoid, control, mitigate, or 
compensate any negative environmental impacts in an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), 
during both construction and operation phases of the project.  On the basis of the EIA, 
environmental audits are planned to ensure compliance with the applicable norms of the project.  
Page  4
4
Further, CFE is developing specific operational guidelines to monitor and prevent environmental 
impacts related to migratory birds (see Key Safeguard issues below). 
 
SEMARNAT will use the experience from the proposed project during the operation phase to 
evaluate impacts on the migratory birds in the zone and will issue appropriate norms in similar 
future projects in the country. 
 
Public disclosure 
 
The EIA and EMP are posted on the Bank website, and on the website of a SEMARNAT.  There 
are no negatively affected people from this project and all local communities have had access to 
the EIA and are currently able to lodge complaints directly with CFE and the local 
environmental authorities.  SEMARNAT based its evaluation and approval of the EIA on 
consultations held with General Direction of Wild-
Life (Dirección General de la Vida Silvestre, 
DGVS), the National Biodiversity Commission (Comisión Nacional de Biodiversidad, 
CONABIO), the State Institute of Ecology of Oaxaca (Instituto Estatal de Ecología del Estado de 
Oaxaca) and the Coordination of Conservation Programs in Central Mexico (DUMAC).   
 
On April 20
th
 2006, the Federal Commission of Electricity conducted a one day public 
consultation with relevant stakeholders, bird specialists, NGOs and the academia to discuss the 
characteristics of La Venta III and its potential impacts on bird and bat populations. More than 
40 people attended the consultation and in general terms it has been reported that the event 
resulted in a constructive dialogue and positive conclusions regarding the quality and usefulness 
of CFE’s bird monitoring program. CFE had left an open e-mail address for further questions and 
answers about the project.  The formal specific results of the consultations will be disclosed 
within the next ten days and this section will be updated with a description of these results in 
detail (the week of May 1, 2006). 
 
The project’s Indigenous Peoples Plan has been submitted to the  World Bank Infoshop. 
 
Key Safeguards issues
 
The key environmental impact concerns the potential collision of birds (native and migratory) 
with the blades of wind turbines during operation. Specifically, the Oaxaca portion of the 
Isthmus of Tehuantepec is recognized as one of the world's most important corridors for 
migratory birds.  As noted in the Environmental Assessment (EA) report millions of birds 
(representing a wide diversity of species) funnel through the Isthmus area, especially during the 
autumn (southbound) migration that takes place late August to November.  The general La Venta 
region is particularly noteworthy for numbers of raptors (hawks and other birds of prey) that pass 
through the area. 
 
The Project has established a number of measures to avoid and/or minimize impacts on bird and 
bat populations including: (i) as required by the environmental licensing for the Project, CFE has 
been implementing since 2004 a program of monitoring of the birds in the project’s zone of 
Page  5
5
influence (ii) the project has been re-designed during the final award to the contractor to involve 
a
smaller number of turbines and to avoid areas where risks of collision where deemed higher 
during the monitoring program
1
(ii) a public consultation with relevant stakeholders and bird 
specialists to discuss prevention and mitigation measures was held on April 20 2006 (iii) 
development of  guidelines and specifications to ensure appropriate turbine design and 
arrangements as well as implementation of rules for turbine shutdown during migration season is 
currently under way, and iv) the structuring of a scientific review and committee for oversight 
and technical advice.   CFE is planning to implement a radar system that would detect the 
passage of big numbers of migratory birds and combine it with trained observers, so that it can 
temporary suspend the rotation of wind turbines to avoid collisions.   
 
The above operational provisions will form part of the operational and monitoring plan used to 
validate and verify emissions reductions for the purposes of the Kyoto Protocol and as standard 
practice are part of the ERPA.  An independent entity (DOE, see sections C1 and C2 above) will 
produce a report confirming that CFE is complying with all pre-established social and 
environmental conditions. 
 
General Description of Environmental Impacts La Venta II 
PHASE
 
AIR QUALITY 
Site preparation, 
construction operation and 
decommissioning  
Vehicle use and machinery increase the concentration of CO, HC, NOx  
Increase of dust due to vehicle traffic, transport of materials, civil works for 
ground leveling,  
NOISE 
Site preparation, 
construction operation and 
decommissioning 
Vehicle use, machinery and operation of wind turbines will increase the noise 
level 
SOIL 
–
GROUND 
Site preparation, 
construction operation and 
decommissioning 
Civil works for site preparation, in particular ground leveling, could result in 
loss of soil.  Movement of heavy equipment could result in compacting and 
loss of soil quality.  Discharges of oils during construction works from 
vehicles and wind turbines could contaminate the soil. 
WATER 
Operation 
The opening of access roads could affect water drainage 
VEGETATION 
Site Preparation 
Civil works for the construction of the power plant and access roads will 
result in loss of vegetation coverage 
FAUNA 
Site preparation, 
construction operation and 
decommissioning 
Civil works, the use of machinery and vehicles and the presence of personnel 
could affect the mortality of the project zones fauna.  This could take place 
primarily during the phases of preparation and construction when the number 
of workers will be greater.  During operation and commissioning such 
impacts will be negligible. 
During operation there is a risk of birds (native and migratory) colliding with 
1
SEMARNAT provided the environment clearance for the updated project in December 2005 (Official 
Memorandum in project Files) 
Page  6
6
the wind turbines. 
LANDSCAPE 
Operation and 
Maintenance 
The presence of wind turbines will have a visual impact on the landscape. 
Source: Environmental Impact Assessment, Eolic Plant La Venta II, CFE, INE A.C. (December 2003) 
(ii) Social
La Venta II will be located in an area were the system of 
ejidos
 (communal land) is in place.  
The 
ejido 
land
 
was established in 1951 with 5,815 hectares where each 
ejidatario
 was granted a 
maximum of 10 Ha. According to the National Institute of Geography and Statistics (INEGI), the 
La Venta 
has a population of 1,814 people. The inhabitants of the 
ejido
 la Venta belong to the 
ethnic group Zapoteco, one of the largest ethnic groups of the State of Oaxaca. Although the 
ejido
’
s
population does not speak Zapoteco any more, they maintain the regional festive 
traditions and identify themselves as Zapotecos and Mexicans.  
 
More than half of 
ejidatarios
 (55%) in La Venta are employed in primary sector of the economy 
(agriculture, livestock, fishing), 12% in the secondary sector (manufacturing, construction), and 
about 30% in the tertiary sector (services, commercial activities).  In 
Ejido La Venta
,
zapoteco 
peasants have been traditionally been dedicated to agriculture, mainly sugar cane crop and other 
products for family consumption such as corn, beans and pumpkin. With the fall of sugar prices, 
sugar cane based agricultural activities are no longer the main economic activity; and has been 
replaced for cattle raising and agriculture of sorghum crop , watermelons, peanuts, melons, 
cucumbers and sesame which are sold in regional markets. Because of the strong winds, land is 
being cultivated only during the spring/summer cycle, and even in irrigated land the crop output 
is below the national performance average. The land where the wind turbines are to be installed 
is being used for extensive cattle-raising, although in the past it has also been used for 
agricultural purposes (INEGI 2001).  
 
The introduction of La Venta II in 
Ejido
 La Venta will triggers the indigenous people operational 
policy (OD 4.20). It is expected that La Venta III will have a positive impact on the 
ejidos
 as 
their current farming activities will not be affected and the installation of the generators in their 
land is seen as a good opportunity to obtain additional income or compensation.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area: 
 
No negative indirect or long term impacts are foreseen 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts: 
 
Not applicable   
 
Page  7
7
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
CFE has been implementing since 2004 a program of monitoring of the birds in the project’s 
zone of influence.  There is however a number of international best practice measures that are 
implemented to prevent and mitigate impacts on bird population, including: 
 
·
Avoidance of installation of wind farms in sites with known bird migratory paths 
·
Improving visibility of wind turbines and blades: illumination during night time, white 
colored blades 
·
Collision prevention: Ensuring a maximum height of 150m 
·
Preventing the use of structure and blades for nesting or rest: use of tubular structures 
·
Monitoring and registering of bird migratory paths and number of dead birds 
·
Quick removal of any dead birds to avoid ravens 
 
According to the EIA for La Venta II, CFE has been implementing since 2004 a monitoring 
program to gather information on the types of birds which are native to the zone of influence of 
the project (Tehuantepec). In addition, CFE is planning to implement a radar system to detect the 
frequency passage and paths of migratory birds, (i.e. so that it can temporary suspend the rotation 
of wind turbines and avoid bird collisions). 
 
SEMARNAT will use the experience of operations with La Venta II to evaluate impacts on 
migratory birds in the zone of influence and issue appropriate guidelines and/or regulations for 
future similar projects in the country. 
 
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for La Venta II includes the following general 
measures: 
 
·
Program of Environmental Safeguarding (
Programa de Vigiliancia Ambiental
)
that 
integrates all measures for prevention, reduction and/or compensation of adverse 
environmental impacts identified for every stage of the project, specifying the applicable 
activities and procedures. 
·
Reforestation program that will consider the use of native species of the region in the 
project site and in proportion similar to those affected by the project. 
·
Works to control erosion and reconstitute the ground in all areas where organic ground is 
removed during clearing for civil works. 
·
Program to monitor resident and migratory birds in the zone of influence of the project. 
 
The Project has established a number of measures to avoid and/or minimize impacts on bird and 
bat populations including: (i) as required by the environmental licensing for the Project, CFE has 
been implementing since 2004 a program of monitoring of the birds in the project’s zone of 
influence (ii) the project has been re-designed during the final award to the contractor to involve 
a
smaller number of turbines and to avoid areas where risks of collision where deemed higher 
during the monitoring program (ii) a public consultation with relevant stakeholders and bird 
specialists to discuss prevention and mitigation measures was held on April 20 2006 (iii) 
development of  guidelines and specifications to ensure appropriate turbine design and 
Page  8
8
arrangements as well as implementation of rules for turbine shutdown during migration season is 
currently under way, and iv) the structuring of a scientific review and committee for oversight 
and technical advice.   CFE is planning to implement a radar system that would detect the 
passage of big numbers of migratory birds and combine it with trained observers, so that it can 
temporary suspend the rotation of wind turbines to avoid collisions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
Key stakeholders involved in the La Venta II project are the La Venta community (ejido), 
surrounding local municipalities and local organizations.  The social assessment and consultation 
for La Venta II demonstrated the capacity of CFE to conduct and resolve in a participatory 
manner a formal process to reach an agreement with the La Venta 
ejido
 and a compensation 
scheme.  CFE is currently finalizing a report to be disclosed including a formal indigenous 
people in accordance with the recommendations established in OD 4.20. 
CFE has already conducted participatory consultation activities in 
Ejido
 La Venta for the wind 
based power generating facility La Venta II. Below is a description of the process followed for 
La Venta II: 
 
·
The majority of 
ejidatarios
 participated in early meetings with the CFE.  At the 
beginning of the dialogue, the 
ejidatarios
 had little interest in the project, due to the 
existence of private sponsors in the region that promoted wind energy installation in 
communal lands and promised very attractive (and potentially speculative) rents for land 
use. During the initial negotiations with CFE the 
ejidatarios
 were requesting free 
electricity service, cleaning of a nearby river, schools rehabilitation, water drainage 
works, and paved streets.   
 
·
In 2002, in response to the concerns of community leaders and members regarding the 
lack of information on wind energy project developments, the State Government of 
Oaxaca, through the Secretariat of Industrial and Commercial Development (SEDIC) 
requested support from USAID to conduct a study on wind energy.  The study would 
provide 
ejidos
 and others communities in the Isthmus of Tehuantepec region with 
information on the typical magnitude of payments, structure of agreements, and means of 
verifying actual generation or power sales revenues, and types of contracts typically used 
in the US and elsewhere between wind power projects developers and landowners.  The 
study has been prepared for USAID Mexico and the State Government of Oaxaca and 
SEDIC by Winrock International, Global Energy Concepts, the American Wind Energy 
Association (AWEA), and the Mexican Rural Development Foundation (FMDR). 
 
·
CFE continued negotiations with land owners and 
ejidatarios
,
for the rights to construct 
the plant on the basis of international practices. As a result of these 
negotiations, 
ejidatarios
 will receive payments for the energy generated and invoiced by 
the wind plant --in line with international practices. It should be noted that 
ejidatarios
 
will receive the compensation from the energy plant and will also be able to continue 
with the farming activities in their land. 
Page  9
9
The project will benefit directly the 
ejidatarios
 that own land in the project’s zone of influence 
and indirectly all the 
ejidatarios
 of
La Venta II according to a plan of social works negotiated 
between CFE and the local authorities of the ejido.  The plan includes: (i) the creation of a trust 
fund (created in December 2005 and capitalized with 7 million Mexican Pesos) to provide public 
lighting, paving of the principal streets of the 
ejido
 and computers for the secondary school; and 
(ii) the creation of an employment agency that would give priority to the 
ejidatarios
 in the works 
during the installation of the wind turbines.  The plan will be executed by the authorities of the 
ejido with the support of CFE, the Ministry of Social Development (
Secretaría de Desarrollo 
Social
,
SEDESOL) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development, Fishing and Food 
(
Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Desarrrollo Rural, Pesca y Alimentación
).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
April 2005 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
April 22, 2004 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
December 15, 2004 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Under preparation 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
May 25 2006 (expected) 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
May 19 2006 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Page  10
10
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
EA report was reviewed by the 
project team environmental specialist
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [ ]          No [X ]          N/A [] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
The project might present a risk for 
migratory birds during the autumn 
migration period.  Mitigation 
measures for this are presented in the 
Environmental Assessment Report 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [X]          No []          N/A [  ] 
CFE conducted consultations and 
agreed a compensation scheme with 
La Venta 
ejidatarios
.
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Page  11
11
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
EIA has been disclosed at 
SEMARNAT’s website.  IPP is to 
disclosed to CFE’ 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [ X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  12
12
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Demetrios Papathanasiou 
May 19, 2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Gabriela Azuela Elizondo 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Alonso Zarzar 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Dora Patricia Andrade Salaverria 
(Environmental Consultant) 
Tania Carrasco (Social Specialist Consultant) 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Susan Goldmark 
 
Comments:   
