Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3163 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P106528 
Project Name: Mexico Effective and Responsive Governance 
Task Team Leader: Roberto Adrian Senderowitsch 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 8, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The higher order outcome of this project is to improve the efficiency, quality, and accountability 
of public expenditures in Mexico.  
 
The project development objective is to introduce performance-based management and 
budgeting in Mexico, bringing into the budget-setting process and broader public debate rigorous 
information on the efficiency and effectiveness of federal departments, agencies and programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In accordance with the government?s request, a Technical Assistance Loan is proposed. While 
the team considered as an alternative the use of a series of fee-based services (FBS), these are not 
well suited to provide support for long-term reforms, and they lack the instruments necessary to 
finance concrete activities during implementation.  
 
The proposed TAL is structured around the following five components:  
 
1-Design and Implementation of a Management Enhancement Program (PMG)  
Page  2
This component will provide technical assistance for the design and implementation of a 
Management Enhancement Program, starting with a pilot phase and scaling up to 200+ federal 
organizations. The PMG may include, for example, horizontal systems for consolidated 
procurement and human resources management across federal departments and agencies.  
 
2- Consolidation of the System for Evaluating Policy and Program Effectiveness  
 
Government counterparts, including Hacienda, requested Bank support for their efforts to 
consolidate a system to evaluate the effectiveness of federal policies and programs, with special 
emphasis on institutional strengthening and the design of information flows.  This component 
will include an assessment of the current legal framework and institutional mandates for 
evaluations, as well as strengthening existing capacity for conducting sound evaluations.  
 
3- Development of an Integrated Information System for Results-Based Management  
 
This component will support the development of institutional arrangements, procedures, and an 
associated electronic database system to (i) receive information from different sources (e.g., 
Instituto Nacional de Estad?stica, Geograf?a e Inform?tica, impact evaluations, PMG, budget 
indicators, etc.), (ii) organize and analyze this information, and (iii) produce reports to inform 
various stakeholders (Hacienda for budget preparation, federal departments and agencies for 
program improvements, Congress for better-informed policy making, and the general public for 
increased transparency and accountability).  
 
4- Strengthening the Financial Management System  
 
This component will build on the support already offered by the World Bank (through a fee-
based service) to help Hacienda integrate their finance cycle. Specifically, this component will 
help to bring the Public Accounts System (Cuenta P?blica) closer to international standards for 
assets management and expenditure accounting linked to results.  
 
5- (i) Institutional Strengthening of Central Units and (ii) Monitoring and Evaluation of the 
Reform Interventions  
 
This component will provide technical assistance to government units in the Secretar?a de 
Funci?n P?blica (SFP) and Hacienda for the successful implementation of the project. It will also 
contribute to developing the organizational capacity necessary to monitor progress and evaluate 
areas for improvement related to the innovations included in the previous four components.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Mexico City, Mexico   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable as no environmental or social safeguards are expected to be triggered by the 
proposed operation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/20/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Roberto Adrian Senderowitsch 
10/16/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/09/2007 
Comments:  N/A 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Nicholas Paul Manning 
10/16/2007 
Comments:  N/A 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
