Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/13/2007 
Report No.:  AC1913
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P082950 
Project Name:  Mexico: Integrated Management of Basins and Aquifers Project 
Task Team Leader:  Douglas C. Olson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (50%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Environmental policies and institutions 
(S);Rural policies and institutions (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Pollution 
management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
101.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve participatory IWRM in critical water 
basins and aquifers. The achievement of the PDO will be monitored through the 
following outcome indicators:  
 
(a) 
IWRM Plans for critical basins and aquifers prepared by local organizations and 
under implementation;  
 
(b) 
Water users support implementation of IWRM Plans;  
 
(c) 
CONAGUA?s planning, programming and budgeting processes are based on 
IWRM Plans for critical basin and aquifer areas; and  
 
(d) 
Reduction of groundwater overexploitation and increased water productivity in 
critical aquifers.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will support sustainable IWRM in four of Mexico?s most critically 
overexploited hydrographic regions ? R?o Bravo, Cuencas Centrales del Norte, Lerma-
Santiago-Pacifico, and Noroeste ? and six of their aquifers ? Costa de Hermosillo, 
Page  2
Comarca Lagunera, San Luis Potos?, Aguascalientes, Quer?taro and El Bajio de 
Guanajuato.  
 
The Project, which will lay out the planning priorities for critical basins and aquifers 
through IWRM Plans, and undertake limited demonstrative subprojects, is expected to be 
implemented over a five-year period and costs US$100 million supported completely 
through Bank financing.  
 
However, full implementation of the IWRM Plans in the project areas will take 
approximately 15 years, at a total estimated cost of about US$2 billion.  This financing of 
the plans is expected to come from a variety of sources, including CONAGUA, Ministry 
of Agriculture (Secretar?a de Agricultura, Ganaderia, Desarrollo Rural, Pesca y 
Alimentaci?n ? SAGARPA), Ministry of Social Development (Secretar?a de Desarrollo 
Social-SEDESOL), and SEMARNAT, as well as state and municipal programs, water 
users and private investors.  Multi- and bi-lateral agencies may also participate.  
 
The Project is a pilot, intended to demonstrate how to implement IWRM in a 
decentralized manner.  Lessons learned through the pilot are expected to be applied 
throughout Mexico.  
 
The Project components are the following:  
 
Component 1 - IWRM in Critical Hydrographic Regions and Basins (US$24 Million)  
 
This component will support improvements to IWRM at the basin-level in four of the 
most critically exploited hydrographic regions of Mexico: R?o Bravo, Cuencas Centrales 
del Norte, Lerma-Santiago-Pacifico, and Noroeste.  
 
It will finance: (a) studies to improve the regional water resources knowledge base 
(groundwater and surface water availability, quality, uses and discharges); (b) studies and 
equipment to improve the regional water monitoring system; (c) technical assistance 
(TA) and equipment to consolidate the regional water information systems, including the 
creation of four regional water information centers; (d) TA to develop participatory, 
basin-level IWRM plans; (e) demonstration projects to provide evidence that water-
savings technology can be cost-effective; (f) studies to devise innovative, alternative 
mechanisms for the financing of the IWRM plans applying the user pay and polluter pay 
principles supported by the NWL; (g) training and TA to build the capacity of basin 
organizations (RBAs and RBCs) and (h) public information and awareness campaigns on 
the need to improve WRM.  
 
Component 2: IWRM in Critical Aquifers (US$65 Million)  
 
This component will support IWRM within six of the most critically overexploited 
aquifers in Mexico: Comarca Lagunera, Aguascalientes, San Luis Potos?, El Bajio de 
Guanajuato, Quer?taro and Costa de Hermosillo.  These aquifers were chosen because of 
their serious overexploitation problems and given that they have strongly motivated and 
organized water users organizations (COTAS), coupled with the strong participation of 
local CONAGUA offices, state and local governments.  In addition, considerable 
progress was made under PROMMA in these areas in defining WRM problems and 
identifying potential solutions.  
Page  3
This component will finance, for each of the six aquifers: (a) studies to improve 
groundwater resources knowledge base in the six aquifers (groundwater availability, 
quality, uses); (b) studies and equipment to improve groundwater monitoring network 
and information system, (c) TA to develop participatory, detailed aquifer-level IWRM 
plans; (d) studies, civil works and equipment for the design and implementation of 
demonstrative subprojects identified in the plans; (e) training and TA to build the 
capacity of aquifer-level institutions, such as COTAS and (f) public information and 
awareness campaigns for local water users on the need to improve WRM.  
 
Component 3: Improve Central-level Support for IWRM (US$ 11 million)  
 
This component will support: (a) CONAGUA in aligning its central-level programs to 
promote IWRM; and (b) overall management of the proposed project including 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) through the financing of TA, training and equipment.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will address the most critically water stressed sub-basins and aquifers in 
Mexico. IWRM in four of Mexico's most critically overexploited hydrographic regions -- 
Rio Bravo, Cuencas Centrales del Norte, Lerma-Santiago-Pacifico, and Noroeste -- and 
six of their aquifers -- Costa de Hermosillo, Comarca Lagunera, San Luis Potosi, 
Aguascalientes, Queretaro and El Bajio de Guanajuato.  
 
These areas are all located in northern and central Mexico.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
Mr Marcus J. Wishart (YPP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project aims to improve conditions for sustainable IWRM, which is expected to be 
overwhelmingly positive in terms of environmental outcomes. There may be some minor, 
localized impacts associated with demonstration subprojects and other minor civil works 
(e.g. construction of a regional information center), which will be defined during project 
preparation. As such the project has been classified as a Category B.  
 
The project?s environmental management approach involves a series of phased EA 
instruments to ensure compliance with the provisions of OP 4.01, Environmental 
Assessment. These are consistent with OP 4.01 provisions for Category B Projects.  
 
At the project level, CONAGUA has completed an ?umbrella EA? (Evaluacion 
Ambiental Global del Proyecto GICA) describing the regulatory and institutional 
framework for IWRM, as well as the overall environmental management plan for the 
project. This umbrella EA includes an analysis of gaps, and provides actions to 
complement current practice so as to guarantee full compliance with Bank safeguard 
standards. These actions are summarized in the project?s Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP).  
 
Project Environmental Management Plan;  
 
The Project EMP comprises the following activities:  
 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA): The EMP calls for SEA as an integral part 
of the IWRM planning process. This approach has been designed so as to mainstream 
environmental considerations into the basin- and aquifer-level IWRM Plans, through 
which priority actions for development will be agreed upon and formalized.  
 
The IWRM Plans will be developed through a participatory process, in which a series of 
development scenarios will be developed by key stakeholders, with the goal of achieving 
economic growth in priority sectors that is compatible with sustainable water use. 
Hydrological, hydrogeological and decision-support models will be used to estimate the 
impact on water resources associated with each scenario. One key input to these models 
will be the SEA, which will estimate the environmental impacts associated with the 
various development scenarios. Key issues to be addressed in the SEA include links 
between the alternative development scenarios and the environment (e.g. changes in 
pesticide use associated with conversion to higher-value crops, induced impacts 
associated with land-use changes), as well as links between water resources use and 
natural habitats (e.g. location of protected areas relative to critical areas for aquifer 
recharge). Results of the SEA would be used to help guide decision-making so that 
IWRM plans are designed taking a range of environmental issues into account. As a 
result, medium-term development plans will reflect environmental priorities. The EMP 
includes TORs for this activity.  
Page  5
Environmental and Social Management Framework for Investments: The EMP includes 
a
framework to manage the environmental and social impacts associated with project 
investments, such as demonstration subprojects and construction of small infrastructure. 
This Environmental and Social Management Framework, or ESMF, sets forth the 
procedures to minimize safeguard impacts associated with such works. For example, the 
ESMF includes criteria for screening potential subproject sites to minimize 
environmental impacts, application of environmental manuals to guide design, 
construction and operation of typical activities, requirements for Environmental Impact 
Assessment, disclosure and consultation, environmental clauses for inclusion in all 
construction contracts, pesticide management training, as well as the associated 
institutional responsibilities.  
 
Capacity Building: The EMP calls for measures to improve institutional capacity for 
environmental management at the river basin, aquifer, and central level. Specifically, the 
EMP includes funding for: contracting of environmental specialists to participate in the 
development of each of the ten IWRM plans, support to the development of national 
regulations for environmental flows and environmental services, publication of 
environmental manuals for typical water infrastructure, and public awareness campaigns 
so that local water users support the implementation of IWRM plans.  
 
Expected Project Environmental Impacts. The umbrella EA found that the project will 
likely have significant positive environmental impacts. Through supporting the 
development and implementation of IWRM plans for critical basins and aquifers, the 
project will be contributing to the reduction of water overexactraction, one of the most 
pressing environmental problems facing Mexico. This outcome would be a significant 
improvement over the current baseline conditions within the project areas. Likewise, the 
project will support changes to the national legal framework to determine calculations for  
 
ecological flows and water-related environmental services.  
 
Project activities to support small-scale demonstration subprojects may result in minor 
environmental impacts, but these are expected to be far outweighed by the positive 
outcomes associated with the project?s contributions to water sustainability.  
 
OP 4.04 Natural Habitats  
 
The project is expected to result in positive impacts to natural habitats through its 
emphasis on reducing water extraction to levels that allow for environmental needs, 
including ecological flows. Project-supported SEAs will provide a mechanism for 
mainstreaming environmental consideration into the water resources planning process, 
including aspects related to the linkage between natural habitats and future development 
scenarios. Toward that aim, each SEA will include an inventory of natural habitats within 
the project area, and consider how IWRM options and investments could affect those 
habitats. For specific investments supported through the project, the ESMF provides 
screening mechanisms to assess the potential of demonstration subprojects to cause 
significant conversion (loss) or degradation of natural habitats, whether directly (through 
construction) or indirectly (through human activities induced by the project). Appropriate 
Page  6
mitigation or compensation will be included to address any significant conversion or 
degradation of natural habitats attributable to the demonstration subprojects.  
 
The project will also contribute to the protection of natural habitats within Mexico 
through activities to develop norms for requiring and calculating ecological flows.  
 
OP 4.09 Pest Management  
 
The Project does not support any investments that are likely to involve the procurement, 
use, or disposal of environmentally significant quantities of pest control products. 
However, through activities to reduce water use, project-supported IWRM plans are 
likely to promote diversification into (possibly new) higher-value crops, and 
intensification of existing low-technology systems, both of which require actions under 
OP 4.09. It should be noted that the project is expected to result in a net reduction in 
irrigated area, thereby reducing total pesticide use within the project area.  
 
The project will address these issues through the following mechanisms.  
 
(i) 
Issues related to pest and pesticide management will be addressed within the SEA 
framework of the IWRM Plans. In all such cases, actions to minimize pesticide-related 
impacts on human health and the environment, and promote ecologically based Integrated 
Pest Management (IPM) will be supported.  
 
(ii) 
Where individual subprojects involve pesticide use (such as might be the case in a 
test plots to demonstrate alternative irrigation techniques, or conversion to new crops), 
the ESMF will require training in IPM, including pesticide handling and storage.  
 
(iii) 
Capacity building efforts will support the dissemination of best agricultural 
practices, including pesticide management and IPM, to farmers in the project areas.  
 
OP 4.37 Safety of Dams  
 
Although there is not expected to be any construction of new dams or improvements 
made to existing dams during the implementation of GICA, some of the demonstration 
subprojects may use water coming from upstream reservoirs. As required by OP 4.37, 
CONAGUA?s dam safety procedures call for regular verification of safety characteristics 
of the related facilities, and implementation of remedial measures where necessary.  
 
The project is also supporting a national dam safety information system, including 
training to dam operators, updating of dam safety norms, and creation of a GIS-based 
dam safety information system.  These activities are expected to result in improved dam 
safety conditions across Mexico.  
 
OP 7.50 International Waters  
 
The objectives of this safeguard are to ensure that all riparians are informed when Bank-
financed projects affect international waters, and that international waters are protected.  
 
Through Component 1.1, the project supports activities within the Rio Bravo (Rio 
Grande), which qualifies as ?international water? as it is located on the border between 
Mexico and the United States of America. While the policy is trigged, project activities 
Page  7
within the Rio Bravo Basin involve only water resource monitoring and information 
collection, as well as planning activities related to IWRM. The project will not involve 
any civil works within the Rio Bravo Basin. As such, the project qualifies for the 
exception to the notification requirement under Para 7 of OP 7.50.  Accordingly, the 
TORs for the IWRM Plan design will include an assessment of the need to notify other 
riparians. The Regional Vice President was notified of this exception on April 19, 2007.  
 
It should also be noted that the international waters issue will be addressed within the 
Comision Internacional de Limites y Aguas (CILA), a longstanding bilateral commission 
(between the USA and Mexico) where foreign affairs and water authorities from both 
countries are represented. Their mandate is to regulate and agree on the management of 
international waters. While there are not expected to be any negative impacts to the 
quality or quantity of water in the Rio Bravo, the CILA will be regularly notified of the 
project progress by CONAGUA, who is a member of this commission.  
 
OD 4.20 Indigenous Peoples. Given that the project?s Project Concept Review was 
before July 1, 2005, the project is subject to the provisions of OD 4.20. Social assessment 
carried out during preparation indicated that there is one Irrigiation District within the 
project area (Colonias Yaqui, in the Sonora?s Yaqui River Basin) with indigenous 
population.  
 
Given that, more indigenous peoples may be living within the smaller Irrigation Units 
that may be within the project?s critical basins or aquifers, the project has an IPDP 
outlining procedures for identifying and working with indigenous peoples during project 
implementation. The project will undertake Strategic Social Assessment (SSA) as part of 
the development of the IWRM plans in each of the ten project areas. The SSA will 
include an analysis of the populations of each selected basin/aquifer. If the SSA results 
find that there are any indigenous peoples living within the area, the IPDP will be 
undertaken to ensure that communication and capacity building efforts are culturally 
compatible, and that indigenous peoples participate in, and benefit from, IWRM plans. 
Moreover, the project ESMF calls for IPDPs to be developed if demonstration 
subprojects, or any other project civil works, would affect indigenous peoples.. The 
operational manual comprises ToR and procedures for this purpose.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). No resettlement is envisaged due to the limited 
nature of the intended works (see Annex 4). The project?s ESMF includes screening 
criteria that would flag any subproject requiring resettlement.. The demonstration 
subprojects will incorporate concrete measures to avoid any negative impacts in 
agreement with participants in these efforts.  
 
OPN 11.03 Cultural Property  
 
This safeguard aims to ensure Bank-financed projects do not negatively affect culturally 
important patrimony. It is triggered in any project involving construction, such as GICA, 
where those activities might affect such patrimony. Demonstration subprojects may 
require minor civil works, including excavation, which, although unlikely, could yield 
impacts to cultural patrimony. As such, the ESMF sets forth the procedures to be 
Page  8
followed by contractors in the event of ?chance finds? during construction, including 
notification of the competent authorities. Such procedures will be included in all bidding 
and contract documents. These procedures have been established in the Mexican ?Ley de 
Monumentos y Bienes Culturales? and are consistent with the Bank?s policy.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts associated with the Project are presumed to be overwhelmingly 
positive as a result of alleviating excessive water consumption and implementing 
sustainable IWRM plans for each of the Project Areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
'no development' alternative was not considered relevant as it would compound 
escalating problems of overexploitation and unsustainable water resource management 
practices.  
 
Continuation of PROMMA including institutional support for the implementation of the 
LAN but without including the IWRM actions in Project Areas was considered and 
rejected.  Without the IWRM actions in Project Areas, it is likely that the serious regional 
water resources management problems related to overexploitation would not be 
systematically addressed in any specific part of the country.  
 
The Project provides the background and tools to mainstream environmental and social 
responsibilities into the IWRM process. Provisions incorporated into the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework will ensure appropriate consideration of alternative 
interventions within the demonstration subprojects and allow early identification of 
potentially negative impacts; for this purpose preparation teams will incorporate 
environment and social specialists. Early assessment of alternatives will also enable 
potentially positive impacts to be effectively incorporated as part of the overall objective 
of the sustainable IWRM effort in each sub-basin and aquifer.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Given the nature of the Project's structure, with Project Areas and demonstration 
subprojects yet to be defined, the Borrower has undertaken a series of steps to ensure full 
compliance with safeguard policy issues. These have been previously described. The 
Project's implementing agency, the National Water Commission (Comision Nacional del 
Agua - CONAGUA), has more than 15 years experience with Bank funded water 
resources projects in Mexico. This long association has allowed the Bank and 
CONAGUA to work together to ensure that appropriate standards and regulations are in 
place to ensure compliance with the Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies.   
 
Page  9
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Umbrella EA and the ESMF were consulted during a workshop convoked by 
CONAGUA on December 15, 2005. The workshop was attended by members of 
government agencies, the private sector (including NGOs, such as the Fondo Mexicano 
para la Conservaci?n de la Naturaleza, Greenpeace M?xico, and the World Wildlife 
Fund), academia, and other agencies. Input from this meeting was used in the design of 
the project?s capacity buildling activities. Consultations were also carried out with key 
stakeholders and user organizations (COTAS and River Basin Committees) to hear their 
views regarding social issues in: Guanajuato, Guadalajara, Aguascalientes and Sonora. 
Their views have been incorporated in the project design regarding technical assistance, 
institutional strengthening and possible pilot project.  
 
The Project EMP and ESMF call for public consultation during project implementation. 
Specifically, the ten IWRM Plans will be developed in a highly participatory manner, 
involving participation by key stakeholders in COTAS, RBCs and other interested 
parties, such as NGOs. Once the draft IWRM Plan is available, the technical team for 
each critical basin and aquifer will be responsible for disclosing and consulting it, 
including specific IPDP if necessary; representatives of civil society, communities, local 
leaders, and NGOs will be invited to participate in the IWRM Plan consultation.  
 
Likewise, all demonstration subprojects will be subject to an EA process and agreed on 
with main stakeholders to ensure ownership. Each EA will be made publicly available, 
and will be consulted upon request. The results of the consultation will be summarized in 
the final EA. Consultation will include disclosure of IPDP in the case it has been 
prepared. The summaries of these events will include the dates, locations, names and 
affiliations of participants, as well as the issues discussed. Additionally, the summary will 
describe if and how the project design has changed to reflect the issues raised during the 
consultation. The technical teams, comprising social and environment specialists, will be 
responsible for ensuring this is done.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/11/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/11/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/14/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Page  10
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Issues pertaining to Cultural Property (OPN 11.03), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Safety 
of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples 
(OD4.20) will be addressed within each of the Project Areas during implementation of 
the demonstration subprojects, as required. ToR for the SEA and SSA and the ESMF all 
include public consultation. These activities will be undertaken during implementation 
and thus no disclosure dates have been determined. The findings and recommendations 
along with all documentation will be consulted, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in 
accordance with the Disclosure Policy.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
N/A 
Page  11
Manager review the plan? 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Douglas C. Olson 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
04/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
Page  12
