Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2786 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/23/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P101341 
Project Name: MX-Guerrero Decentralized Rural Transport for Territorial Development 
Loan 
Task Team Leader: Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (40%);Sub-national government administration 
(20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S);Rural policies and institutions (S);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
27.00
27.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would aim to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the SGG?s 
investments in the transport sector and to promote rural access and rural development 
opportunities, in support of more inclusive growth in Guerrero.  The project would build a 
transparent and participatory system for the selection of projects and allocation of resources, 
furthering the Government?s democratization objectives.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
As envisaged, the project would include the following five components:  
 
-
Component 1: Participatory Territorial Planning and Institutional Strengthening 
(estimated cost: US$2.0 million of which US$2.0 million would be financed by the Bank loan). 
This component would finance the design and implementation of a participatory territorial 
planning process in the Sierra, as well as related institutional arrangements. A methodology 
Page  2
would be developed to screen the ejidos from the Guerrero Sierra and identify sub-territories 
with high productive potential and sound institutional capacity. In these sub-territories, a 
participatory process involving local stakeholders would be implemented to help define a 
territorial development strategy, identify key productive initiatives with the greatest growth 
potential and prioritize transport needs. The component would also assist the constitution of 
territorial institutions such as the Sierra Development Council and would provide technical 
assistance to municipalities.  
 
-
Component 2: Road rehabilitation (estimated cost: US$40 million of which US$20 
million would be financed by the Bank loan). This component would finance the rehabilitation of 
about 600 km of key selected roads and other transport infrastructure (e.g. rural paths), as well as 
the improvement of about 20 selected bridges. Eligible infrastructure would be prioritized under 
the participatory territorial planning process described above. Rehabilitation standards would 
ensure cost-effectiveness. The component would also finance related technical, economic, social 
and environmental studies as well as supervision.  
 
-
Component 3: Road maintenance (estimated cost: US$5 million of which US$3.5 million 
would be financed by the Bank loan). This component would finance the design and 
implementation of a road maintenance system based on community-based micro-enterprises. The 
component would finance training and technical assistance to micro-enterprises, monitoring of 
maintenance, and would co-finance routine road maintenance activities (together with 
municipalities).  
 
-
Component 4: Rural development and productive partnerships (estimated cost: US$5 
million of which US$3.5 million would be financed by the Bank loan). This component would 
establish a mechanism to promote entrepreneurial capacity in the areas where transport 
conditions have been improved. This mechanism would help prepare business plans for 
productive initiatives with the greatest growth potential, foster partnerships between producers 
and buyers, in order to strengthen the competitiveness of the Guerrero Sierra. This mechanism 
would closely coordinate with other relevant federal and State programs in order not to duplicate 
existing mechanisms but, rather, increase the effectiveness of these interventions and leverage 
other resources. In particular, the component will be designed in order to complement and 
improve the selectivity and effectiveness of the existing Alianza Para el Campo program.    
Coordination will also be ensured with the seven Bank operations active in rural development 
and environment in Mexico.  
 
-
Component 5: Monitoring, evaluation, dissemination and project management (estimated 
cost: US$5 million of which US$1 million would be financed by the Bank loan). This component 
would finance monitoring and evaluation as well as the project?s administrative costs. This 
component would also help promote the dissemination of experience and best practices, 
particularly to other Southern States.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Sierra of Guerrero.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The team had preliminary meetings with Federal and State-level agencies that would be ensuring 
compliance with environmental and social safeguards policies during project implementation. 
Based on this preliminary assessment, institutional capacity was found significant, particularly 
regarding environmental and indigenous peoples issues. The Mexican environmental legislation 
Page  3
has achieved a significant level of sophistication, which is also reflected, at state level, in 
institutional ability to ensure compliance.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project does not foresee significant environmental impacts that could jeopardize the 
natural environment of its influential area. Following the Operational Policy [OP 4.01], the 
project would be "Category B". This category is justified by the kind of works and its magnitude 
that will be developed in each components of the Project. The works (improvement, 
rehabilitation or maintenance) would be dealing with existing rural roads, implying no 
significant physical changes. Potential risks can be easily identified and mitigation measures are 
available.  
 
The following will be ineligible for project support: (i) new road construction or major road 
improvements (other than improvements to bridges as currently planned); (ii) project activities 
which could result in deforestation (such as conversion of forested lands to agriculture) or lead to 
significant degradation or conversion of natural habitats (which would warrant a Category ?A? 
rating, as per Natural Habitats BP 4.04, Para. 2); and (iii) large-scale civil works that would 
normally be Category ?A?, such as dams with reservoirs exceeding 100 ha, or new irrigation 
systems exceeding 200 ha.  
 
The Environmental Assessment Policy is therefore applicable to define the environmental 
studies that will have to be performed prior to the investments (Environmental Assessment 
Report and Environmental and Social Management Framework).  The stand alone EA for this 
project will evaluate all potential direct, indirect and cumulative impacts from the project 
activities, focusing particularly on impacts to forests, given the importance of forestry activities 
to regional economic development and the significance of forest resource in the project area. The 
EA will furthermore include, inter alia: (a) typology of rural road rehabilitation, maintenance and 
rural development productive partnership activities, including a negative list of ineligible 
activities; (b) assessment of the potential impacts of project-supported activities, as well as the 
adequacy of the existing legal/regulatory framework and institutional capacity to identify. 
Mitigate and monitor these impacts; (c) environmental management criteria, procedures and 
institutional responsibilities for subproject screening, design, approval, implementation and field 
supervision; (d) environmental review of all known first-year subprojects; (e) standard 
environmental rules for contractors; (f) capacity-building measures for the relevant implementing 
entities on environmental management; and (g) a summary of the public consultation carried out 
on the EA, as well as provisions for additional consultations to be carried out during project 
implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
No impact is expected on natural habitats since no new roads are planned, still the safeguard 
might be triggered and only after initial assessment is completed we will know for certain. The 
demand driven nature of the rural development approach supported by the project will privilege 
working with well organized communities, possessing a strong social capital and having or 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
developing land use planning and regulation instruments. These regional planning approaches 
will allow the project to identify when/if an existing road affects a natural habitat whether 
protected by government decree, community conservation agreements or none, to review the 
existing situation and rehabilitation plans and avoid impact on natural habitats. Relevant 
CONABIO publications will be used to identify critical natural habitats in the Sierra region, in 
particular those defining: Regiones Terrestres Prioritarios and Areas Importantes para la 
Conservaci?n de los Aves.EA work from previous Bank projects such as PROCYMAF and 
COINBIO will also be consulted since they may provide useful information on critical natural 
habitats in the project area. The eligibility criteria spelled out in the project EA will prohibit 
support for sub-projects will would lead to significant conversion or degradation of natural 
habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The infrastructure rehabilitation/maintenance components of this project are meant to foster 
regional development through better management of natural resources and improved access to 
markets. Since one of the relevant potential areas for economic growth is the management of 
temperate forests in the Sierra, the regional development components of the project plan to 
expand the forest timber and non timber activities, while introducing best practice in its 
management. Even if not intended, the induced impact of road improvement on the forest should 
be assessed. In this case the induced impact is an intended, and therefore more manageable 
impact of the project, and the promotion/technical assistance/supervision activities demanded by 
this objective will be mainstreamed in the project core activities and accounted for in the relevant 
management plan.  For any forestry-related activities whose development is supported under the 
project, Forestry Management Plans will be developed by participating communities, approved 
by SEMARNAT, and registered within the communities? official by-laws. The project will 
provide assistance (as needed) to communities to enable them to comply with these 
requirements.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
This component could be triggered if the support for rural productive partnerships would lead 
to either an increased use of pesticides, or the continuation/expansion of unsustainable or unsafe 
pest management practices. During preparation, the applicability of this policy will be assessed 
to ensure that the project supports an integrated pest management approach where applicable.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Given the maintenance, rehabilitation and improvement works being undertaken in a region 
with potential presence of physical cultural resources, this policy is triggered. The EA will 
include an assessment of potential impacts to any known sites of cultural or archeological 
significance, and the EMP will incorporate chance find procedures for any subsequent 
discoveries during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
After preliminary review of data information and dialogue with the National Commission for 
Indigenous Development in the State of Guerrero, it was identified that there are no significant 
presence of indigenous peoples in the rural areas in the Sierra de Guerrero region in Southern 
Mexico.  However, in order to prevent any possible adverse impact, an extensive Social 
Assessment as well as consultations with local stakeholders/beneficiaries will be carried out 
during project preparation. One the outcomes of the Social Assessment will be the preparation of 
an Indigenous Peoples Framework. This Social Assessment will be carried out by a consultant 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
with adequate expertise in indigenous peoples? issues in the Sierra region, in order to ensure that 
any indigenous communities living in the region are included in consultations regarding project 
plans, and have a chance to share in project benefits in a culturally appropriate manner.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Rehabilitation works to be financed under component 2 will be performed within the right of 
way of existing roads. They should therefore not involve any resettlement. In order to prepare in 
case minor resettlement would be needed anyhow, a Resettlement Framework will be prepared. 
The issue of possible resettlement will be raised in the consultations of the Social Assessment. 
The Terms of Reference for the Social Assessment will be written to include an in-depth analysis 
of the likely land acquisition needs of the project, including a full screening of any resettlement 
needs for known priority works identified prior to appraisal   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/19/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/09/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage 
ISDS would be prepared:  10/01/2007  
 
B.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  
 
Safeguard-related studies include:  
 
-
Environmental Assessment Report that include the environmental evaluation of the first 
package of works  
 
-
Social Assessment and strategy for social inclusion  
 
-
Environmental and Social Management Framework  
 
-
Indigenous peoples? framework  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
-
Resettlement framework  
 
All these studies are currently included in the PHRD preparation plan and are expected to 
be finalized by 11/01/2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
04/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/19/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
04/20/2007 
Comments:   
