Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3065 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P106589 
Project Name: Information Technology (IT) Industry Development 
Task Team Leader: Eloy Eduardo Vidal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (34%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (33%);General energy sector (33%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
120.00
120.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The general objective of the Project is to develop the IT and ITES Industry in Mexico.  The 
Project aims to transfer the best international experience to:  (1) develop the indigenous IT 
Industry; (2) attract outsourcing companies to Mexico ; and (3) attract captive offshoring of 
international corporations to Mexico. The Project will initially focus in key states that show 
better leadership and have resources to achieve success in creating a vibrant industry in the short 
term and in market segments where Mexico has comparative advantages: as capacity in these 
successful states saturates, it will spread to less developed regions and states and will benefit all 
Mexico in the end, improving the competitiveness and efficiency of the Mexican economy and 
fostering the development of SMEs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is designed in response to a strong demand from State Governments, and strongly 
reinforces previous efforts made by the Secretaria de Economia through the PROSOFT program. 
It is expected that the project could entail an IBRD loan of around US$80 million.  
 
Page  2
The exact scope of the project is currently under discussion, but it is expected to include the 
following components:  
 
a. 
Improvement of the Policy, Regulatory and Legal Frameworks and Strengthening of 
Institutions  
 
This component will review the existing Policy, Regulatory and Legal Frameworks and 
institutional performance for IT/ITES business development, including inter alia data privacy 
issues, digital signatures, data security, digital property rights, labor laws and media 
convergence. It will propose recommendations to bring them to the status of international best 
practices, and assist the institutions in charge of implementing and enforcing them.  
 
Regarding the telecommunications sector, a study will be prepared to determine the impact of 
the current regulatory framework on the performance of the IT companies, and will make 
specific policy-oriented recommendations. Specifically, the study will focus on the regulation of 
VoIP, unbundling of the local loop and convergence of the broadcasting and telephone 
industries.  
 
Given the importance of a business-friendly environment, the program will review the existing 
government-businesses interaction processes and procedures, and support initiatives to 
streamline them, in particular through effective use of ICTs.  
 
The project will critically assess the current business incentives regime, suggest improvements 
and changes to make it more effective, and propose new initiatives following international best 
practices. It will also support the development and implementation of external monitoring and 
evaluation of PROSOFT.  
 
b. 
Strengthening of Selected State IT Clusters and Agencies  
 
For those States that have the endowment to develop the IT Industry and the political will to do 
it, the Project will support the preparation and implementation of a strategy to help access to 
export markets to support the scalability and sustainability of  IT industry in the State.  These 
strategies will be tailored to each specific State, and will have four components: 1) prioritization 
of target market segment(s), 2) SWOT analysis of each location and comparison with global 
competition; 3) preparation of an investment program; and 4) delivery of recommendations and 
an action program. The implementation of this strategy will include cluster activities such as (a) 
support to the State and National Associations to foster linkages with US, European and other 
Associations to promote the IT Industry, develop linkages between companies of both countries 
and foster business development; (b) twinning arrangements between Mexican and foreign 
executives and professionals of the IT industries of both countries will be supported, to 
encourage the development of the linkages between the companies, train the Mexican staff and 
attract new business to Mexico; (c) IT companies exchange programs with foreign companies 
and business accelerators; (d) outreach efforts to target international investors (international 
events, business and technology fairs, etc.) and reception efforts to help them discover the State 
and its potential; (e) participation of the IT clusters in international trade events; and (f) 
organization of large local events with international participants,  to promote the industry.  
 
c. 
Development of Human Resources  
Page  3
This Component will help the IT Industry achieve scalability, this is the ability to grow fast, to 
compete globally, by increasing the quantity and quality of human skills required to do the job.  
To change the Mexican education system is a formidable task that would take a generation to do 
and is beyond the scope of this Project.  Therefore, we will use a more focused approach that 
consists of two steps: (1) in coordination with the Industry, create a system of certification of 
professionals working in the IT and the ITES Industry, both at the engineer level (graduates) and 
at the call center level, and market niches ; (2) support the development of Technical Institutions 
and programs that provide the training to reach certification, using the model that was highly 
successful in Andrah Pradesh . It will also assist IT companies by providing  training in quality 
assurance programs like ITSqc, COPC etc., for the ITES sector, and scholarships for certification 
(MoProSoft, CMMI, PMP, ISO-9000);  
 
d. Supporting 
Infrastructure 
 
 
Experience shows that the IT Industry develops faster and better through Clustering in 
agglomerations of small, medium and large companies, research centers, universities, financial 
institutions and incubators. Linkages between demand and supply, human skills and industry, 
and c
apital and entrepreneurs produce the so called “Silicon Valley” effect. One of the main 
established vehicles for encouraging Clustering is IT Parks, which are dedicated facilities for the 
IT/ITES industry.  This component will support the construction of IT Parks through PPPs with 
investments coming from the private sector and marketing, management and expansion of such 
facilities being done by the private sector, including all the ingredients mentioned above to foster 
clustering of the industry and in line with lessons learned: the role of the public sector will be 
limited to public infrastructure and shared services, while the private sector will invest in 
building, managing, marketing and operating the IT Parks. This component will also fund 
equipment needed by the industry but unaffordable by an individual company due to its high 
cost, which therefore must be shared by all. For example, animation and content creation may 
require render farms.  
 
e. 
Funding of the IT Industry  
 
The project will finance a study to explore the best alternatives to attract and develop: (1) Seed 
Capital and Angel investors financing; (2) Venture Capital financing; (3) Growth financing; (4) 
Merger and Acquisition financing; and (5) Capital Markets for the IT Industry. The component 
will also include technical assistance and training programs to the financial institutions and 
investors in general to appraise IT companies and projects, develop and implement exchange 
programs with US and European financial institutions, promotion programs and visits of the IT 
Industry to financial institutions, and vice versa.  This component will not provide funds to 
finance the IT companies, as this should be a private sector effort.  
 
f. 
Government Services Outsourcing  
 
Experience in many countries has shown that the Government, being the largest user of IT 
Services, could promote the development of the IT Industry, and at the same time improve its 
efficiency and effectiveness by subcontracting these services, or outsourcing them to the private 
sector, increasing its transparency and delivering better services to the citizens. Therefore, the 
Project will include a component that will carry out a study on outsourcing of Government 
services to the IT Industry, using the best international practices, to recommend PPPs and 
outsourcing guidelines to local, state and federal governments. It will then develop pilot projects 
Page  4
to support federal, state and local government initiatives to outsource services to the private 
sector, by giving technical assistance to them to develop PPP models, define key strategic areas 
with high impact, prepare the bidding documents and contracts and train their staff.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Capital cities of Mexican States.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be assessed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) 
–
While most of the project’s activities would not 
entail any direct environmental impact, the project includes a component to finance “IT Parks” in 
pre-selected locations in capital cities of Mexican states.  The PCN notes that these facilities are 
generally located in urban areas, “where there is abundant labor force and universities that can 
provide training for their employees, and close to major airports.”  
 
Since some construction activities may be part of the project, an Environmental 
Assessment (EA) will be carried out prior to appraisal, in accordance with OP 4.01. IT parks 
invoke images of entire campuses of multiple large buildings and supporting infrastructure (such 
as parking lots, roads, etc.).  Such large developments could entail substantial environmental 
impacts, and siting criteria are a key element in minimizing these impacts. Site screening criteria 
will be established in the project to ensure that any natural habitats and physical cultural 
resources (as per OP 4.04 and OP 4.11, respectively) are identified in the proposed sites.  
 
If sites are determined prior to appraisal, the EA will include (i) a description of the 
selected sites and the criteria used in selecting them to minimize potential impacts; (ii) a 
description of the proposed facilities and the potential environmental and social impacts related 
to their construction and operation; (iii) any necessary mitigation measures, including measures 
to ensure no net loss of critical natural habitats (if applicable); (iv) evidence of consultation with 
affected populations and other stakeholder groups on the environmental aspects of the proposed 
works (including documentation of what issues were raised and whether they were taken into 
account in project design); (v) environmental rules for contractors, including procedures for any 
chance finds of culturally or archeologically significant resources during construction; (vi) 
institutional responsibilities (including budget) for environmental management during 
construction and operation; and (vii) provisions and responsibilities for monitoring the 
environmental mitigation and management aspects.  
 
If the exact sites of the proposed facilities are not determined during project preparation, 
the EA will stipulate the screening criteria to be used in selecting appropriate sites, describe the 
typology of facilities eligible for financing and any likely environmental or social impacts related 
to their construction and operation; and specify procedures and institutional responsibilities 
(including budget) for screening, consultations, environmental management during construction 
and operation, and monitoring as described above.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
–
Given that the target placement for the IT Parks is in 
densely populated urban areas close to labor markets, airports and universities, there is a high 
possibility that land acquisition for their construction could cause involuntary displacement of 
people or economic activities.  For any construction sites known prior to appraisal, a careful 
screening will be conducted to determine whether there will be any instances of involuntary 
resettlement as covered under OP 4.12, and if needed, Resettlement Action Plan(s) should be 
developed, consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal.  If the exact sites are not identified during 
project preparation, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be developed and disclosed in 
accordance with OP 4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An environmental assessment will be started before appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Eloy Eduardo Vidal 
06/25/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/13/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
06/25/2007 
Comments:   
