Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/06/2007 
Report No.:  AC3253
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P106682 
Project Name:  Savings and Rural Finance SAGARPA Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Harideep Singh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 5, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Banking (50%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Rural markets (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Rural non-farm income generation (S);Indigenous peoples (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
21.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
39.15
39.15 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDO of the Phase I project, as indicated in the Loan Agreement, is: ?to improve the 
financial stability and outreach capacity of SCIs throughout Mexico, with emphasis on 
those serving rural areas of the country, to thus contribute to the integration of low-
income populations into the Mexican economy by increasing such populations? access to 
financial services and consequently aid in the realization of such populations? income-
generating potential.?  The Phase I project has four components to achieve the PDO, 
namely: (a) Consolidating sector institutions; (b) Expanding financial services in selected 
rural marginal areas; (c) Sector-related studies; and (d) Project Management and M&E.  
 
There is no change in the above project development objective.  Only the scale and 
scope of the component ?Expanding Financial Services in Rural Areas? is increased from 
assisting 21 savings and credit institutions to about 80, and expanded beyond the seven 
geographical areas under Phase I to cover the entire country.  The focus of technical 
assistance, however, will predominantly be on deepening penetration and outreach, and 
not on certification since only those entities which are already financially and 
managerially sound would participate in the project.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
These AF project activities, expected to cost an additional US$60.15 million (with Bank 
share of US$21.00 million), are grouped into the following two broad components: (a) 
Technical Assistance to institutions in rural marginal areas to deepen penetration and 
outreach; and (b) Project Management and M&E Study.  
 
Component (a): Technical Assistance to institutions in rural marginal areas to deepen 
penetration and outreach.  The AF project will finance technical assistance to about 80 
entities in a demand-driven setting all over Mexico generally following the approach 
tested under the Phase I project, but focusing on the deepening outreach using the 
?expansion? method which was deemed the most cost-effective to increase outreach.  The 
objective would be to mainstream an additional 380,000 new members into the formal 
rural financial sector.  This is to be achieved by supporting 350 points of access to 
services (either existing points of access strengthened or newly created through agency 
arrangements and other branchless banking arrangements) in these 80 institutions, while 
maintaining the existing classification for certification of the assisted entities.  
 
There is no change in project design.  An adjustment is being made to the definition of 
?rural? to include communities with population count of less than 15,000 to align the 
project with currently accepted national census categories, but otherwise the same three 
levels of marginality constitute the target population (very high, high, and moderate 
marginality in the CONAPO classification).  
 
Only entities categorized as B (already financially and managerially sound) or higher 
would participate in partnerships with the TA providers, under performance-contingent 
contracts; exceptionally, some entities categorized ?C? may be included at the TA 
provider?s risk.  The incremental operational costs associated with the expansion to serve 
(more of) the target clientele would be partially (50/50) and temporarily financed by 
counterpart contribution, which is interlinked with the performance of, and incorporated 
into, the TA contracts.  An operational improvement is being introduced in project 
management by establishing an ?Average Unit Price per (new) Client? which will 
determine the value of contracts with, and will guide the payments to, TA providers 
based on the verified number of new users incorporated into the formal rural financial 
system.  
 
Component (b): Project Management and M&E Study.  Continued project oversight 
would be provided by SAGARPA?s Technical Team, and individual consultancies 
related to the Technical Team will be financed by the project.  The M&E study, 
consisting of a household survey, for the Phase I seven regions for 2008 is already 
planned under the parallel BANSEFI Phase II project.  This project will finance a first 
round of household survey in the newly added regions in 2008 (to obtain a baseline for 
the new regions), and a consolidated survey in late 2010 to cover the entire project area 
(Phase I and the new AF regions) to obtain an assessment of the aggregate project 
outcomes for this component. Other thematic or SCI-focused evaluation studies will also 
be financed by the project.   
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project covers all rural marginal areas in Mexico; ?rural? areas defined as 
communities with population count of less than 15,000 to align the project with currently 
accepted national census categories, and three levels of marginality constitute the target 
population (very high, high, and moderate marginality as per the CONAPO classification.  
 
Environmental Aspects.  The project is categorized ?C? from the environmental 
viewpoint, requiring no assessment of environmental impacts or preparation of an 
environmental management plan for any of the project areas/locations.  
 
Social Aspects.  The only safeguard policy that is triggered by the AF operation relates 
to Indigenous Peoples.  The location of the entities which receive technical assistance 
under the project and their area of operation will determine the physical areas relating to 
which the IP Safeguard Policy gets triggered.  The actual determination of the areas 
which will eventually be a part of the project, through technical assistance to entities 
operating in thise areas, is not known at this stage.  
 
During project implementation, the technical service providers are required to interact 
with the potential entities, and upon reaching an agreement with the managements of 
such entities, submit a technical assistance proposal to SAGARPA (the implementing 
agency).  Four such contracts are to be awarded and implemented during the project 
period covering a total of about 80 entities. Only after the award of such contracts can 
participating entities be identified and the location/area of operation of these entities, 
where the IP Safeguard Policy becomes applicable, be known.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Additional Financing project promotes the expansion of financial services in 
marginal rural areas.  This is to be achieved through technical assistance to the savings 
and credit institutions to deepen penetration and outreach in rural marginal areas. There is 
no line of credit or investments under the project which are targeted to beneficiaries at the 
individual or community level.  The direct beneficiaries of the project activities are the 
rural financial institutions which receive technical assistance under the project.  
 
As identified during Phase I project preparation in 2002, and now during the AF project 
preparation, indigenous people from a variety of ethnic groups represent a high 
percentage of the rural population in marginal areas.  The main issue, namely, ensuring 
that the project benefits this population, is being addressed by developing and 
implementing an appropriate strategy to assist the managements of the institutions to 
provide access to financial services to IP populations.  
 
The Phase I project approach (covering seven marginal regions) involved the 
preparation of the simplified IPDPs, carrying out social analyses, doing social 
consultations, and eventually preparing an IP Participation Plan for each institution 
assisted under the project.  The implementation of these Action Plans through the 
technical service providers under supervision of the SAGARPA team has produced 
excellent results in terms of increasing IP and women membership. A range of measures 
were taken by the institutions specifically targeted to IP communities. In all cases, 
existing traditional and cultural structures were incorporated in the operating mechanisms 
and in mechanisms to promote savings and credit: community committees are agencies of 
representation in the financial institutions; the community assembly is the principal 
agency in charge of decision making; and the culture of the ?tequio,? another form of 
community support, has, in many cases, facilitated the setting up of new branches.  
Consultants have taken into account these typical characteristics of potential members 
and this has helped in meeting targets for IP population participation, reaching an average 
26 percent of the total.  
 
The existing arrangements under Phase I project for compliance with the IP Safeguard 
Policy OP4.10 have been found to be effective. Given the minimal nature and scale of the 
AF project?s potential effects on IP, the project will do the following: (a) at the macro 
level, it will continue to use the detailed and comprehensive social analyses carried out 
for, and the consultation outcomes from, the seven regions covering 72% of the Mexican 
IP population; and (b) at the micro/entity-level, the project will follow an IP Framework 
approach.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an IP Framework to address the IP Safeguard Policy issues.  
The Framework has a differentiated approach to IP depending on the whether the entities 
being assisted under the project also participated in Phase I project, and whether the AF 
project entities are situated in the Phase I seven regions or the additional regions covered 
by the AF project, as follows:  
 
(a) 
Entities in states covered under the Phase I project.  These states will continue to 
use the detailed and comprehensive social analyses carried out for, and the consultation 
outcomes from, the seven regions covering 72% of the Mexican IP population. 
Indigenous Peoples Participation Plans will be up-dated for existing Phase I project 
entities, and prepared for new entities located in these regions, should there be a presence 
of IP population in the new entity?s area of operation.  The process will incorporate best 
practices already tested to ensure that the project continues to benefit the IP population.  
 
(b) 
Entities in states outside the Phase I project regions.  Entities in these states will 
use the Phase I project social analyses, consultation outcomes, some sample IP 
Participation Plans with an evaluation of achievements as Phase I project experience to 
enrich their understanding of the social and IP aspects, and prepare Indigenous People 
Participation Plans should there be a presence of IP population in their area of operation.  
The process will involve doing an incremental social analysis and IP consultations.  
 
The preparation of the Action Plans and their implementation will be done by the 
technical assistance providers, as was done under the Phase I project.  Likewise, 
SAGARPA will monitor the overall implementation of this component, including 
compliance with IP Safeguard Policy through a review of the plans, and monitoring of 
their implementation.  
 
Of the 7-8 technical service providers shortlisted for this technical assistance, four have 
already worked under the Phase I project, and have adequate understanding and capacity 
to plan and implement the measures described above.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
There are three key stakeholders: (a) IP communities; (b)technical assistance providers; 
and (c) SAGARPA.  The inter-relation between these stakeholders and their involvement 
in the process has partly been described in Section 4 above.  There are two other aspects 
which reinforces consultation at different levels: (a) Terms of Reference for the technical 
assistance; and (b) implementation and monitoring of the Action Plans.  
 
Page  6
Terms of Reference for the technical assistance support.  The Request for Proposals 
already released for technical assistance indicate clearly to the prospective service 
providers the need to: (a) incorporate staff in the assignment team with the capacity to 
carry out social analysis and prepare IP Participation Plans; (b) do a quick screening to 
ascertain the presence of IP populations in the entity?s operational territory; and (c) if IP 
population is present, carry out an incremental social analysis and consult with the 
identified potential indigenous beneficiaries to prepare an IP Participation Plan which 
would include output and outcome indicators.  Although many of the shortlisted 
consultants have the required expertise and experience having participated under the 
Phase I project, SAGARPA will provide appropriate guidance to the technical assistance 
providers, including to those who are new to the project concept, to carry out the 
incremental social analysis and prepare the IP Participation Plans.  
 
Implementation and monitoring of IP Participation Plans.  As under the Phase I Project, 
the technical assistance providers will undertake field visits and, in consultation with the 
indigenous communities, implement the IP Participation Plans, and present SAGARPA 
progress reports every six months.  SAGARPA will review these reports and suggest 
remedial actions, where necessary.  The Bank team, as a part of its regular review 
process, will also assess compliance.  
 
Where the technical consultant indicates absence of IP communities during its screening 
process, and does not prepare an IP Participation Plan, this fact will be verified by 
SAGARPA, and spot-confirmed by the Bank during its review.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/26/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/02/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The IPDPs relating to the Phase I project seven regions, and which continue to remain 
applicable to the AP project activities, were disclosed as follows: (a) Chiapas and 
Huasteca regions - May 2002; (b)Veracruz and Michoacan regions ? January 2003; 
(c)Guerrero region - February 2003; (d) Oaxaca region ? March 2003; and (e) Puebla 
region ? August 2003.  
 
At this stage, the location of the institutions to be assisted by the AF project is not 
known.  Premature disclosure could result in disseminating the Framework in areas 
where the project may have no intervention at all, possibly raising IP community hopes 
for participation in the project.  
 
The locations are expected to be known by December 31, 2007 when the four technical 
assistance assignments are expected to be awarded.  This date is firm since the Request 
for Proposal for this procurement has already been issued.  The section on the IP 
Framework, which is embedded in the Project Operational Manual, will be disclosed at 
the office of each project-assisted entity by January 15, 2008, and also on the website of 
each technical assistance provider.  
 
In the meanwhile, the agreed IP Framework (embedded in the Safeguards Note) has 
been submitted to Infoshop.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  8
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Harideep Singh 
11/02/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
11/02/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
 
Comments:   
