Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/02/2006 
Report No.:  35418
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P087038 
Project Name:  Environmental Services of the Forest 
Task Team Leader:  Mark A. Austin 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P089171 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 28, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (90%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
80.66 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
15.90
96.56 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to enhance the provision of environmental services 
of national and global significance and secure their long-term sustainability. This would 
be done by strengthening and expanding the PSAH and CABSA programs and supporting 
the establishment of local payments for environmental services (PES) mechanisms in 
selected pilot areas.  
 
The objective will be achieved through the following key outcomes and outputs (i) 
strengthening the capacity of CONAFOR, community associations, and NGOs to 
increase flexibility and improve efficiency of existing service provision to support long-
term development of the PSAH program in Mexico; (ii) establishing and securing 
sustainable long-term financing mechanisms; (iii) establishing legal, institutional, and 
financial arrangements to pilot market-based mechanisms for payment for environmental 
services, (iv) documenting links between land use changes and water services 
improvements and biodiversity conservation, and (v) defining good practices to replicate, 
scale up, and sustain market-based PES programs.  
 
Page  2
The global environment objective of the project is to enhance and protect biological 
diversity and preserve globally significant forest and mountain ecosystems.  
 
This objective will be achieved through the following key outcomes and outputs: (i) 
improving the targeting of the existing PSAH program; (ii) piloting a market-based 
system to contract environmental services; and (iii) establishing an endowment fund for 
biodiversity conservation to provide long-term financing for payment for environmental 
services. The project will ensure that only sites with globally significant biodiversity will 
receive GEF funds under the national or local programs in the project area. In addition, 
these sites recognized as part of the national protected areas system. Furthermore, all land 
management systems with PES support under the project (from any funding source) will 
be biodiversity-friendly.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 focuses on developing sustainable financing mechanisms. Component 2 
activities support the development and strengthening of PES delivery mechanisms. 
Component 3 supports environmental service providers. Component 4 manages the actual 
flow of payments to environmental serrvice providers and for the ongoing operational 
costs of the program. Finally, Component 5 focuses on project and program management 
mechanisms, including monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Areas where PES systems would be established, strengthened, or continued include eight 
pilot sites as well as other PES areas that are expected to be established under this project 
as a result of local-level initiatives. All eight of the pilot sites were chosen to overlap with 
at least two of the following high-priority biodiversity conservation designations: (i) 
existing Natural Protected Areas; (ii) Priority Terrestrial Ecoregions established by the 
National Commission for Biodiversity Knowledge and Use (CONABIO); (iii) Important 
Bird Areas (AICAs) that are vital to the survival of endemic species or to protecting key 
bird breeding, feeding, and migration areas; and (iv) Ramsar Wetlands of International 
Importance.  
 
The eight pilot sites are all within reasonable proximity of urban centers with at least 
50,000 inhabitants and a presumed demand for environmental services such as improved 
water flows and water quality, flood mitigation, and biodiversity and scenic beauty (for 
ecotourism). In addition, all eight sites have (i) important watersheds in areas classified 
by the Mexican government as Priority Hydrological Regions (RHPs) where scarcity of 
fresh water is a significant concern, (ii) globally significant biodiversity in need of 
improved conservation, (iii) natural vegetation important for carbon storage, (iv) 
significant risks of deforestation and other loss and degradation of natural habitats, and 
(v) extensive community and ejido landholdings potentially suitable for PES contracts.  
 
Within the project sites, private landowners (ejidos, communites, and possibly 
individuals) with secure tenure will be eligible for PES contracts, if they choose to 
Page  3
participate.  Some of these landholdings will be within the buffer zones of protected areas 
(where human occupation is legally permitted).  
 
The eight pilot project sites total about 6.1 million hectares. The amount of land actually 
placed under PES contracts will depend on the availability of funds and demand from 
potential PES recipients. The pilot areas are:  
 
a.  Coatepec-Xalapa-Pico de Orizaba.  Located in the states of Veracruz and Puebla, this 
site comprises an important area of remaining cloud forest (much of which has been 
replaced by shade coffee and other agricultural systems), with humid pine forest at the 
higher elevations and dry forest in the lower foothills.  The cloud forests and adjacent 
well-shaded coffee plantations harbor many endemic plant and animal species of 
conservation concern, including the globally threatened Bearded Wood-Partridge 
Dendrortyx barbatus, for which the Coatepec area is an important stronghold.  The 
project would continue and expand the area of PES payments under a successful ongoing 
program, which is motivated by water supply concerns for the urban areas of Coatepec 
and Xalapa.  PES payments would maintain the cloud forests and possibly also the shade 
coffee areas of high watershed and biodiversity conservation value, and reduce the 
expansion of field crops and pastures to hillside areas.  
 
b.  Colima-Manantlan-Cerro Grande-Villa de Alvarez. Located in the states of Colima 
and Jalisco, this site comprises a biologically highly diverse mix of moist and dry pine-
oak forests, cloud forests, and tropical dry forests. It encompasses a portion of the Sierra 
de Manantlan Biosphere Reserve, which is renowned for its biodiversity that includes 
many endemic bird species (including the globally threatened Mexican Woodnymph 
Thalurania ridgwayi and Black-capped Vireo Vireo atricapillus) and the wild-growing 
Perennial Maize Zea diploperennis. It also forms a corridor between the Sierra de 
Manantlan and the Nevado de Colima National Park, with its high-altitude pine and fir 
forests and substantial ecotourism potential. Maintaining adequate forest cover is needed 
for ensuring adequate water supply to Colima city, as well as to reduce the significant soil 
erosion and landslide problems in the area.  PES contracts with the ejidos and 
communities at this site would serve to prevent further deforestation within areas of high 
importance for biodiversity conservation, improved watershed management, and carbon 
sequestration.  
 
c.  Huatulco-Crucecita-Copalita/Zimatan. Located on the Pacific slope of the State of 
Oaxaca, this site encompasses a diverse mix of cloud and humid pine-oak forests in the 
Sierra de Miahuatlan, lowland tropical (humid and dry) forests in the coastal foothills, 
and mangroves. The moist forests of the Sierra de Miahuatlan harbor numerous plant and 
animal species of conservation concern, including the endangered Blue-capped 
Hummingbird Eupherusa cyanophrys (found nowhere else) and globally threatened 
White-throated Jay Cyanolyca mirabilis. Huatulco is an important beach resort with 
growing dependence upon fresh water, and the montane forest cover that helps to ensure 
its reliability. There is also the potential for expanded ecotourism, including on 
community-owned forest lands. PES contracts would reduce deforestation for agricultural 
Page  4
expansion, while helping to maintaining water supplies, reduce catastrophic flooding 
risks, and enhancing the survival prospects of many threatened species.  
 
d.  Saltillo-Zapaliname. Located in the states of Coahuila and Nuevo Leon, this site 
includes the Area Natural Sierra Zapaliname, an official protected area with substantial 
ejido landholdings suitable for PES contracts. The Sierra Zapaliname contains a diverse 
mix of native pine and oak forests, along with semi-arid scrub at lower elevations. This 
mountain range is also an AICA because its pine forests are an important feeding area for 
the threatened endemic Maroon-fronted Parrot Rhynchopsitta terrisi. The pilot site also 
includes a highly threatened (by agricultural expansion) natural grassland area known as 
the Pradera de Tokio, which is the main global stronghold for the endangered Mexican 
Prairie Dog Cynomys mexicanus and Worthen's Sparrow Spizella wortheni, as well as an 
important wintering area for many North American grassland birds. The city of Saltillo is 
in a semi-arid zone with over-exploited aquifers and depends upon water originating in 
the Sierra Zapaliname.  
 
e.  Valle de Bravo-Amanalco. Located in the states of Mexico, Michoacan, and 
Guerrero, this site comprises two endangered ecosystems classified as "Highest Priority" 
in the World Bank-WWF Conservation Assessment of the Terrestrial Ecoregions of Latin 
America and the Caribbean (Dinerstein et al., 1995):  Mexican Trans-Volcanic Pine-Oak 
Forest in the higher mountains (along with patches of cloud forest) and Balsas Dry Forest 
in the foothills. The site includes the buffer zone of the Nevado de Toluca National Park. 
The city of Valle de Bravo and surrounding irrigation districts suffer from overexploited 
aquifers and rely upon these forests to improve seasonal water flows. PES contracts with 
ejidos and communities with key forested lands would serve to enhance water flows, 
protect hydraulic infrastructure from sedimentation, and conserve the habitat of numerous 
endemic plant and animal species.  
 
f.  Cancun-Sian Ka'an. Located in the State of Quintana Roo, this site includes the Sian 
Ka'an Biosphere Reserve and the El Eden Private Reserve. It comprises humid and dry 
tropical forests, mangroves, and semi-arid scrub in the extreme north.  The site contains 
most of the diverse endemic fauna and flora of the Yucatan Peninsula and is a 
concentration area for many species of migratory land and water birds. This pilot area is 
in the general vicinity of Cancun and the booming tourist resorts of the Mayan Riviera, 
where there is considerable potential to promote eco-tourism as a complement to the 
well-developed tourism around beach resorts and Mayan ruins. This is an area where PES 
arrangements based on maintaining natural habitats for biodiversity-based ecotourism 
shows genuine promise.  PES contracts would help to ensure that participating 
communities maintain the natural forest and other biodiversity-friendly vegetation.  
 
g.  Oaxaca de Juarez-Sierra San Felipe. Located in the State of Oaxaca, this site 
comprises the unique dry oak forest and thorn scrub in a portion of Oaxaca's central 
valley and adjacent slopes, along with the moist pine-oak and cloud forests in the 
mountain ranges both north and south of Oaxaca city. The cloud forests in the Sierra de 
Norte are presently the most extensive ones remaining in Mexico, with numerous plant 
and animal species of conservation interest. The moist pine-oak forests north of Oaxaca 
Page  5
city are the main stronghold of the globally threatened Dwarf Jay Cyanolyca nana. The 
remaining thorn scrub and dry oak forests in the foothills harbor many range-restricted 
species, including near-threatened birds such as Pileated Flycatcher Xenotriccus 
mexicanus and Oaxaca Sparrow Aimophila notosticta. The hydrological services from 
the mountain forests (both north and south of Oaxaca city) are especially significant 
because the aquifers that provide water to the city and nearby irrigated lands are 
classified as over-exploited by the National Water Commission (CNA). Although Qaxaca 
city is a popular tourist attraction because of its history and nearby archaeological sites, 
the adjacent mountains (with their pleasant climate, beautiful forests, and exceptional 
biodiversity) have significant, underutilized eco-tourism potential. PES contracts with 
communities holding important lands for biodiversity, hydrological functions, and carbon 
sequestration would serve to limit the clearing of forests for various types of subsistence 
and commercial agriculture.  
 
h.  Monterrey-Cumbres. Located in the states of Nuevo Leon and Coahuila, this site 
comprises the Sierra de Arteaga, an extensive area of native pine forest, with semi-arid 
scrub in the lower foothills and moist forest along water courses. It includes the Cumbres 
de Monterrey National Park and the El Taray Reserve. This site contains a high 
proportion of the world's nesting cliffs and feeding area for the threatened endemic 
Maroon-fronted Parrot. The city of Monterrey has overexploited aquifers and relies 
significantly on surface water originating in the pine forests. Conservation of these 
forests is also considered important for reducing the intensity and damage from periodic 
floods and gully erosion. PES contracts with ejido landowners in the Sierra de Arteaga 
would reduce deforestation, as well as the pine forest degradation that results from 
excessive burning.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSEO) 
Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no anticipated large-scale, significant, or irreversible adverse impacts 
associated with the project.  
 
Environmental. The project is expected to be overwhelmingly positive from an 
environmental standpoint, by using PES to induce rural landowners to maintain the 
forests or other natural vegetation on their lands, thereby (i) conserving globally 
significant biodiversity, (ii) maintaining or improving hydrological functions, and (iii) 
reducing greenhouse gases by storing carbon. No civil works are expected to be procured 
under the project. The main on-the-ground environmental impacts associated with project 
expenditures would thus be the maintenance of desired vegetative cover on the rural 
landholdings of PES recipients. The only possible adverse environmental impacts would 
be strictly unintended; they could possibly involve (i) tradeoffs between different 
environmental objectives (such as biodiversity vs. improved water flows); (ii) 
misallocation of PES funds (such as landowners who have not complied with their 
contracts, or environmentally inappropriate land uses); or (iii) perverse incentives (such 
as new people moving onto lands eligible for PES benefits).  
 
Social. The project is also expected to have positive impacts on the social side as a 
result of increasing incomes and improving the quality and sustainability of natural 
resources in some of the poorest rural communities in the country, with the highest 
marginalization indexes, and large shares of indigenous people. However, there are risks 
related to overcoming obstacles to participation for poor communities and the possibility 
of inequitable distribution of project costs and benefits.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is specifically intended to foster future activities in the project area that have 
favorable long-term social and environmental impacts. Indirect or long-term negative 
impacts could result from unintended results as described above, or from failure of the 
PES mechanism to provide long-term incentives to maintain the land uses and 
conservation practices contracted under the program.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Land acquisition to place land under government control and protection could be more 
effective in conserving environmental services, but would have been considerably more 
expensive and would not have been feasible in any case because the outright purchase of 
community and ejido land is not currently permitted under Mexican law and would be 
controversial from a social and political perspective even if it were allowed.  
 
Although eco-labeling or certification schemes may promote adoption of improved land 
use practices by landholders who seek to access markets in which buyers of forest 
Page  7
products reward good forest practices or management, eco-labeling alone would not 
effectively target the priority areas or land uses sought by the project nor increase public 
awareness of environmental services sufficiently to help create local PES markets that 
would be appropriately targeted. Since most of the time the direct beneficiaries of 
environmental services are not themselves the direct buyers of goods from certified 
forests, the potential of eco-labeling to help develop local markets for environmental 
services is limited. In addition, eco-labeling fundamentally involves extractive activities, 
even if well-managed, whereas the project emphasizes conservation. However, eco-
labeling could possibly help obtain funds for conservation from people interested in good 
forest management.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) intended to prevent 
unintended negative impacts by incorporating within the project's operational rules (i) 
eligibility and prioritization criteria for the types of lands and landowners that could 
receive PES contracts and (ii) review procedures and specific responsibilities within 
CONAFOR to ensure that all contracts are awarded, administered, and supervised in 
accordance with these criteria. The PES eligibility criteria are expected to require, inter 
alia, (i) no clearing of forests or other natural habitats to establish new agricultural 
systems; (ii) any reforestation must be with species native to the site; and (iii) all eligible 
landowners (whether communities, ejidos, or individuals) will need to present evidence 
of legally secure land tenure and long-term residence in the PES eligible area.  
 
Other measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues include a detailed 
action plan that includes community capacity building to help overcome obstacles for 
participation in the project and avoid problems with inequitable distribution of benefits, 
as well as participatory community consultation in (i) defining the project and selecting 
project areas and (ii) incorporation of strong ongoing community consultation 
mechanisms within the project itself.  
 
Borrower capacity to plan and implement these measures is considered moderate to 
high, based on previous experience with PES through the existing PSAH and CABSA 
programs, strengthened sectoral capacity in key government agencies and programs due 
to legal, institutional, and regulatory reform in recent years, and additional capacity 
building measures incorporated into the project design.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include (a) members of the mostly poor rural ejidos and communities 
that would be paid to provide environmental services and (b) users of environmental 
services who would receive increased or improved services and/or be protected from 
degradation of those services. The global community would also benefit through the 
conservation of biodiversity of global significance and increased carbon sequestration.  
 
Page  8
A
participatory social consultation was conducted that included (i) interviews with 74 
ejido and indigenous community leaders, NGO workers, community/ejido technical field 
workers, and local managers and staff of protected areas and CONAFOR, and (ii) 20 
participatory workshops with 278 participants, including three workshops specifically for 
women (66 indigenous, 10 nonindigenous). These consultations helped craft a project 
design that emphasizes strong indigenous community and ejido participation in a detailed 
action strategy that helps integrate the social and environmental aspects of the project and 
increase local community capacity to participate in decisionmaking and project 
management and compliance. The project also has strong, ongoing community liaison 
and consultation arrangements, including the hiring of "regional promoters" to promote 
the project, disseminate information and knowledge, provide feedback, and help adapt 
PES mechanisms to local needs and conditions, as well as stipends and scholarships to 
"community promoters" selected by the communities themselves to provide further 
liaison, technical assistance, and facilitation of the project.  
 
Mexico already has substantial experience in consulting with environmental service 
users to identify both the desired services and the willingness to pay. User consultation 
and assessment is the first step in creating a sustainable, voluntary PES system, and will 
be a main focus of Component 1 of the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/28/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/09/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/28/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/09/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  9
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mark A. Austin 
03/02/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Juan Martinez 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
11/28/2005 
Comments:   
