Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3219 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/24/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P106682 
Project Name: Savings and Rural Finance SAGARPA Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Harideep Singh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 5, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Banking (50%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Rural markets (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Rural non-farm income generation (S);Indigenous peoples (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
21.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
39.15
39.15 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The PDO as indicated in the Loan Agreement of the parent project - P010708 - is as follows: 
"The main development objective (DO) of the project is to have a vibrant and viable savings and 
credit sector with expanded financial services outreach in Mexico, with an emphasis on the rural 
and urban areas with low income population".  The project has four components to achieve the 
PDO, namely: (a) Consolidating sector institutions; (b) Expanding financial services in selected 
rural marginal areas; (c) Sector-related studies; and (d) Project Management and M&E.  
 
This is an Additional Financing loan related to the Phase I project.  No changes in the parent 
project development objectives are proposed.  The scale and scope of the component "Expanding 
Financial Services in Rural Areas" is increased from 21 to 100 savings and credit institutions, 
and expanded beyond the seven geographical areas under Phase I to cover the entire country.  
The focus of technical assistance, however, will predominantly be on deepening outreach, and 
not on certification since only entities which are already financially and managerially sound 
would be eligible to participate in the project.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Proposed AF Project Components.  The proposed AF project is expected to cost an additional 
US$60.15 million (with Bank share of US$21.00 million), are grouped into the following two 
broad categories: (a) Technical Assistance to institutions in rural marginal areas; and (b) Project 
Management and M&E Study.  
 
Technical Assistance to institutions in rural marginal areas to deepen outreach.  The AF project 
will finance technical assistance to about 80 entities in a demand-driven setting all over Mexico 
generally following the approach tested under the Phase I project, but focusing on the deepening 
outreach using the "expansion" method which was deemed the most cost-effective to increase 
outreach. The objective would be to mainstream an additional 400,000 new members into the 
formal rural financial sector.  This is to be achieved by supporting 350 points of access to 
services (either newly created or existing points of access strengthened) in these 80 institutions, 
while maintaining the existing classification for certification of the assisted entities.  
 
No changes in project design are proposed.  An adjustment is being made to the definition of 
"rural" to include communities with population count of less than 15,000 to align the project with 
currently accepted national census categories, but otherwise the same three levels of marginality 
constitute the target population (very high, high, and moderate marginality in the CONAPO 
classification).  
 
The "expansion method" to increase outreach takes advantage of the installed capacity of the 
financial intermediaries, market knowledge acquired during Phase I, and the experience gained 
by TA provider during that phase.  This will result in a reduced cost per new client as compared 
to the average for Phase I.  
 
Only entities categorized as B (already financially and managerially sound) or higher would be 
eligible to participate in partnerships with the TA providers, under performance-contingent 
contracts.  The incremental operational costs associated with the expansion to serve (more of) the 
target clientele would be partially (50/50) and temporarily financed by counterpart contribution, 
which is interlinked with the performance of, and incorporated into, the TA contracts.  An 
operational improvement is being introduced in project management by establishing an "Average 
Unit Price per (new) Client" (PPUS in the Spanish acronym) which will determine the value of 
contracts with, and will guide the payments to, TA providers based on the verified number of 
new users incorporated into the formal rural financial system.  
 
Project Management and M&E Study.  Continued project oversight provided by SAGARPA's 
Technical Team, and consultancies relating to the Technical Team will be financed by the 
project.  The M&E study, consisting of a household survey, for the original seven regions for 
2008 is already planned under the parallel BANSEFI Phase II project.  This project will finance a 
first round of household survey in the newly added regions in 2008 (to obtain a baseline for the 
new regions), and a consolidated survey in late 2010 to cover the entire project area (original and 
new regions) to obtain an assessment of the aggregate project outcomes.  
 
Project duration, execution and oversight.  The Additional Loan activities are expected to be 
completed by February 28, 2011, within three years of the current closing date of the parent 
Page  3
project.  The revised Closing Date of the AF loan, therefore, will be August 31, 2011.  BANSEFI 
will continue to be the executing agency for the project, and the SAGARPA component 
oversight will be provided through the Technical Team located in SAGARPA, already created 
and operational under the parent project.  
 
Project Implementation and Management.  The project will continue to be implemented under 
the guidance of the already functional BANSEFI and SAGARPA project teams.  Activities 
proposed to be funded through the Additional Loan will be carried out through international TA 
service providers, and other consultants.  The contracts of the individual consultants in the 
SAGARPA project team will be extended to facilitate the management and execution of the AF 
project during the extended period.  
 
Accounting and Financial Management Arrangements.  The AF project will continue to use the 
financial management arrangements for Phase I project, which have been revised and updated 
from time to time based on Bank review findings, lessons learnt during the implementation of the 
Phase I project, and the specific agreements reached between the World Bank, BANSEFI (the 
financial agent), SAGARPA (the implementing entity) and the Government (the MOF).  The 
Bank supervision work for the Phase I project involved ensuring that the arrangements allow for 
an appropriate level of transparency that facilitates oversight and control while also supporting 
smooth implementation. No major FM-related issues were identified as deficient.  Overall, the 
existing FM arrangements are satisfactory, and adequate for the AF project activities.  
 
Flow of funds and disbursement.  The project will continue to use the existing project?s 
arrangements for the flow of funds and disbursement already in effect under the project currently 
under implementation. SAGARPA receives budget funds from the national treasury (TESOFE) 
to process payments to suppliers of goods or services.  Information in the format of SOEs in 
Mexican Pesos (MXP) is submitted to the Bank through BANSEFI, following which the Bank 
reimburses an equivalent amount in dollars (USD), and finally, BANSEFI reimburses TESOFE.  
 
Retroactive Financing.  Disbursement from the Additional Loan will commence immediately 
after effectiveness, given that there is no disbursement condition.  An amount of US$2.0 million 
will be available from the Additional Loan to disburse against expenditures incurred prior to this 
effectiveness date, but after December 1, 2007 (but in no case incurred earlier than the twelve 
months immediately before signing of the amended loan agreement).  
 
Procurement Arrangements.  An ex-post review of procurement activities relating to the project 
was completed in October 2006. The ex-post review conclusions indicated that BANSEFI?s 
procurement team (which will be handling all SAGARPA procurement processing as under the 
parent project) is well-prepared and has enhanced their experience and understanding of 
procurement-related issues.  The procurement system installed by BANSEFI allows satisfactory 
monitoring, reporting, and record keeping of transactions.  
 
The existing procurement staffing arrangement and capacity and the procurement system are 
commensurate with the needs of the AF project activities.  These arrangements will continue to 
be used for the AF project activities.  
 
Page  4
Applicable Procurement Guidelines.  The Guidelines for Procurement under IBRD Loans and 
for Selection and Employment of Consultants, May 2004 (with the October 2006 corrigenda) 
will be applicable to expenditures financed by the AF loan.  A global procurement plan has 
already been prepared for activities to be financed through the Additional Loan.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
ALthough the project covers all marginal areas in Mexico, much will depend on the 
arrangements between the technical service providers and the institutions wanting to participate 
in the project.  The project location (marginal areas covered by the project) will be known after 
the award of the technical service assignment contracts to the service providers.  This is expected 
by end-December 2007.All IP Participation Plans are expected to have been prepared by the 
technical service providers by September 30, 2008.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Phase I project covered seven marginal areas in Mexico, and required the preparation of 
simplified IPDPs, social analyses and consultations through social scientists, and the preparation 
and implementation of IP Participation Action Plans by the technical service providers.  Recent 
Bank review missions have found compliance with OP4.10 IP Safeguard Policy to be 
satisfactory.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
There is a presence of IP in the rural marginal areas being covered under the AF project.  The 
areas which eventually get covered under the project depend on the agreements that the technical 
service providers and the institutions reach.  Only those areas will get incorporated in the project 
for which the technical assistance services get approved.  A Framework Approach has been 
recommended to, and agreed with, SAGARPA.  IP Participation Plans will be prepared as a part 
of the technical assistance assignments, involving incremental social analyses and consultations 
with IP communities.  These plans will then be implemented under oversight by SAGARPA.  
The details of the approach are provided in the Safeguards Compliance Note.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Given the complexity of the project, and the nature and scale of the proposed project?s 
potential effects on IP, the project will do the following:  
 
(a) 
at the macro level, it will continue to use the detailed and comprehensive social 
analyses carried out for, and the consultation outcomes from, the seven regions covering 72% 
of the Mexican IP population; and  
 
(b) 
at the micro/entity-level, the project will follow an IP Framework approach as 
discussed below.  
 
IP Framework.  The proposed approach will have the following main features.  
 
(a) 
Entities in states covered under the parent project.  These states will continue to 
use the detailed and comprehensive social analyses carried out for, and the consultation 
outcomes from, the seven regions covering 72% of the Mexican IP population. Indigenous 
Peoples Participation Plans will be up-dated for existing parent project entities, and prepared 
for new entities located in these regions, should there be a presence of IP population in the 
new entity?s area of operation.  The process will incorporate best practices already tested to 
ensure that the project continues to benefit the IP population.  
 
(b) 
Entities in states outside the parent project regions.  Entities in these states will 
use the parent project social analyses, consultation outcomes, some sample IP Participation 
Plans with an evaluation of achievements as parent project experience to enrich their 
understanding of the social and IP aspects, and prepare Indigenous People Participation Plans 
should there be a presence of IP population in their area of operation.  The process will 
involve doing an incremental social analysis and IP consultations.  
 
(c) 
Terms of Reference for the technical assistance support.  These will indicate to 
the prospective technical assistance providers the need to: (a) incorporate staff in the 
assignment team with the capacity to carry out social analysis and prepare IP Participation 
Plans; (b) do a quick screening to ascertain the presence of IP populations in the entity?s 
operational territory; and (c) if IP population is present, carry out an incremental social 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
analysis and consult with the identified potential indigenous beneficiaries to prepare an IP 
Participation Plan which would include output and outcome indicators.  SAGARPA will 
provide appropriate guidance to the technical assistance providers to carry out the 
incremental social analysis and also prepare the IP Participation Plans.  
 
(d) 
Implementation and monitoring of IP Participation Plans.  The technical 
assistance consultant will implement the IP Participation Plans, and will present progress 
reports every six months.  SAGARPA will review these reports and suggest remedial actions, 
where necessary.  The SAGARPA core team, as established under the parent project, will 
undertake field visits and, in consultation with indigenous communities, review 
implementation of the IP Participation Plans.  The Bank team, as a part of its regular review 
process, will also assess compliance.  Where the technical consultant indicates absence of IP 
communities during its screening process, and does not prepare an IP Participation Plan, this 
fact will be verified by SAGARPA, and spot-confirmed by the Bank during its review 
missions.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Harideep Singh 
10/23/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
10/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
10/24/2007 
Comments:   
