Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/22/2007 
Report No.:  AC1965
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P088996 
Project Name:  Mexico (CRL) Rural Electrification Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gabriela Elizondo Azuela 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P095038 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (60%);Power (40%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
70.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
15.00
85.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed GEF project will support the capacity building, market development and 
market sustainability components necessary for the implementation of sustainable rural 
electrification models based on renewable energy for the development of non-agricultural 
productive uses and social activities.  The key objectives of the Project are the following:  
 
-Policy, Strategy and Institutional Capacity Building: The objective is to assist the 
Government of Mexico in the review and implementation of appropriate legal-regulatory 
frameworks and the development of sound policies and strategies necessary to ensure the 
development and sustainability of a market for the provision of integrated energy 
solutions (i.e. those that include renewable energy and are developed to provide 
communities with electricity for non-agricultural productive activities and social 
services).  
 
-Market Development and Sustainability: The objective is to assist the Government of 
Mexico in the identification of projects and design of appropriate mechanisms necessary 
to demonstrate the implementation of least-cost integrated energy solutions which are 
based on sustainable service provision models and that can be effectively replicated in 
Mexico and in other nations.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Project is a five-year program financed by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), 
the World Bank, the Government of Mexico and the private sector.  The Project aims at 
increasing access to electricity services and promoting social and economic development 
in the rural areas of the poorest state of Mexico.  The geographical scope of the Project 
includes:  Oaxaca, Chiapas, Guerrero, and Veracruz in Mexico, there have been identified 
4,184 localities that are not going to be electrified during the next 5 years, out of this 
universe some localities will be selected based on a demand driven approach; proposed 
sub-projects will be considered eligible if they meet a list of conditions.  The initiative 
will start with sub-projects in the States of Oaxaca, Veracruz and Guerrero, where six-
year government administrative cycles have recently initiated (sexenios), with Chiapas 
joining later. The Project targets communities of 50 to 2,500 habitants located more than 
10 kilometers away from the grid and that will not be reached by the grid in at least 5 
years, thus altogether the Project will electrify 50,000 households in the period July 
2007-December 2012.  The Project is focused on off-grid electrification options including 
mini-grids and stand alone systems; and is complementary to other governmental 
initiatives which are increasing access to electrification with grid extensions.  
 
Specifically, the Project will co-finance the following five-components:  i) Policy, 
Regulation and Strategy; ii) Rural Electrification Sub-projects; iii) Technical Assistance 
for Rural Electrification; iv) Technical Assistance to Increase Productive Uses of 
Electricity; and v) Project Management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be developed in 4 states:  Oaxaca, Chiapas, Guerrero and Veracruz in 
Mexico.  These four Southern States of Mexico have abundant renewable resources; 
Veracruz, Guerrero and Chiapas have hydro resources and Oaxaca has wind resources.  
Small human settlements are spread throughout the mountain range territory, their 
geographic isolation in part explains their economic exclusion, impacting poverty- roads 
and other transportation systems are not well developed in these four southern states.  
These four southern states have the highest concentration of indigenous people in 
Mexico; cover 15.5% of Mexico's territory and have almost 18% of Mexico's total 
population; and all of them have coasts on the Pacific Ocean.  The four southern states 
have a wealth of cultural assets, such as historical and archeological sites officially 
recognized:  In Chiapas there are 6 major archeological sites, in Guerrero 2, in Oaxaca 
10, and in Veracruz 4.The fours southern states are located within and/or there are natural 
protected areas inside:  In Chiapas there are 11 natural protected areas, in Guerrero 2, in 
Oaxaca 4, and in Veracruz 4.  
 
-The State of Chiapas:  Has multiple microclimates, ranging from mountain to coastline, 
in consequence is rich in biodiversity.  It possesses natural water resources, which are 
being well-used by hydroelectric energy generation.  The most commonly practices 
activities are commerce and service-related.  25% of the population in Chiapas is 
indigenous.  
Page  3
-The State of Guerrero:  Is a fairly dry and sunny territory with high mountains, scarce 
valleys, and mostly poor soil supporting tropical jungle.  Silver mining has been carried 
out for centuries in Guerrero, and also, the coastline of Guerrero has several famous 
tourist destinations.  14% of the population in Guerrero is indigenous.  
 
-The State of Oaxaca:  Is similar to the state of Guerrero in terms of climate and 
topographical conditions; Oaxaca has one of the most rugged terrains in Mexico:  a third 
of Oaxaca's terrain is covered by western mountain ranges and almost a fifth by coastal 
mountain ranges.  Rivers are less abundant than in the rest of the southern states.  Oaxaca 
is mostly a tourist-oriented state with places of interest from mountains down to its 
coastline.  37% of the population in Oaxaca is indigenous.  
 
-The State of Veracruz:  Is a long strip of land that borders most of the coastline of the 
Gulf of Mexico.  It has varying conditions of latitude and altitude thus is highly 
diversified from high-mountain to tropical forest.  A number of rivers and streams irrigate 
the territory.  Veracruz has oil resources which are exploited in offshore areas. It is the 
richest of the four southern states, it is an important producer of coffee, tobacco, maize, 
sugar cane and beef and dairy livestock. 10% of the population in Veracruz is indigenous.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSSO) 
Ms Tania Carrasco (LCSAR) 
Mr Hernan M. Gonzalez Figueroa (LCSEN) 
Ms Paola C. Solidoro (ENVCF) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The typology of The Projects to be implemented is as follows:  
 
I.  Wind Generators.  
 
-Potential impact :  Low.  
 
-Range Capacity:  0.5KW - 10KW.  
 
-Potential Environmental Problems:  Bird population endangered (Minimal), land 
clearing (Minimal).  
Page  4
-Potential Social Problem:  Property issues (i.e. land purchase), conflict within the 
community (i.e. related to decision making).  
 
II. Wind-Diesel Hybrids.  
 
-Potential impact:  Low.  
 
-Range Capacity:  1KW-50KW.  
 
-Potential Environmental Problems:  Bird population endangered (Minimal), land 
clearing (Minimal), Oil spills (Minimal).  
 
-Potential Social Problem:  Property issues (i.e. land purchase), conflict within the 
community (i.e. related to decision making).  
 
III. Biomass  
 
-Potential impact:  Low  
 
-Range Capacity:  1KW-50KW  
 
-Potential Environmental Problems:  Bottom ash (Minimal), dust generation (Minimal), 
emission to air, (Minimal), water use (Minimal), emissions to water (Minimal).  
 
-Potential Social Problem:  Property issues (i.e. land purchase), conflict within the 
community (i.e. related to decision making).  
 
IV. Micro-hydros  
 
-Potential impact:  Medium  
 
-Range Capacity:  50 KW-250 KW  
 
-Potential Environmental Problems:  Deforestation as a result of the construction of 
channels and access roads (Minimal), final disposal of accumulated sediments in the 
settlement ponds (Minimal), contamination of the ponds (suspended solids) - (Minimal), 
loss of aquatic fauna through lack of adequate ecological control (Minimal), impacts on 
natural habitats (Minimal), use and final disposal of residues and combustibles 
(Minimal), impact of noise and accidents (Minimal).  
 
-Potential Social Problem:  Property issues (i.e. land purchase), conflict within the 
community (i.e. related to decision making).  
 
V. PVs  
 
-Potential impact:  Low  
 
-Range Capacity:  0.750 KW / household.  
 
-Potential Environmental Problems:  Disposal of batteries (Minimal).  
 
-Potential Social Problem:  Property issues (i.e. land purchase), conflict within the 
community (i.e. related to decision making).  
 
VI. PVs-Diesel Hybrids  
 
-Potential impact:  Low.  
 
-Range Capacity:  0.500 KW/productive active, 0.750 KW/household.  
 
-Potential Environmental Problems:  Disposal of batteries (Minimal), oil spills 
(Minimal).  
 
-Potential Social Problem:  Property issues (i.e. land purchase), conflict within the 
community (i.e. related to decision making).  
 
Page  5
VII. PVs Wind Hybrids  
 
-Potential impact:  Low  
 
-Range Capacity:  1KW-50KW.  
 
-Potential Environmental Problems:  Bird population endangered (Minimal), land 
clearing (Minimal), disposal of batteries (Minimal).   
 
-Potential Social Problem:  Property issues (i.e. land purchase), conflict within the 
community (i.e. related to decision making).  
 
VIII. Mini-grids associated to any of the above  
 
-Potential impact:  Medium  
 
-Range Capacity:  Maximum of 6 Km between source and household/locality (which 
will be installed along rural roads whenever possible).  
 
-Potential Environmental Problems:  Same as above.  
 
-Potential Social Problem:  Property issues (i.e. land purchase), conflict within the 
community (i.e. related to decision making).  
 
All environmental impacts will be minimal since sub-projects are of small scale.  
Mitigation measures to all environmental impacts identified will be addressed in the 
Environmental Impact Assessment of each project.  The proposed 
classification/categorization for The Project is B, from the safeguards standpoint.  
Safeguards that are not triggered mean that issues related are not expected, according to 
the team.  The Project will have a strong environmental positive impact given that the 
target population will substitute diesel, wood, kerosene, ocote, and others carbon-based 
elements, for the proposed renewable energy technologies; diminishing deforestation, 
CO2 emissions, oil spillage and indoor pollution among others.  A Safeguards Manual is 
being designed for the subprojects.  This manual will be applied by the State 
Implementation Units, which will be in charge of the evaluation of subprojects.  The 
State Implementation Units will assure that not only national environmental and social 
regulations are being complied but also World Bank environmental and social policies 
are being complied.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative indirect or long term impacts are foreseen.  The Project will promote the 
participation of national and local experts in the planning of micro-businesses and/or 
models for the development of sustainable productive/income generating activities and 
social services (capacity building).  A Manual of Good Environmental Practices will be 
provided to rising productive activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
Safeguard Manual will be provided to The Project Implementation Units  at the State 
level.  The Manual will provide procedures to minimize impacts on safeguards triggered 
by The Project, including a conflict resolution mechanism to help minimize risks during 
project implementation and/or problems between stakeholders, stakeholders and 
communities and/or between communities.   
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The existing capacity of participating borrowers to deal with The Project environmental 
and social safeguard aspects is being evaluated.  Measures to enhance the capacity of the 
borrowers to deal with identified environmental and social safeguard aspects will be 
established.  The selected financial institution (NAFIN) has a solid experience with 
World Bank projects and safeguards policies (as well as with national environmental and 
social regulations), and has the capacity to implement these policies. However, The 
Project aims at building such capacity at the local level to plan and implement rural 
infrastructure projects, through providing a Safeguard Manual and training to apply this 
manual to the SIUs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are:  
 
1)
The strongly-committed national government, which will establish the supportive 
policy framework and, through the appropriate line agencies, provide key information 
and selective financial assistance for renewable energy promotion and the development 
of income generating activities and social services.  
 
2)
The State and Municipal governments that will be directly involved in supporting 
local renewable energy promotion and economic development activities  
 
3)
The national and local financial institutions that will be encouraged and helped to 
provide term credit for the purchase of renewable energy equipment.  
 
4)
The local communities that will be encouraged and helped to develop community-
based energy supply proposals based on their domestic and economic consumption needs.  
 
5)
The individual households that will be given the choices and assisted to purchase 
renewable energy services  
 
6)
Key donors.  
 
Over the project preparation stage, a methodology for social participation and 
consultation has been drafted.  This methodology will become the platform to guarantee 
that a universe of more than 50,000 households will be consulted (on needs, on 
perceptions about advantages and disadvantages of renewable energy technologies, on 
interest in participating, and on advisable sub-projects according to the production 
vocation and cultural features of indigenous and non-indigenous peoples), receive 
information of project objectives and different existing renewable energy technologies 
options.  Throughout the project life, the state project implementation units (PIU's) will 
be the implementation agency in close coordination with both CDI and SEDESOL.  A 
communication strategy for different audiences and a Conflict Resolution Framework 
will be set to be implemmented throughout the project life.  
 
The following workshops with stakeholders have been organized and held:  
 
-Workshop in Jalapa City:  Participation by representatives of CDI, FIRCO, CFE, 
SENER, COPLADES, SEDESOL, private sector, NGO's and the academia.  The purpose 
Page  7
was to provide technical information about renewable energy technologies and to discuss 
diverse institutional models.  
 
-Workshop in Tequesquitengo City, Morelos:  Participation by representatives of the 
states, NGO's, private sector, and the academia. The purpose was to brief them on project 
progress, state-of-the-art technology on solar panels, the importance of NGO's 
participation to support local actors, compliance with both Mexican andWorld Bank 
safeguards on social and indigenous issues.  
 
-Workshop in Mexico City:  Participation by representatives of the private sector, 
SENER and CRE.  The purpose was to brief them on project objetives and activities 
funded with donations from trust funds targeted to different fields of development, and to 
identify their interest to participate.  
 
-Workshop in Cuernavaca City:  Participation by representatives of the states, SENER, 
IIE, CDI, CFE, CRE, SEDESOL, FIRCO and USAID. The purpose was to assess criteria 
for the selection of both localities and sub-projects, and to discuss lessons learned from 
previous rural electrification programs.  
 
-Field visits were organized to follow-up agreements made in Cuernavaca City.  
 
-Several assessments were completed to record existing experiences in the use of 
renewable energy technologies in diferent regions in Mexico.  In addition, specific 
studies on the targeted areas for project implementation were completed to assess the 
social and technical feasibility of regions selected by state governments.  
 
According to studies completed, field visits and the pre-consultation in selected 
communities for the first year, it was confirmed that: (i) from non-positive previous 
experiences, the targeted population still has myths and prejudices about the use and 
advantages of renewable energy technologies, (ii) for decision-making the provision of 
high quality information of cultural contexts is a must, (iii) involvement of mono-lingual 
women requires additional efforts in communities where indigenous people are the 
majority, (iv) consultations must be undertaken in project targeted regions to involve not 
only leaders and local authorities but their inhabitants (men, women, youngsters, etc.), 
and (v) information and materials preparation must be pedagogical to allow for a 
comprehension of project objectives.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2007 
 
Page  8
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Project is considered an indigenous people development initiative, hence, no separate 
Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP) is required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
No 
Page  9
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Todd M. Johnson 
02/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hernan M. Gonzalez Figueroa 
02/28/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Tania Carrasco 
02/28/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Elena Correa 
02/28/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
02/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan G. Goldmark 
03/22/2007 
Comments:   
