Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2007 
Report No.:  AC2885
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P095250 
Project Name:  Health Services & Social Assistance 
Task Team Leader:  Rekha Menon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (66%);Other social services (34%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Social safety nets (P);Social risk mitigation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project is part of a long-term Government program to improve the 
effectiveness of health and social assistance systems in Moldova.  The objective of the 
project is to support the Government's program to increase access to quality and efficient 
health and social assistance services for the Moldovan population in line with the MTEF 
for 2007-09.  If the Project is successful, Moldova will in the long term, (a) decrease pre-
mature mortality and disability, closing the gap between European Union and Moldova 
through upgraded health services, increased financial protection and increased efficiency 
of health system; and (b) increase social assistance coverage among the needy, and 
decrease leakages.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Health System Modernization Component (US$ 12 million).  The 
component supports priorities identified for implementation in the first four years of the 
Government?s National Health Strategy 2007-2017.  
 
Sub-Component 1.1: Ministry of Health capacity development.  This sub-component 
will consist of activities to support: (i) policy development capacity in health service 
planning, finance and quality enhancement; and (ii) skills development in analysis, 
monitoring and evaluation of policies at the Ministry of Health and associated agencies, 
Page  2
including institutionalization of National Health Accounts (NHA).   This will assist the 
Ministry in its changing role as a ?steward? of the health sector.  
 
Sub-Component 1.2: Health care financing and reimbursement.  To improve cost-
efficiency, the sub-component will help the Health Insurance Company increase the level 
of autonomy of health care providers.  To improve the quality of services it will also help 
the Company introduce contracting between with providers for output-based payments.  
To improve access, this sub-component will support development and implementation of 
a
plan for increasing health insurance coverage.  
 
Sub-Component 1.3: Primary Health Care Development.  This sub-component would 
improve the quality of primary care delivered in rural areas by adopting nationwide 
structural standards for primary care facilities services, providing continuing medical 
education and training for primary care workers and by funding construction works and 
new equipment for existing and new clinics if needed.  
 
Sub-Component 1.4:  Hospital capacity assessment and modernization.  This sub-
component will help the Government of Moldova modernize the hospital network and 
improve operational efficiency and management of the Republican Clinical hospital in 
Chisinau. The sub-component will support an assessment of hospital capacity needs, 
which will guide future investments.  
 
Component 2:  Social Assistance and Welfare Component.  The component supports a 
multi-donor program, led by the DFID, and including SIDA, EU and UNICEF, to help 
the Government improve the effectiveness of cash benefits and social welfare services in 
combating poverty. To achieve this, the component would help the Government to better 
identify the poor, to have information available that would allow for good decision 
making both in awarding benefits awarding and in the identification and delivery of other 
social services.  
 
This component supports two activities, in the context of the program: establishment of 
a
consolidated data base for all social assistance transfers; and equipment and training for 
social workers who will collect information necessary for targeting.  The social workers 
will deliver services in areas such as: child protection, prevention of violence against 
women, prevention of trafficking, and support for people recovering from alcoholism and 
drug abuse  
 
Component 3: Institutional Support Component.  This component aims at building 
administrative capacity in the implementing agencies in order to prepare these sectors for 
SWAP/budget support operations in the future.  Technical assistance would be provided 
to improve monitoring and evaluation and fiduciary management, not only to meet 
Project requirements but to improve overall capacity within the two ministries.  This 
component will also provide logistical support for the working groups assisting in 
implementation of social sector reforms.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented on the existing site of the Republican Clinical Hospital 
and on existing sites of primary care facilities identified for rehabilitation.  Any new 
construction will be on existing government property and no resettlement will be 
required.  During the redevelopment of the hospital, hospital workers and patients will be 
affected by the construction work but care will be taken to minimize the impact, for 
example, the work will progress in phases to avoid any disruption in the normal working 
of the hospital.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Evelin Lehis (ECSSD) 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
*
Demolition debris may contain asbestos and toxic components from wall paint, 
plaster and roofs.  If airborne and inhaled these may cause asbestosis, silicosis diseases 
which could impair lung respiratory capacity.  Inhaling asbestos fibers and toxic wall 
paint dust can cause lung cancer.  Proper procedures for working with and disposal of 
demolition debris will be implemented in order to protect the workers and the 
environment.  This will include the use of protective equipment, dust containment 
procedures, transportation and dumping methods.  Dump sites will be in compliance with 
the environment protection regulation of the country.  
 
*
Construction materials will comply with the present regulation eliminating the use 
of hazardous materials.  Particular attention will be paid to materials, insulation, paint and 
plaster.  
 
*
Waste and sewerage systems which handled improperly or spilled can constitute a 
danger for the environment.  The main concern is contamination of underground water 
reservoirs, fountains and wells and the land itself.  Improperly managed it could 
constitute a direct hazard for humans and animals in case insects (flies) and rodents (rats) 
Page  4
have access to it.  These animals are well known vectors for various infectious diseases.  
The design documents for any civil works will be reviewed to ensure appropriate water 
and sewerage systems are installed.  
 
*
Healthcare waste if produced in sizeable quantities in medical facilities could be 
hazardous if handled inappropriately by healthcare personnel.  A healthcare waste 
management study was carried in partnership by the GoM and WHO.  The study resulted 
in a comprehensive National Action Plan for healthcare waste management which is 
currently under implementation.  The Project will adopt principles and guidelines on 
which the plan is based and will be in compliance with pending regulation of Moldova.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential adverse long term impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not required.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The GoM has a number of policies, laws and regulations to address the safeguard policy 
issues.  These were reviewed and are included in the Environment Management Plan for 
the Project.  Risk mitigation measures proposed include:  
 
*
Adoption of safe demolition procedures in regard to the debris.  Proper 
procedures for working with and disposal of demolition debris will be implemented in 
order to protect the workers and the environment; they will comprise at least the use of 
protective equipment, dust containment procedures, transportation and dumping methods.  
Dump sites will be in compliance with the environment protection regulation of the 
country.  
 
*
Use of environment friendly construction materials. . Particular attention will be 
paid on materials, isolation, paint and plaster.  Prior to starting the works, the design of 
the health care facilities will be reviewed to ensure that environmentally friendly 
construction materials are used.  
 
*
The design will include a proper system of waste and sewerage system harmless 
to the environment and living beings for all facilities rehabilitated under the Project.  
 
*
The problem of healthcare waste management will be addressed by ensuring that 
the MoH regulation on safe handling, disposal, transportation and destruction of 
hazardous waste are implemented.  Proper training will be delivered to the healthcare 
personnel and adequate procedures will be enforced.  Public awareness training will be 
provided and the implementation of procedures will be monitored.Where necessary 
appropriate mechanisms for safe disposal of health care wastes (based on WHO 
guidelines) will be provided under the Project.  
 
*
As all civil works planned under the project will be on existing sites on 
government owned land, no new land will be acquired. As a consequence, no 
resettlement is planned in the project or expected as a consequence of the Project.  
 
Page  5
The MoH will work in close collaboration with the Epidemiological Surveillance and 
Prevention Institute and its network for the coordination and supervision of the 
environmental plans and risk mitigation measures undertaken in the project and would;  
 
*
coordinate training for health staff and contractors  
 
*
disseminate existing environmental management guidelines and when necessary 
develop new ones in line with best practices accepted internationally;  
 
*
ensure contracting for construction and supply of equipment includes reference to 
the appropriate guidelines  
 
*
conduct periodic visits to inspect and improve measures and monitor compliance  
 
All the activities required by the adoption of mitigation measures will be properly 
described and monitored in the M&E framework and pending arrangements for 
monitoring. They will pertain to adopting the required environment safety legislation and 
the PHC clinics structural standards. Implementing of the National Action Plan for 
Health Care Waste Management will be closely watched. Personnel designated by the 
GoM and MoH and its local structures together with project team and specialist 
consultants will supervise the implementation of environment safeguard measures. . They 
will follow the environmental management plan part of the project and they will check 
the compliance with current regulation, procedures employed, and mitigation measures 
taken. Possible harmful impacts if any, will be promptly addressed and adequate 
measures will be taken.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During preparation, all agencies involved in health care environmental issues regulation 
were consulted with including the Sanitary and Epidemiological Service, National 
Institute for Preventive Medicine and the Ministry of Health.  Discussions were also held 
with local environmental specialists regarding regulations for construction activities and 
existing monitoring systems.  
 
The GoM and MoH are the key stakeholders in implementing the risk mitigation 
policies within the project.  The program will be implemented in consultation with all 
stakeholders.  The main consultation mechanisms will involve national consultations with 
all stakeholders, consultations with donor agencies, and consultations with health 
stakeholders at the national and rayon levels. Public awareness campaigns will be 
conducted under the Project.  The EMP for the Project has been disclosed on the MOH 
website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/29/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  6
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rekha Menon 
04/03/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
04/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Evelin Lehis 
04/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr John Malmborg 
04/12/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/12/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
04/13/2007 
Comments:  Based on discussion and reassurance from team and environmental experts I clear 
herewith. 
