Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/02/2006 
Report No.:  35417
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P090673 
Project Name:  Rural Investment & Services Project (APL #2) 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Olivier Colleye 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 23, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 28, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (56%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(25%);General industry and trade sector (15%);Sub-national government administration 
(2%);Other social services (2%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm 
income generation (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
4.22 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
5.76
10.98 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project is the Second Phase of a two-phase Rural Investment and Services Program. 
The Program objective, which remains unchanged, is to provide long-term support to 
accelerate agricultural recovery and growth so th
at Moldova’s agricultural and rural 
sectors can play their full role in providing the underpinnings for future income growth 
and poverty reduction.  
 
Within this program objective, the project’s second phase objective is to continue to 
foster post-privatization growth in the agricultural sector by improving access of new 
private farmers and rural businesses to what they need to succeed – knowledge, know-
how and finance. The Phase II will build on success achieved under the Phase I, by: (i) 
strengthening and expanding the rural advisory services; (ii) improving business skills of 
the to-be entrepreneurs and assisting with the creation and legal registration of the new 
Page  2
businesses; (iii) upgrading the financial sector environment through a range of risk 
management measures, such as supervision capacity building, and introduction of new 
lending instruments such as leasing; (iv) increase the commercial banking sector outreach 
into rural areas; and (v) developing a practical approach to reducing transaction costs in 
land markets.  It will also build the capacity of the government to manage the specific 
activities of the project which should be taken over by the Government by project’s end 
and will gradually transfer logistical and financial responsibilities to ensure long-term 
sustainability of the activities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will consist of four components to be implemented over four years 
plus support for project management:  
 
Component 1: Rural Advisory Services (US$4.9 million, of which IDA financing of 
$2.1 million)  
 
The Rural Advisory Services (RAS) component aims to provide information, 
knowledge and know-how to newly established private farmers and rural population. 
RISP II will: a) provide support to further strengthen and consolidate the network of 
private rural advisory Services Providers (SPs) established under Phase I and to enhance 
its focus, efficiency and sustainability; b)help the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Industry (MOAFI) develop a vision for the future development of the public good aspect 
of RAS in Moldova and translate it into medium term policy and initiate the 
implementation of the emerging policy over the life of the project; and c) build the 
capacity of the MOAFI to gradually assume full responsibility for overall oversight, 
coordination and outsourcing of RAS activities implemented by SPs, ACSA and other 
entities or donor-funded projects.  
 
Component 2:  Rural Business Development Component (estimated at US$ 0.85 million 
and fully financed by IDA)  
 
The Rural Business Development Component will continue to finance technical 
assistance to rural entrepreneurs, and provide operational support for local development 
agencies (DAs), with the aim to create legally registered, self and co-owned sustainable 
rural businesses, which will potentially become clients of financial institutions.  The 
component will provide, based on expressed demand, support for the formation of viable 
agribusinesses, including business cooperatives, processing and marketing entities, as 
well as non-farm rural businesses with proper legal and operational status which will 
contribute to employment creation and income augmentation in rural areas.  
 
Component 3: 
Rural Finance (US$ 17.77 million, of which IDA financing of 
US$11.46 million)  
 
The component aims to (a) continue to expand the outreach of formal financial sector to 
rural areas, to ensure broader access to investment financing for farmers and rural 
entrepreneurs. It will promote rural financial outreach through traditional loans and by 
Page  3
expanding the use of leasing, which is still a non-
traditional instrument in Moldova’s 
financial sector; and (b) to strengthen the sustainability of the Savings and Credit 
Associations (SCA) industry which delivers financial services to a large segment of the 
population which does not have access to traditional banking services, ensure prudential 
growth of the industry through proper management and supervision and structure the 
industry so that it can become sustainable in the long term.  
 
Financing of the activities:  
 
(a) Credit Line for Investment Loans and Leases, and related technical assistance (US$ 
15.8 million)  
 
(b) Strengthening the Savings and Credit Associations industry, its legal regulatory and 
supervisory framework (US$ 1.96 million)  
 
Component 4: Land Re-parceling Pilots (estimated at US$ 0.75 million, fully financed 
by bilateral donor).  
 
The goal of this component is to respond to the concerns of Government and others 
about the fragmentation of agricultural land, focusing on small peasant farmers (as 
opposed to larger corporate farms) as its primary target group. It will do this by 
facilitating the efficient functioning of land markets in pilot locations through the 
implementation of village land re-parceling projects based on international best practice.  
The specific objectives of these pilots are to: (i) test the demand for and feasibility of land 
re-parceling with small landowners as the primary target group; (ii) use the pilot 
experience as the basis for designing a potential national-level approach, including 
techniques, resource requirements and legislative framework; and (iii) assess the impact 
of re-parceling at the local level, including on land markets, agricultural production, and 
equity.  
 
Component 5: Project Management (estimated at US$ 0.77 million, with full IDA 
financing)  
 
This component will provide technical and financial support for project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented countrywide based on demand for services and credit. 
Project activities will not be located in protected or culturally/socially sensitive areas. 
Where potential projects are proposed in the vicinity of protected areas or critical habitat, 
a
specific environmental assessment will be required.  
 
The GEF-funded Agricultural Pollution Control Project (APCP) is currently under 
implementation in conjunction with the Phase 1 of RISP, to reduce potential nutrient 
pollution of investment financed under it. This collaboration is expected to be continued 
under RISP Phase 2.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Elizabeth Gomart (ECSSD) 
Mr Aleksandar Nacev (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
1.
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
Environment:  
 
Overall, no significant or large-scale environmental impact is expected to occur under 
the project, given the relatively small size of most of the sub-projects to be supported. 
The proceeds of the project will be used to finance TA, as well as investment activities 
through credit lines channeled through selected commercial banks. Due to the demand 
driven nature of the investment activities, it is not possible to state a priori the exact types 
of investments. However, experience of RISP I shows that the bulk of investments 
financed small loans with the average size of US$ 17,000, of which 60% were for 
services and other small-scale non-agricultural activities. 60% of funds were provided to 
finance agricultural production and processing-related activities. Financing of pesticides 
will continue to be ineligible under the project.  
 
The updated Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) identified a number of potential 
issues and provided recommendations for addressing the issues. The summary of the 
implementation status of these recommendations is provided below:  
 
(1)With a number of RISP-I sub-projects falling into WB Category B and the likelihood 
of the same occurring in RISP-II, the Implementing Agency should hire, place on retainer 
an environmental consultant or train existing staff to assist in the environmental 
management and monitoring of these sub-projects.  
Page  5
Status: The Implementing Agency will cooperate closely with the GEF-funded 
Agricultural Pollution Control Project (APCP), which is currently under implementation 
to reduce potential nutrient pollution of investment financed under it for expert advice 
and assistance on retainer basis. This collaboration, started under RISP I is expected to be 
continued under RISP Phase 2.  
 
RISP I has built important synergies with the GEF Agriculture Pollution Control Project 
(APCP) and has already carried out training on environmentally friendly agriculture 
practices for ACSA and SPs. APCP has taken the leadership with the provision of TA to 
the RISP borrowers for the design of the environmental mitigation investments and 
APCP also provides assistance to the RISP clients with the supervision of the more 
complex mitigation investments. APCP is assisting MOAFI and Ministry of Ecology and 
Natural Resources to draft a Moldovan Code of Good Agriculture Practices. The Code is 
expected to be published in early 2006 and it will become an additional environmental 
benchmark that would guide investments in the Moldovan agriculture. By end 2005 thirty 
six sub-projects receiving RISP I credits have been selected for APCP funding of 
environmental mitigation investments out of which 24 are for livestock enterprises, 10 for 
crop production and 2 for agro-industry. The total committed APCP nutrient discharge 
mitigation grant co-financing for the RISP borrowers has reached US$ 0.9 million. Seven 
manure platforms for the RISP-I borrowers have been completed to date and the first 
grant co-financing commitments have been made for primary agriculture production 
investments as well as for the agriculture produce processing projects. These investments 
are expected to be completed in 2006. The remaining nutrient discharge mitigation grants 
budget (US$ 1.1 million) under GEF APCP will be available to both RISP I and II clients 
in the coming years.  
 
(2) Additional environmental training ranging from awareness to more detailed 
environmental management should be provided to PFIs, staff of the Implementing 
Agency, and development officers.  
 
Status: The project has set aside budget for training of a number of players involved in 
the project implementation: staff of the Participating Financial Institutions, a person in 
CAPMU, a person in the Credit Line Directorate, responsible for the Credit Line 
implementation, and staff of the Development Agencies involved in creation and 
registration of new businesses, to ensure that the newly created agricultural businesses 
follow good agricultural and environmental practices. The Service Providers of the Rural 
Advisory will also strengthen their capacity in delivering advice on good agricultural and 
environmental practices.  
 
(3) An effective environmental monitoring program should be designed and put into 
place. Training in environmental monitoring should be provided to the individual 
responsible for environmental management (Item 1 above).  
 
Status: Monitoring for the results and impact of each component will include 
environmental aspects.  
Page  6
(4) The World Bank supervisory mission for the Project should include an 
environmental specialist on its missions at least once a year to monitor EMPs of a 
sampling of the Category A and B sub-projects.  
 
Status: The project team took a note of this recommendation and will ask the 
environmental specialist to join supervision missions.   
 
(5) End of Project (end of RISP-I) completion mission should include an environmental 
specialist to examine compliance on the Category A and Category B projects and should 
review the quality of EIAs and EMPs for these sub-projects.  
 
Status: The Project team will note this recommendation and ask an environmental 
specialist to join the End-of-project RISP I mission. The Project is expected to close in 
August 2006.  
 
(6) Field development officers should be accompanied by the local extension officer 
when considering and/or assessing an agricultural activity for Project loan support. The 
extension officer will be able to provide guidance regarding sustainable agricultural 
management.  
 
Status: The collaboration between the Rural Advisory Component and the Business 
Development Component will be strengthened to ensure that the newly created 
agricultural businesses follow good agricultural and environmental practices.  
 
(7) The relationship between the APCP staff and RISP staff needs to be strengthened to 
ensure that APCP environmental input to RISP sub-projects is incorporated effectively.  
 
Status: As explained above, the cooperation between the two projects was effective 
under the Phase I of RISP and is expected to be continued in the future. RISP I has built 
important synergies with the GEF Agriculture Pollution Control Project (APCP) and has 
already carried out training on environmentally friendly agriculture practices for ACSA 
and SPs. APCP has taken the leadership with the provision of TA to the RISP borrowers 
for the design of the environmental mitigation investments and APCP also provides 
assistance to the RISP clients with the supervision of the more complex mitigation 
investments. APCP is assisting MOAFI and Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources 
to draft a Moldovan Code of Good Agriculture Practices. The Code is expected to be 
published in early 2006 and it will become an additional environmental benchmark that 
would guide investments in the Moldovan agriculture. By end 2005 thirty six sub-
projects receiving RISP I credits have been selected for APCP funding of environmental 
mitigation investments out of which 24 are for livestock enterprises, 10 for crop 
production and 2 for agro-industry. The total committed APCP nutrient discharge 
mitigation grant co-financing for the RISP borrowers has reached US$ 0.9 million. Seven 
manure platforms for the RISP-I borrowers have been completed to date and the first 
grant co-financing commitments have been made for primary agriculture production 
investments as well as for the agriculture produce processing projects. These investments 
Page  7
are expected to be completed in 2006. The remaining nutrient discharge mitigation grants 
budget (US$ 1.1 million) under GEF APCP will be available to both RISP I and II clients 
in the coming years.  
 
Social:  
 
Key social issues were identified through a number the preparation of the first phase of 
the RISP project.  A recent survey  ‘A Stock Taking of Land Reform andFarm 
Restructuring in Bulgaria, Moldova, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, by Dudwick, Fock and 
Sedick (2/27/2005) provides some updated information about rural households, rural 
services and community life in Moldova. The survey confirms the main findings of the 
original stakeholder analysis which identified major challenges facing the rural 
population: such as insufficient income, lack of employment, and lack of access to 
utilities. These issues will continue to guide the design of the second phase of the project.  
Most important for rural households is the lack of enabling environment and supportive 
institutions for small farms. This is manisfested by the lack of marketing information, 
continued state control of processing and other agricultural infrastructure, difficult access 
to irrigation and a sluggish land market.  However, Moldovan farmers remain optimistic.  
 
In addition, during implementation of Phase I, yearly beneficiary assessment provided 
important feedback regarding the project’s components and guided the design of Phase II.  
RISP II integrates learning from these beneficiary assessments, attempts to enhance the 
level of responsiveness of the project to rural households’ needs, and greater 
accountability.  
 
•
In the agricultural extension services component for example, this means adopting 
fees for services for large and medium sized farms, and the establishment of user 
committees. It also means the creation of a support network of civil society organizations 
for service providers to be able to provide higher quality services.  
 
•
In the Rural Business Development component will also provide technical 
assistance to initiate operations as well as post-creation support on a cost-sharing basis.  
 
•
In the Microfinance component, issues identified in the beneficiary assessments 
include: there is still lack of confidence in the SCA because of its small size, lack of 
professionalism and inadequate provision of security. The project envisages, among other 
things to increase of capacity of SCAs staff, build institutional capacity, including 
development of new services and products. To address the need for increased 
sustainability, the SCAs will also be encouraged to take deposits if they meet new 
eligibility requirements to be set by a new legal and regulatory framework.  
 
•
Land Re-parceling Pilots: The primary target group for the pilot projects is the 
small peasant farmers (as opposed to larger corporate farms). Early consultations by a 
team of European experts in villages resulted in large meetings of interested farmers – 
both men and women – and other stakeholders. Implementation of re-parceling will be 
based on the principles of voluntary, market-based transactions, and will involve 
Page  8
extensive community consultations and a participatory approach. The model that will be 
used has been used in other Eastern European countries. Because of the risk that local and 
international team members may not be able to maintain a high level of voluntary 
participation (because of hidden pressures from large buyers, for example) it will also be 
important for the pilots to test accountability methods which allow farmers who feel the 
process has not been fair to have recourse.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment:  
 
The Government carried out an update of the EIA financed by the PHRD grant. A 
comprehensive environmental review to prepare environmental screening and mitigation 
procedures for expected sub-project types was carried out. The review (i) assessed the 
adequacy of the legal framework for environmental assessment; (ii) identified institutions 
that would be responsible for Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA); (iii) determined 
technical assistance and training needs for these institutions to adequately implement the 
EIA requirements; and (iv) proposed procedures for environmental screening, EIA 
preparation and implementation, possible mitigation measures for certain sub-project 
types, and monitoring and evaluation of implementation of EIA requirements.  
 
Environmental Guidelines and Forms were prepared for credit officers of participating 
financial institutions as an easy to use guide for any environmental issues.  
 
The EIA and the Guidelines were discussed at a consultation workshop with the stake 
holders and local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and disclosed in country. 
Public comment on the draft EIA and discussions with local NGOs all resulted in very 
positive support to the RISP program. Of particular interest is the emphasis given by 
those who commented that the RISP program is very environmentally friendly and 
contributes significantly towards an enhanced environment. No comments were provided 
that would suggest needed changes to the draft EIA.  
 
The loan agreement shall have appropriate language committing the borrower (financial 
intermediary) to implement the environmental guidelines set forth in the operational 
manual. In addition, the project will annually contract the services of an independent 
consultant to evaluate the extent to which environmental screening is taking place, and in 
case where remedial action has been proposed, the extent to which these actions have 
been satisfactorily carried out. This assessment will also recommend, as needed, any 
Page  9
further training that might be needed to ensure adherence to the agreed environmental 
screening procedures and management plan.   
 
Social:  
 
Under RISP I, the Government commissioned on yearly basis beneficiary surveys, 
which provided informative and relevant feedback to the project. Each component of the 
project was evalua
ted and some of the beneficiaries’ recommendations havebeen 
integrated in the first and now the second phase of the project. These changes aim is to 
make the project more demand driven and responsive to beneficiary needs.  
 
Under RISP II, the beneficiary surveys will be carried out on regular basis. The capacity 
of local NGOs in conducting beneficiary assessments will be strengthened, to more 
adequately measure impact on beneficiaries. Feedback mechanisms for beneficiaries will 
also be strengthened. In addition, stakeholder roundtables and other for a need to be 
institutionalized to improve the quality of data collection and analysis.  
 
These elements complement a monitoring and evaluation system that is already in place 
for four out of five of the components. The pilot component will structure its monitoring 
and evaluation system in a logical framework set-up. Participatory monitoring and 
evaluation elements will be included.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environment:  
 
The draft Environmental Impact Assessment was discussed with umber of stakeholders 
from the Ministry of Environment, local authorities and NGOs and farmer organizations 
and disclosed in country. Minor comments were received, which were integrated in the 
final document. Further public and stakeholder awareness of environmental requirements 
in lending will be ensured through information campaigns carried out by the Rural 
Advisory Service Providers and Business Development Agencies.  
 
Social:  
 
NGOs are key actors in the implementation of the project. Local NGOs will support and 
stimulate farmer participation in the technical advisory, and financial components.  The 
project team has scrutinized the strategic decision made in the first phase of RISP to rely 
on local non-governmental institutions for the provision of business development and 
extension services. In the second phase, the project will set out to build capacity in the 
public sector to enable it over time to perform a much more active role in the overall 
coordination and strategic development of these activities. Current processes used by the 
NGOS will be assessed and reviewed though the beneficiary assessments. It will also 
create linkages through out civil society to support the capacity of these organizations, to 
think tanks etc.   
 
Page  10
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/09/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/26/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Olivier Colleye 
01/11/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Aleksandar Nacev 
01/11/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elizabeth Gomart 
01/11/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Benoit Paul Blarel 
01/12/2006 
Comments:  Approved 
