Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/03/2006 
Report No.:  AC2221
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P099841 
Project Name:  Avian Influenza Control & Human Pandemic Preparedness & Response 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Anatol Gobjila 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.75 
 
US: AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (USAID) 
0.30 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
0.60 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
0.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.45
2.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the Project is to minimize the threat posed to humans by Highly 
Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) and other infectious diseases that originate in 
animals. To achieve this, the Project will conduct surveillance for outbreaks of such 
diseases, prepare for outbreaks, and act to control outbreaks among humans and animals.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:Animal Health.  The component supports government surveillance of the 
HPAI and other diseases by procurement of vital laboratory equipment for identifying 
viruses and through training of technicians.  Moreover, it strengthens HPAI control 
programs through training and through procurement of special equipment for culling 
birds.  To encourage reporting of sick animals, the component establishes and contributes 
to a compensation fund for farmers whose poultry are culled.  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Human health.  This component strengthens the health system's response 
capacity through investments in laboratory equipment for identifying viral infections, 
equipment for intensive care units, training, and potentially, anti-viral medications and 
vaccines (should one become available).  
 
Component 3: Public Awareness & Information. This component supports information 
and communication activities to increase public understanding of HPAI and to promote 
commitment and cooperation by civil society, the private sector, and government.  
 
Component 4: Implementation Support and Monitoring & Evaluation.  This final 
component supports project management, monitoring, and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is a national project which covers the entire country, to varying degrees, 
depending on the location of outbreaks for purposes of virus eradication at the source. 
Capacity will be strengthened to allow proper disease monitoring throughout the country. 
This will require specific interventions in regions where satellite animal health 
laboratories exist. On the human health side, project activities will be both country wide 
and regional.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Aleksandar Nacev (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Activities under the Project are not expected to have any adverse environmental effects as 
they are focused largely on public sector capacity building and improved readiness for 
dealing with outbreaks of avian influenza in domestic poultry.  These prevention-focused 
activities are expected to have a positive environmental impact as the Project's 
investments in facilities, equipment, and training for laboratories will improve the 
effectiveness and safety over existing avian influenza handling and testing procedures on 
animal and human health sides by meeting international standards established by the OIE 
and WHO.  This would be reinforced by the mainstreaming of environmental safeguards 
into protocols and procedures for the culling and disposal of animals during AI outbreaks.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Since The Project will support investments in disposal capacity for culled poultry, a set of 
environmental management measures will be designed for environmentally safe 
disposable of bio waste, by the local public veterinary services supported under the 
Project. The scope of such measures will be specified in an EMP to be designed as a 
condition of the disbursement of Component I - Animal Health.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No social safeguard policy is triggered by the Project, however the Project is designed to 
mitigate the negative impacts of mandated culling of poultry on small scale backyard 
poultry producers through the establishment of a Compensation Fund. The operating 
scheme for the Compensation Fund has been designed, and its further refinement is 
envisaged during the initial implementation period of the Project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower will carry out an EA and design an EMP.  The team has requested and 
obtained a waiver for delay of the EA due to the emergency nature of the investment 
operation.  The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Industry, and the Ministry of Health and Social Protection. Implementation support will 
be provided by an existing PMU, which is supporting the Bank-financed Rural 
Investment and Services Program (RISP). Given the latter's involvement with EA issues 
in existing projects, the PMU's capacity for EA elaboration and implementation is 
deemed sufficient.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Borrower will prepare and disclose an Environmental Assessment, as discussed 
above. The scope of enviornmental management activities will be specified in the EMP.  
Page  4
The Borrower’s capacity to plan and to implement the measures is adequate. The project 
provides contingency funding for the implementation of the EMP recommendations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/29/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project is processed as an emergency project, and the disclosure will be done before 
effectivness of the credit.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  5
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Anatol Gobjila 
03/30/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Aleksandar Nacev 
03/30/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Pierre Olivier Colleye 
03/30/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/30/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Benoit Paul Blarel 
03/30/2006 
Comments:   
