Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3095 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Moldova 
Project ID: P107612 
Project Name: NATIONAL WATER FACILITY PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Takao Ikegami 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (80%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Other rural development (S);Pollution management and environmental 
health (S);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives (PDO) are to: (i) support the Government?s effort 
to improve water and sanitation services through creating a National Water Facility (NWF) that 
would channel most or all national and external financing to the sector along programmatic lines; 
and (ii) support investments in upgrading water supply and sanitation services identified as high 
priority in selected localities through the NWF.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Government is in the midst of its effort to update its Water Supply and Sanitation sector 
strategy, an effort expected to be completed by October and that IDA has been aiding through 
the PWSSP.  The final project design would be tailored to support the strategy, but assuming that 
the draft strategy remains largely unchanged, the project would (i) assist with the creation and 
implementation of the National Water Facility, designed to attract and channel external 
investment funding to the sector in a way that complements national fiscal resources; (ii) provide 
technical assistance to streamline and strengthen the preparation and implementation capacity of 
Page  2
the ACTD; and (iii) support investments in upgrading water supply and sanitation services 
identified as high priority through the NWF.  
 
The Client financed a pre-feasibility study (PFS) that identified the most urgent infrastructure 
investments needed in the water and sanitation sector in eleven small towns (e.g., Balti, Cahul, 
Calarasi, Causeni, Drochia, Falesti, Floresti Leova, Orheni, Rascani, Soroca, and Ungheni) in 
Moldova. These investments target only the rehabilitation and reconstruction works of existing 
infrastructure for water supply and sewerage systems in the above towns such as: (i) 
rehabilitation of existing drinking water treatment plants including upgrading of the laboratory 
equipment and automation of technological equipment (e.g., the water intake); and (ii) 
renovation and extension of the existing water supply systems and sewerage networks. These 
urgent investments are estimated at about US$16.0 million (resources which are available from 
IDA).  
 
As currently designed, the National Water Facility will be the centerpiece of the Government?s 
effort to raise investment levels. It will serve as a sector investment fund that would ensure 
complementarity of external and domestic investment financing and, together with the 
beneficiary Apa Canals, as an implementation unit for those investments.  In doing so, it will 
seek to improve the management capabilities of the Apa Canals themselves and to channel 
investments to localities with the ability to maintain and operate the investments.   Rather than 
operate as a passive recipient of external financing, NWF staff will work to identify and design 
projects that fit the preferences of individual external financing agencies.  The NWF on-lending 
or on-granting financial policies would be tailored to the financial capacity of the recipient apa-
canals or rural entities.   The NWF would be matched by ACTD project preparation and 
implementation capacity in order to ensure that sub-projects satisfy the project preparation 
criteria and implementation safeguards of individual external financing agencies.  
 
The consultative process used in developing the sector strategy has been inclusive of domestic 
and external stakeholders.  The next step in that process includes an October 2007 donor 
coordination workshop to which multi-and bilateral financing agencies will be invited. The 
workshop would build on contacts with a wide range of financial and technical assistance 
agencies that have identified their special interest and comparative advantages in supporting 
Moldova?s water and sanitation sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project includes financial support to strengthen the capacity of Government of Moldova to 
create the NWF and consequent move to implement a programmatic approach to upgrading the 
water and sanitation sector in the country. The project geographic coverage will target about 10 
small towns (e.g., Balti, Cahul, Calarasi, Causeni, Drochia, Falesti, Floresti Leova, Orheni, 
Rascani, Ungheni, and Soroca) in Moldova to enable Apa-canal in selected towns to supply the 
population with continuous, efficient and sustainable water and wastewater services over time. 
These towns were considered the most important ones in the country in relation with 
institutional, socio-economic, financial and technical aspects according to a pre-Feasibility Study 
(PFS) prepared by the Client in June 2007.  This PFS will be developed in a Feasibility Study 
(FS) by the end of September 2007 that will propose the required investments possible to be 
financed under this project. Since the proposed project financing will target rehabilitation of 
Page  3
specific existing infrastructure investments in the water supply and sanitation sector in Moldova, 
the proposed project environmental classification is B.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The ACTD - the project agency implementation - has some capacity to implement the Bank's 
safeguard policies, based on previous experience with implementation of World Bank financed 
projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is classified as environmental category B since it will provide rehabilitation of 
specific water and wastewater infrastructure investments. If, as expected, the investments pose 
relative modest risks with little site-specific concerns then an Environmental Assessment Report, 
inclusive of an EMP will be prepared, and if need site specific environmental assessment will be 
prepared for the new service extensions. Site (or alignment) specific environmental analysis 
(might be needed for new service extensions). Such analysis can be included in the EA report 
(assuming these pose modest risks).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The applicability of the OP/BP 4.04 to the project investments will be assessed during the 
project preparation; needed mitigation actions to prevent possible environmental impacts 
affiliated with the proposed civil works will be acknowledged in the EMP.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is selected as TBD at this stage of the 
project since the potential investments are not known yet. However, the EMP will assess the 
possibility of PCR.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered since specific civil work contracts are not yet 
identified and may well involve land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Dam safety could be triggered if water supplies targeted for rehabilitation are derived from 
dam and reservoirs though this is probably not likely.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project seeks by its design to improve the water quality of rivers in the region. Several 
towns targeting under the project for water and sanitation investments are situated nearby rivers 
that passes though Moldova?s territory and further flown into the Black Sea or into other 
riparians? rivers. Rehabilitation of works will likely take place on surface waters that meet 
OP7.50 definitions of international waterways, though impacts are expected to be minimal and 
exception to notification likely.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
-
An informal follow-up safeguards meeting will be required after the pre-appraisal mission 
(end-October, 2007);  
 
-
Preparation of Environmental Assessment Report with Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) before appraisal;  
 
-
Preparation of Land Acquisition Framework before project appraisal if land acquisition is 
required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Takao Ikegami 
07/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
08/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
08/20/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
