Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2493 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/28/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Moldova 
Project ID: P100929 
Project Name: Road Sector Program Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Andreas Schliessler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the project will be to protect a significant percentage of Moldova?s road 
network from further destruction by carrying out physical works to reestablish adequate road 
conditions and thus recover the asset value of those roads. A second project objective will be to 
support the Government in implementing the institutional and sector reform measures which will 
be identified under the Transport Strategy, in particular to create an adequate institutional and 
financial framework for the sustainable development of road infrastructure and road transport.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total project cost is estimated to be in the order of US$50 million, of which 32% (US$16 
million) would be provided through an IDA credit, and 68% (US$34 million) as parallel 
financing from EBRD and EIB. The following project components have been identified:   
 
Component A: Periodic maintenance and rehabilitation of selected main roads (about US$47 
million). This component would include (i) execution of civil works mostly for spot repairs, 
resurfacing and drainage repairs; (ii) preparation of technical design studies, economic feasibility 
Page  2
studies, and social and environmental impacts studies; (iii) preparation of bidding documents for 
civil works; (iv) works supervision and technical audit; and (v) related institutional support such 
as technical assistance for procurement, equipment and other needed assistance to the State Road 
Administration (SRA). This project component will be executed by the Ministry of Transport 
and Road Industry, with technical support from the State Road Administration.  
 
Component B: Support to the implementation of sector reform measures decided under the 
Transport Sector Strategy (about US$3 million). Although the exact content of this component 
can only be defined after the conclusion of the Transport Sector Strategy (expected in March 
2007), this component will most likely include (i) technical and legal support services, (ii) 
training and capacity building for the staff of the administration (ministries and State Road 
Administration), road transport operators, and road design and construction firms, (iii) 
improvement of the road maintenance management system, and (iv) specific support to help 
mobilizing EU funding for the transport sector. This component will be executed by the Ministry 
of Transport and Road Industry.  
 
The physical works to be executed under the project shall focus on those roads whose basic 
structure is still essentially intact, and which can be saved from heavy deterioration by spending 
a
relatively small amount per km of road. The type of works can be characterized as periodic 
maintenance and light rehabilitation; this includes full road resurfacing. In some cases and for 
short sections, a climbing lane for slow vehicles may be added, but only if and where this is 
possible within the existing right-of-way. The project interventions will extend the useful 
lifespan of a significant portion of Moldova's road network by about 10 years. The project will 
thus constitute one of three sub-programs of the Government's overall road infrastructure 
expenditures, the other two being (i) routine road maintenance, and (ii) reconstruction of badly 
deteriorated roads. It was agreed that this project will not include major rehabilitation or 
reconstruction of roads which are already mostly destroyed, because this would lead to 
consuming most if not all of the project's financing on one or two road section, while at the same 
time many other roads would be fully destroyed.  
 
All road works will take place in the existing right-of-way of roads, which in Moldova reaches 
to about 12 meters left and right of the pavement edges. The right-of-way of roads in Moldova 
has been well-protected from encroachment, and is not occupied (not even illegally) for any 
economic activity. There will not be any land acquisition or resettlement, and a resettlement 
framework will not be needed for this project.  
 
The project would be executed over a three-year period (mid 2007 to mid 2010).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All of the road candidates will be identified and analyzed during the design stage. The location 
of the project roads is in various parts of the country, based on the Government's prioritized road 
investment program for 2007-2010.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
1. Legal framework. Starting from 1992, Moldovan authorities have developed a series of new 
laws and regulations which stipulate in detail all aspects of the EA procedure, as follows:  
Page  3
-
Law on Environmental Protection (1993);  
 
-
Law on Environmental Expertise (SEE) and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) (1996);  
 
-
Law on Industrial Safety (2000);  
 
-
Guidelines on Performing State Environmental Expertise (1995);  
 
-
Regulation on Public Participation in Environmental Decision-Making (2000); and  
 
-
Regulation on performing State Ecological Expertise (2001).  
 
A
special chapter on State Ecological Expertise (SEE) was included in the 1993 Law on 
Environmental Protection. It defines SEE as an environmental protection activity that aims to: (i) 
prevent and minimize the potential of the direct, indirect, or cumulative impact of new economic 
activities on the environment, ecosystems, and human health; and (ii) to assess from this 
perspective all economic activities, separately or as a whole, which could affect the environment, 
human health, or living standards in the present or future. This chapter describes the 
responsibilities of the state authorities (Division on SEE) to conduct a SEE and of the project 
proponents. According to this law, SEE is mandatory for all planned activities that could 
influence the environment and/or use natural resources, irrespective of their purpose, location, 
type, and ownership, volume of capital expenditures, financing body, and mode of 
implementation. In 1996, the Moldova Parliament approved the Law on EE and EIA (see: 
http://lex.gtz. de/LexInfoSys/lexE.htm). This law covers all aspects of conducting EE and EIA.  
 
2. Guidelines and Procedures. Procedures for conducting SEE are contained in Guidelines on 
Performing SEE (2001). The comprehensive guidelines define in detail the goal, objectives and 
principles of SEE. They stipulate the structure and function of the process, procedures for 
submitting project documentation, and review procedures. The guidelines are accompanied by a 
series of annexes, on such topics as requirements for project documentation submitted to SEE; 
the subdivisions responsible for SEE of various types of projects; requirements for every chapter 
(or volume) of project documentation; projects that require a separate chapter on EIA at the 
project stage, etc. A special Annex to the Law on SEE and EIA contains regulations for 
conducting EIA studies. There are no specific sectoral policies or guidelines on the environment 
with regards to the transport sector in the country and the Ministry of Transport and Road 
Industry is not familiar with Bank?s safeguards policies.  
 
3. International Treaties on EA. In 1993, the Republic of Moldova ratified the Espoo 
Convention on EIA in a Transboundary Context. According to the Moldovan Constitution, 
international treaties take precedence over national laws; hence, the Espoo Convention 
constitutes the legal basis for EIA studies of projects with potential transboundary impacts.  
 
4. Administrative Framework. The competent SEE authority in Moldova is the Division on SEE 
within the State Ecological Inspectorate, a subdivision of the Ministry of Ecology and Natural 
Resources. It incorporates dual functions. As the main administrative body, it is responsible for 
organizing and coordinating the SEE procedure (Law on EE and EIA, Article 7(2)). As the 
expert body, it is responsible for reviewing project documentation for planned activities and 
deciding whether or not they may be implemented. In the latter function, the ministry is 
represented by a group of permanently employed state experts of the Division on SEE. All 
aspects of the environment are represented, e.g. atmosphere, soil, flora and fauna, etc. According 
to the Law on SEE and EIA, these experts should be highly trained professionals with at least 10 
Page  4
years of experience in the field and five years as planners (Article 7(3)). The Division on SEE is 
also responsible for control and supervision of SEE procedures. National-level developments; 
new policies, programs, and plans; and new laws and regulations are reviewed by the experts of 
the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR).  
 
5. Institutional Capacities to Perform EAs. While Moldova made impressive progress in 
developing legislation on environmental protection and EA, more effective environmental 
management requires progress with: (i) promoting increased use of strategic and sectoral 
environmental assessments to mitigate any serious unanticipated environmental consequences; 
(ii) further strengthening of the capacity of the State Ecological Inspectorate to supervise the 
implementation of environmental monitoring plans (EMPs). The institutional capacity of the 
borrower will be further assessed during project preparation and ensuing measures included in 
the EMP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA?s) and Environmental Management Plans (EMP?s) 
will be prepared for all individual road sub-projects before the signature of works contracts and 
the start of physical works.  
 
In addition, a Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) that would include an 
Environmental Assessment Management Framework (EAMF) as well as Environmental 
Guidelines (EG) will be prepared, and applied for those road sub-projects which are not yet 
identified. The SEA will address safeguard policies 4.01 and 4.04. The SEA would also include 
an assessment of the policy, legal and administrative framework; an institutional strengthening 
plan in this area; and recommendations for possible sector-wide regulatory changes as well as 
mitigation measures. The EAMF would describe the screening process for identifying 
subprojects with potentially significant issues that would need to be addressed in a sub-project 
EIA. The Environmental Guidelines would include a general assessment of potential impacts 
along with the proposed generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for identified sub-projects. 
Compliance with Environmental Management Plans will be verified in two ways: (i) 
through the road works supervision consultants, and (ii) through staff of State Ecological 
Inspectorate.  
 
Before project appraisal, MTRI will submit to the MENR and the Bank the SEA report for 
its coordination/approval. Both the draft SEA and its final version will be posted on the website 
of MTRI and/or MENR. It is also expected that all sub-project level EIAs will be also posted on 
the MTRI and/or MENR websites for public disclosure and consultation before approval by the 
SEE.  
 
The project activities are essentially road rehabilitation and maintenance. The project will 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
not finance the construction of new roads or the major upgrading of roads and thus it is expected 
that there will be little or no impact on erosion, stability of slopes or sedimentation/siltation of 
rivers. Instead, the rehabilitation of the roads will decrease the erosion rate along the roads 
compared to existing conditions. It is also expected that Rehabilitation/Maintenance works will 
not have any effects on the water resources and water quality along the road routes. The impact 
on natural vegetation associated with operating the quarry and borrow areas, and constructing 
detour and access road to the borrow material pits and quarry sites, will not be applicable here - 
because there will be use of only existing borrow/quarry sites.  
 
The potential impacts of the project activities upon cultural, religious and historical sites 
will be assessed during the design stage and it is expected no such sites will be directly impacted 
by road rehabilitation and/or maintenance works.  
 
With regard to social issues, since all works will be conducted on the existing roads, there 
will be no temporary or permanent loss of agricultural or grazing lands. In addition, the project 
activities will not trigger involuntary resettlement or land-taking. The physical apace of the roads 
was cleared during the construction of the existing roads some 30 to 50 years ago. A Social 
Assessment of the project is not required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
There are no important wildlife and wildlife habitats in the areas of the first-year road sub-
projects which have been identified until now, and the project components will not involve any 
encroachment into known and designated ecologically sensitive areas, parks and nature reserves.  
The location of the already known first-year works is therefore such that OP/BP 4.04 will not be 
triggered. However, it is not excluded that second- and third-year works (not yet identified at this 
stage) may possibly trigger 4.04. For this reason, the Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
mentioned above, which will includes the EAMF, will also cover the safeguard procedures to be 
applied for road works in Natural Habitats, should they occur.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/08/2007 
 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
draft version of the Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) will be completed before 
Appraisal.  EIA's and EMP's for individual road sections will be prepared as part of the 
feasibility and design studies, and based on the EAMF (which is a part of the SEA).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Schliessler 
09/29/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/28/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
11/28/2006 
Comments:  Cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
