Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/16/2006 
Report No.:  AC1756
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P096328 
Project Name:  Rural Education and Development Project (formerly Rural ED Support 
Project) 
Task Team Leader:  Charles Abelmann 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 23, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.10
0.10 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of READ is to assist the Recipient in enhancing the quality of education in 
rural primary schools, grades 1-
5, by improving students’ access and use of quality 
learning materials and improving teachers’ teaching skills through professional networks. 
It will also help build the policy, monitoring and evaluation capacity of MECS in full 
support of the implementation of the pending master plan.   
 
3. Project Description 
There are three project components. Component 1 aims to support rural schools by 
increasing the amount of books available to students and teachers while supporting 
teachers and their school networks around the use of books.  Component 2 strives to 
strengthen the government’s capacity to monitor student learning through participation in 
national and international assessments. Component 3 provides financial and technical 
support for the management and monitoring of the project.  
 
Direct project beneficiaries will be all children in rural areas attending primary school 
and teachers, school managers, directors and librarians working in primary, rural schools.  
Page  2
Indirect project beneficiaries will be children in Mongolia who have access to the 
increased number of book titles available on the local market and in a digitized format.In 
the long term, improvements to educational quality in rural schools through books and 
complementary professional development are presumed to have an effect on reading 
achievement levels, enhanced retention, overall achievement levels and enhanced school 
and teacher practices.  These should translate to broader economic and social benefits in 
the future.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in all rural, grade 1-5 classrooms in primary schools in all 21 
aimags in Mongolia. The project will also include some kindergartens, dorms and non-
formal education centers. There are no salient physical characteristics relevant to 
safeguard analysis.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (EASES) 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
NA   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
NA   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
World Bank staff met with a representative of Kazakh writers who shared views on the 
state of Kazakh children’s books in Mongolia.  Local NGOs who have worked on 
projects targeting Kazakhs, like Save the Children, were also consulted in project 
preparation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Charles Abelmann 
02/01/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/01/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Lars C. Lund 
02/02/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/01/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Tamar Manuelyan Atinc 
02/02/2006 
Comments:   
