Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC2783
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P096439 
Project Name:  MN-Sustainable Livelihoods Project II 
Task Team Leader:  Nathan M. Belete 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Animal production (50%);Micro- and SME finance (25%);Other social services 
(15%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other social protection and risk 
management (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
33.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.40 
 
EC: European Commission 
13.00
16.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Within the overall Sustainable Livelihoods Program, the project (second phase of a three-
phase adaptable loan) has the objective to enhance livelihood security and sustainability 
by scaling up institutional mechanisms that reduce the vulnerability of communities 
throughout Mongolia. SLPII will scale up nationwide the effective mechanisms and 
processes piloted under the first phase in the local communities and governments. A wide 
range of environmentally sustainable, socially inclusive and economically viable project 
activities, including pastoral risk management, community empowerment and 
microfinance development would help to preserve the ecological conditions and improve 
people's livelihood in a sustainable manner.  Like the first phase of the program, 
Sustainable Livelihoods Project I, the project includes a wide range of activities 
categorized into four components: (1) Pastoral Risk Management (PRM), (2) 
Communities Initiative (CI), (3) Microfinance Development (MD), and (4) Project 
Management (PM).   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project includes a wide menu of activities that would enhance livelihood security and 
sustainability by scaling-up institutional mechanisms that reduce the vulnerability of rural 
communities throughout Mongolia. The activities are categorized into four components:  
 
Component 1: Pastoral Risk Management (PRM) which aims to scale-up and replicate 
effective strategies to prepare for and respond to pastoral risk.  
 
Component 2: Communities Initiative (CI) which aims at establishing, on a nationwide 
basis, effective, transparent and socially inclusive mechanisms that empower 
communities to identify and implement small public facility improvement projects.  
 
Component 3: Microfinance Development (MD) which aims to deepen and widen 
access to sustainable financial services to rural citizens.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (PM) which aims to ensure quality implementation 
and management of all activities under components 1, 2, and 3 and compliance with all 
World Bank policies and procedures.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will operate across the country in many locations covering a number of 
ecological regions (desert-steppe, steppe, mountain-steppe), but all will be characterized 
by being predominantly grassland areas where there is active nomadic herding of 
livestock.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten (EASRE) 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not expected to have any potential large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible environental impacts. Overall, the project is expected to generate significant 
environmental benefits, but owing to the broader geographical scope of SLPII and its 
Page  3
greater significance in relation to policies and institutional development, SLPII carries 
higher risks of impacts on environmentally-sensitive areas, water resources, and 
vulnerable groups of people. Therefore the project has been carefully designed and 
monitoring and supervision of implementation will give attention to the potential adverse 
impacts.  
 
Given that the primary purposes of SLPII are to strengthen and extend provision of 
various social benefits throughout Mongolia, the nature and extent of intended social 
benefits are discussed at length elsewhere in the PAD. The activities included in SLPII 
are generally similar to those included in SLPI and are unlikely to generate significant 
adverse social impacts. Regarding OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, screening 
measures have been taken in SLP II to ensure that land acquisition and resettlement-
related impacts do not occur, as discussed below. Regarding OP 4.10, Indigenous 
Peoples, national extension would bring the program into Tsaatan reindeer herder areas, 
requiring special measures to ensure equitable opportunity to participate in, and benefit 
from, the project.  
 
While no resettlement or land acquisition is anticipated, the project has put in place 
screening criteria to eliminate the possibility of these impacts occuring, rather than 
undertaking a probably pointless revision of the RPF, developed for SLPI for national 
application. With these changes, SLPII would not generate impacts triggering OP4.12.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To review the Project's likely positive and negative environmental and social impacts, an 
Environmental and Social Assessment (covering the assessment and lessons learned from 
SLPI, impacts, mitigation measures, monitoring, institutional strengthening, and 
incremental operating costs) was prepared. In addition, the project will map 
environmentally-sensitive areas in order to avoid, monitor and manage potentially 
adverse impacts. The borrower will follow project specific screening requirements for 
sub-projects financed under the PRM and CI component. These will eliminate possibility 
of changes in land use that would deprive customary users of access to natural resources 
as well as remaining possibility of land acquisition.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation of the ESA, there was an intensive schedule of interviews with 
key stakeholders and informations (concerned government ministries (MoNE, MoFA, 
MoFE0), international organizations, academia (universities and research institutes), 
Page  4
environmental NGOs, local authorities and inspectors as well as beneficiaries and 
herders) as well as joint meetings/workshops with groups of stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
Page  5
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nathan M. Belete 
03/22/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten 
03/05/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson 
03/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
03/27/2007 
Comments:   
