Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2223 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mongolia 
Project ID: P096439 
Project Name: MN-Sustainable Livelihoods Project II 
Task Team Leader: Nathan M. Belete 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Animal production (50%);Micro- and SME finance (25%);Other social services 
(15%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other social protection and risk 
management (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
12.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
3.00
15.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Within the overall program the proposed project development objective would be to 
institutionalize approaches validated under the first phase of the SLP for achieving secure and 
sustainable livelihoods of poor households and individuals nationwide. This would involve both 
scaling-up of the successful innovations, and the continued testing of new approaches to improve 
sustainability.  
 
The main outcome from SLP would be the establishment, on a nationwide basis, of institutional 
structures for livelihoods support. This would lay the basis for the third and final phase of the 
Program, based on lessons learned in the first two phases, which would be to consolidate and 
fine-tune the technical and institutional innovations for long-term sustainability.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project intends to reduce vulnerability and enhance livelihoods security of the rural 
poor by increasing the capacity of poor and vulnerable households in rural areas to better manage 
risks and build income generating assets. It would build on the achievements of SLPI, scaling up 
nationwide the institutional innovations tested under phase I of SLP. Similar to SLPI, the project 
would have four main components: (i) Pastoral Risk Management; (ii) Local Initiatives Fund; 
(iii) Micro-finance Outreach; and (iv) Project Management.  
 
Component 1. Pastoral Risk Management (PRM): Satisfactory progress has been achieved 
during the first phase of the SLP, most notably in the following areas:  
 
i. Establishment of a National Advisory Committee/Council for Pastoral Risk Management to 
provide policy guidance and perform other essential functions;  
 
ii.winter preparedness and risk contingency plans developed, utilized and updated as needed in 
all soums;  
 
iii.community-based pasture management maps and plans developed with active herder 
participation in all soums; and  
 
iv.herder groups received support in capacity strengthening, and 12 hay and fodder enterprises 
have received loans for equipment purchase.  
 
As in SLPI, this component would likely consist of the following sub-components: (i) Risk 
forecasting and contingency planning, which will enhance activities under SLP to support the 
development of a Livestock Early Warning System for Mongolia. In addition to development 
and testing of innovative dissemination methods, it would also require actions to build national 
capacity to forecast emergencies and to plan and carry out responsive measures; (ii) grazing and 
pasture management sub-component would involve establishing a functioning framework for 
pastoral risk management with links horizontally between government agencies and vertically 
between central and local government, with the focus on institutionalizing the pastureland and 
PRM; and (iii) promoting herder initiatives sub-component, which would provide support to 
herders to assist them in risk management, preparation of annual operating budgets, income 
diversification and business planning including marketing and access to inputs.  A major finding 
and recommendation for SLPII is that the pastoral risk management component place greater 
emphasis on strengthening linkages between herders and the market.  
 
Component 2. Local Initiatives Fund (LIF): In the 8 pilot aimags of the SLPI, the LIF has 
successfully transitioned from the LDF approach of sub-project approval at the aimag level by 
local government, to the LIF approach of community-based identification, prioritization, 
selection/approval, and implementation at the sum-level.  Despite various efforts to pilot action-
research on fiscal decentralization, it was determined that this was not appropriate during the 
first phase due to various changes introduced to fiscal management in Mongolia.  Nonetheless, 
this remains an area which requires additional consideration under phase II.  
 
Under SLPII, the LIF component will scale-up activities to facilitate community prioritization, 
selection, co-financing, execution and monitoring of investments in basic infrastructure and 
social services provision in rural and peri-urban areas. LIF would be implemented in all sums 
and urban districts (duuregs) nationwide. It is likely that the same activities eligible for financing 
under SLP will be eligible under SLPII. In addition, the preparation team for phase II will assess 
whether and under what circumstances the rehabilitation and upgrading of privately-owned 
facilities providing services of wide public use and benefit (such as telecommunications, 
electricity, drinking water, bath houses, sum medical drug dispensaries or sum veterinarians) 
Page  3
should be eligible for LIF financing. The possibility of making livelihood skills training eligible 
for LIF matching grant funding would also be explored.  
 
Component 3. Microfinance Outreach (MFO): A diverse range of microfinance services are 
now available nationwide as a result of the activities supported by the Microfinance 
Development Fund and its Microfinance Management Office located in the Bank of Mongolia. 
To date, over $14 million has been disbursed (including redisbursements) to 16 PFIs 
(participating financial institutions) as wholesale loans, for on-lending to rural residents. This 
wholesale lending has directly contributed to increase outreach of financial services as more PFIs 
were able to increase/expand operations in rural areas, and also improved access to microfinance 
services as a result of competition.  Key indicators are the tripling of available loan products and 
substantial reduction of interest rates and collateral requirements.  Moreover, portfolio quality 
remains quite high with 100% repayment to the MDF and 98% to PFIs from sub-borrowers.   
The objective under this component would be to support the continued development of a 
sustainable rural financial system, especially in remote areas and to under-served households and 
to identify a long-term solution to the institutional status of MDF. Under this component support 
may include: (i) provision of a wholesale fund facility; (ii) support for the development of 
innovative financial products; (iii) capacity building of financial institutions; and (iv) provision 
for business skills development.  
 
Component 4: Project Management: This will include support to the Household Livelihoods 
and Support Program Office (HLSPO, the project implementation unit) to enable it to function 
effectively and provide adequate management for the implementation of the proposed project. 
Support would include operational costs, technical assistance and training for project staff, 
monitoring and evaluation, information dissemination, communication and auditing.  
 
A
comprehensive set of triggers for this APL were developed during preparation of first phase 
of the SLP. As agreed then, triggers to move from phase II to phase III will be reviewed and 
agreed to during preparation of SLPII.  
 
Project Financing: The proposed project will start in FY08 and will be implemented over a four 
year period. Total project cost is expected to be about USD 30 million. Discussions are currently 
ongoing with potential co-financiers such as the European Union and the Japanese Government. 
Though not yet confirmed, the EU has submitted a proposal internally for co-financing in the 
amount of about EUR 10 million for SLP II. Further co-financing possibilities will be explored.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be a nation-wide scale-up of the strategies developed and tested under Phase I of 
the SLP.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Implementing agency demonstrated its adequate capacity to deal with safeguard policies and 
issues during implementation of the SLPI.    
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten (EASEN) 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASSD) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Similar to SLP I, OP 4.01 will be triggered. Since a comprehensive EMP has been prepared 
under SLPI, and activities under SLP II are essentially the same, but scaled up, the team 
proposes to update the existing EMP for SLPI to reflect the realities of SLPII.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The issues pertaining to this policy will be covered by EA.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
See comments on OP 4.01   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
See comments on OP 4.01   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/12/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The studies will commence in late August and will be completed by the end of the year.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nathan M. Belete 
07/26/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
08/16/2006 
Comments:  Lars C. Lund as acting for Glenn Morgan 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
08/17/2006 
Comments:   
