Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/03/2006 
Report No.:  AC2181
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P092965 
Project Name:  Information and Communications Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Tenzin Dolma Norbhu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 8, 2006 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(40%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.25 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
2.00
2.25 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s long-term development objectives are to:  (a) significantly increase the 
coverage and use of relevant ICT services among the rural population through an 
incentive program designed to encourage the participation of private operators in the rural 
segment of the ICT market; and (b) increase private sector participation in the delivery of 
e-government services and improve public sector utilization of ICT   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project has four main interrelated components aimed at achieving the 
project development objective.  The first component, and primary focus of the project, 
will entail private sector led development of the information and communications 
infrastructure in rural Mongolia, through output based aid (OBA) schemes.  Investment 
support will be provided for the deployment of infrastructure and public access to ICT 
services.  As the regulatory agenda in Mongolia continues to evolve, the second 
component of the project will support the regulator in establishing a regime that promotes 
fair competition and market based incentives for the provision of access in rural 
Mongolia.  The third component will entail building ICT policy leadership in Mongolia 
Page  2
and will include investment support for the implementation of key aspects of the national 
ICT policy focusing on increased and improved use of ICTs in the public sector, through 
public private partnerships for the delivery of e-government services.  The fourth 
component provides financial and technical support for the management and monitoring 
of the project.  
 
Direct project beneficiaries will be rural herder populations, citizens,businesses,schools, 
hospitals and other agencies in rural soums.  Other project beneficiaries will include 
MOngolian citizens accessing e-government services and the private ICT sector in 
Mongolia.  These should translate to broader economic and social benefits in the future.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component 1 of the project will be located in selected rural baghs and soums in the 21 
aimags in Mongolia; Components 2,3 and 4 will primarily be located in Ulaanbaatar. 
There are no salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tenzin Dolma Norbhu 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
 
Comments:   
