Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2980 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mongolia 
Project ID: P097297 
Project Name: Forest Landscapes Development and Conservation 
Task Team Leader: Andrew D. Goodland 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P106114 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Environmental 
policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
1.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.10 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.20
1.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Project Development Objective:  
 
To develop sustainably-managed and productive forest ecosystems to support viable livelihood 
alternatives for communities in the northern forest landscapes in Mongolia, and thereby to 
conserve significant natural biodiversity. This would be achieved through supporting improved 
management of forest and forest products (including using community-based approaches) and 
providing necessary supporting institutional framework and legal reforms, improving the rule of 
law, institutional capacity building, and restoration of natural ecosystem dynamics through forest 
rehabilitation programs. The proposed project would seek to put forest and forest resource 
management on a modern, science-based footing, which would result in reduced vulnerability to 
fire damage and increased efficiency of the forestry sector.  
 
Global Environment Objective:  
 
The objective is to strengthen protection of the globally significant biodiversity of Mongolia?s 
northern forest through more effective management including increased financial sustainability 
and improved capacity for protected area management, and development of a corridor approach 
Page  2
to landscape-level conservation planning that addresses the board range of inter-connected 
pressures and threats to biodiversity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Forest Management System Development  
 
The proposed project would identify areas of forest that are suitable for different models of 
forest management, and develop solid foundations for forest management through both 
community-based and commercial concession approaches. This project component would scale-
up participatory planning and implementation of sustainable forest resource management, based 
on experiences from pioneered in Mongolia by bilateral projects (e.g. in Hustai National Park 
(managed by a foundation), and through GTZ projects in the buffer zone of the Khan Kentii 
SPA) and the Bank financed Sustainable Livelihoods Program on participatory, people-centered, 
process-oriented support that recognizes traditional knowledge of resource management systems 
and local communities as rights-holders to natural resources. Community forest management will 
focus on montane and forest steppe ecosystems in Khovsgol, Selenge, Khentii, Tov and Bulgan 
Aimags, which have the highest concentration of Mongolia's forested areas.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building for Sustainable Management of Forest Landscapes  
 
This component would support the strengthening of the institutional framework for forest 
management in Mongolia. Capacity building would include support for technical assistance, 
goods and works where appropriate.  
 
Sub component 1. Legal and regulatory reform: This sub-component would cover the 
development of a new national forest strategy and development of appropriate policies, laws and 
regulations for the sustainable management of forests and forest resources by government, 
communities and, perhaps, the private sector.  These would cover issues such as cross-sectoral 
coordination of land use planning and allocation, forest zoning criteria, ecologically-based forest 
management strategies and criteria (including forest restoration and rehabilitation), and 
enforcement frameworks and protocols (including institutional organization and coordination of 
interagency responsibilities).  
 
Sub-component 2: Institutional support: This sub-component would be directed at improved 
integrated forest resource management and administration, improved environmental compliance 
monitoring and enforcement, and improved post-secondary technical and professional training in 
natural resources management.  
 
Component 3:  Enhancing Management Capacity, Financial Sustainability and Connectivity in 
the PA System  
 
This component is aimed at improving management effectiveness of Mongolian protected areas 
through strengthening financial sustainability, enhancing staff capacity, and developing an 
approach to landscape-level planning that addresses the broad range of inter-connected pressures 
and threats to biodiversity through corridors and integrated planning strategies of municipalities, 
local governments and protected area administrations.  
 
Subcomponent 1: PA system-level activities  
 
Subcomponent 2: Site-level activities will focus on five globally-significant, adjacent high-
priority biodiversity sites in strategically important locations for demonstration purposes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The project focuses on the northern forests of Mongolia which cover approximately 11.5 million 
ha, ninety percent of which are contained within seven provinces (aimags). Forest management 
will be piloted in Khovsgol, Selenge, Khentii, Tov and Bulgan Aimags, which have the largest 
areas of forests.  
 
Only one group of people are considered to fall under the Safeguards OP's definition of 
"indigenous peoples" and these are the Tsaatan in the far north of Khovsgol aimag in an area 
which will fall outside any site of project activity.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's capacity for conducting Environmental Assessments has improved in recent 
years with support from the World Bank, and is considered to be satisfactory. There is less 
experience in dealing with issues related to safeguard policies such as Involuntary Resettlement, 
and support may be needed during preparation and implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten (EASRE) 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is anticipated to be categorized as B, and will require an Environmental 
Assessment.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project objective is to improve management of forests. The project includes restoration 
of natural forest dynamics through forest rehabilitation programs, including thinning of forest 
stands where exclusion of fire has led to high fuel loads. This should result in decreased 
vulnerability to fire damage, and hence reduce degradation of natural habitats. Ecosystem 
restoration activities may potentially be carried out in protected areas. Applicability of the 
Natural Habitats policy is still to be determined.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project will affect forest management, and therefore the Forests policy applies.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The project will not degrade or limit access to physical cultural resources. The project 
includes activities within and affecting the Bogd Khan Special Protected Area, which is 
designated as a UNESCO Man and Biosphere Reserve, in recognition of its biological, cultural 
and spiritual importance to the people of Mongolia. The project will strengthen protection of the 
area, and will collaborate with UNESCO.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project will not physically relocate any people living within the area. However, changes 
in forest management systems may potentially affect access to, and use of, natural resources, and 
hence the applicability of the Involuntary Resettlement policy is still to be determined.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/28/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Assessments of the potential impacts of the proposed project will 
be carried out during project preparation, expected between July and October 2007. 
Stakeholder consultations with government, private sector, universities, and civil society will 
also be held.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew D. Goodland 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
