Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/28/2006 
Report No.:  AC2122
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P098426 
Project Name:  Governance Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Saiyed Shabih Ali Mohib 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASPR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Macroeconomic management (P);Debt management and fiscal substainability 
(S);Regulation and competition policy (S);Public expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
GAP will improve fiduciary controls in public finance management, enhance disclosure 
and transparency in the public sector, and improve the investment climate by addressing 
weaknesses in the tax administration framework and public procurement.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is designed around four main components with a small component on project 
management: (i) Public Financial Management; (ii) Transparency and Accountability; 
(iii) Investment Climate; (iv) Mining Cadastre and Registry System and (v) Project 
Coordination and Management.  The GAP project will build on the accomplishments of 
the recently completed projects (such as the Bank’s Fiscal Technical Assistance Project 
and Financial Sector Adjustment Credit), and complement the work currently being 
undertaken under the Economic Capacity and Technical Assistance Credit and by other 
donors such as the ADB, Japan, USAID and the IMF TA programs.  The project will 
enhance and further deepen ongoing analytical work such as the Poverty Assessment, 
Investment Climate Assessment, Mining and Cashmere sector reports.  GAP is fully 
consistent with the Government’s EGSPRS and theCAS.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Ulaambatar, Mongolia   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  3
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Saiyed Shabih Ali Mohib 
02/13/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Giovanna Dore 
02/14/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Barbara Nunberg 
02/14/2006 
Comments:   
