Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2150 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/05/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mongolia 
Project ID: P099321 
Project Name: Renewable Energy for Rural Access Project (REAP) 
Task Team Leader: Arturo S. Rivera 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P084766 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 19, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 3, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (60%);Power (40%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.60 
 
NETHERLANDS: MIN. OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS / MIN. OF DEV. COOP.
 14.50 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
8.10
28.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to promote the sustainable use of renewable energy 
resources in decentralized areas.  
 
Target groups and expected outcomes:   The target beneficiaries are the rural populations of 
nomadic herders (about 60,000 families) and those residing in the remote Soums and Baghs 
(about 9,000 families).  The project will facilitate electricity access???maximizing renewable 
energy where economically justifiable???to these populations, ensuring that electricity usage 
complements ICT and rural development programs.  
 
The overall project outcome is a more sustainable framework for provision of electricity 
services in rural areas, involving public-private partnerships. For the migrant herders the 
framework will include more reliable and convenient lighting systems, and productive activities. 
Page  2
For the soums and baghs the outcomes will be better, more reliable and longer hours of 
electricity supply, improved performance and longer operating hours in public and private 
institutions, such as schools, rural health centers, ICT centers, shops, and business institutions. 
Thus the public and private institutions in the soums will be able to provide a better level of 
service to the soum populations as well as the herders who visit the soums for their essential 
needs and for temporary stays during the winter season.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This project seeks to scale-up what is now an informal system involving local banks, local 
equipment suppliers and local private operators. The main physical components will consist of:  
 
(i) 
promoting market based sales of Solar Home Systems (SHS) and small wind turbines for 
nomadic herders;  
 
(ii) 
promoting local private management and improved efficiencies of Soum electricity 
systems, following models currently use in some soum locations for management of heat only 
boilers; and  
 
(iii) 
converting existing diesel gensets in the Soums to renewable (small wind/PV systems) 
energy based hybrid systems.  
 
The key project components are:  
 
(a) 
Policy and institutional reform:  It seeks to: (i) strengthen the institutional capacity at the 
central and provincial level, to properly assess rural electrification policies and investments; (ii) 
strengthen the current regulatory framework, at ERA, to facilitate private sector participation in 
the renewable energy area; and (iii) strengthen local private sector capacity, including local 
banks.  
 
(b) 
Herders:  It seeks to facilitate sale of Solar home systems (SHS) and small wind turbines 
by the private sector focusing on: (i) establishing Soum information centers to build awareness of 
available individual home supply options, enable easy choices to be made by herders and 
facilitate credit sales of such systems, (ii) developing appropriate quality standards to ensure that 
the program will only facilitate systems that perform adequately, (iii) developing, and in some 
cases scaling-up, suitable delivery mechanisms to enable the private traders in Ulaanbataar to 
supply these systems to the herder and for arranging the corresponding payments, (iv) facilitating 
provision of limited subsidies and loan facilities to make the high initial costs affordable to a 
majority of the herders, and (v) ensuring product warranties and providing for the needed after 
sales support to ensure the continued performance of the units sold.  
 
(c) 
Off-grid Soums:  It seeks to improve electricity access, and services, in about 15 to 20 
Soums which are uneconomical to be connected to the main grid system over many years. The 
selection of the Soums will be based on their commitment to participate in the proposed 
program, potential for socio-economic development, local availability of renewable energy 
resources and availability of local private traders/participants.  
 
Page  3
Following on a consultative process with main stakeholders in August and October 2005, it was 
recommended that the Soum mini-utilities be developed-or scaled-up???from existing operations 
to function on a more commercial basis, and appropriate ownership options be investigated and 
formulated during the project preparatory stage.  
 
While the ownership of the facilities is expected to remain with the Soum government for some 
time, the operational aspects will be handed over to selected and suitably trained private/NGO 
operators. The activities to be addressed are improving management and operational practices, 
rehabilitation and/or improvement of the distribution system, using renewable energy resources 
(solar, wind and mini-hydro) to form hybrid systems with the existing diesel plant, provision of 
battery charging station for herders staying over the winter, and promotion of electricity use for 
productive and community service uses.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Mongolia, rural isolated areas.  Given small size of renewable systems, no land acquisition is 
expected under this project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has had extensive experience in implementing multilateral funded energy projects, 
including monitoring associated safeguard policies.  The borrower will prepare a Framework for 
Environmental assessment, to be reviewed by the Bank.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
It is unclear whether the project will finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams or 
will rely on the performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction for the diesel-hybrid 
facilities to be financed under Soum component.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/22/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/22/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not safeguards related studies will be required   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Arturo S. Rivera 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
