Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3133 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Montenegro 
Project ID: P106906 
Project Name: Land Administration Project 
Task Team Leader: Gavin P. Adlington 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Housing finance and real estate markets (50%);Sub-national government 
administration (30%);Central government administration (20%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.50
1.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project would be: to improve the efficiency of permitting and 
property registration. The beneficiaries of the investment will be: (a) the public living within the 
municipalities as more order is brought to the built environment; and (b) the business community 
as more transparent and efficient processes for the establishment and operations of a business are 
facilitated. By the end of the project it should be possible for the public to easily access 
information about the processes required to develop a business or property and to have access to 
the legal situation concerning a property, the zone plans and the forms and procedures for 
applying to develop a property or obtain the necessary permits and licenses to establish their 
business activity. This should result in less illegal developments and informal businesses, and 
greater investment through formal procedures. The outcomes will be measured by a reduction in 
percentage of the time spent on the compliance with the regulatory requirements, reduction in the 
number of steps and days required for permits or other documents, and better access to 
information.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project would be a SIL and have three main components: the first dealing with real 
estate administration; the second with planning and inspections; and the third with streamlining 
the regulatory environment for the issuance of permits that enable a business to occupy and 
utilize premises for business activity. A fourth component would cover project management.  
 
Component 1:  Real Estate Cadastre and Improved Registration Service.  The Real Estate 
Administration Department (READ) have completed the REC for the most economically active 
areas of the country. The records are held electronically and include both legal and illegal 
developments. However, the REC has been completed over a forty year period and there are 
many ?new? illegal developments not included in the REC because they occurred after the REC 
was initially made. This causes a problem when a municipality requests basic map information 
for urban planning purposes because there is no reliable evidence about the current physical 
situation on the ground. The project would provide the basic mapping required for the READ 
and the municipalities and complete the REC for Montenegro. Contracting to the private sector 
will assist with private sector development. Service provision for registration would be improved 
and provided ?on-line? to municipalities and the public.  
 
Component 2:  Planning and Permitting.  Urban land management and planning, construction 
permitting and related permitting and licensing for businesses to occupy premises are important 
for the orderly development of any country. They should promote the general public good 
without presenting barriers to foreign and domestic investors to start and grow their businesses. 
The public often can not get permission to construct or regularize existing developments because 
the municipality does not have urban plans. A new national spatial plan has been prepared and 
should be approved by the end of 2007. New general urban plans are then required and the 
project will fund the preparation of local and urban plans in coordination with similar assistance 
being provided by GTZ and UNDP. Municipalities, the MED and the private sector will require 
capacity building, training and Technical Assistance. Equipment, hardware and software 
necessary to improve the capacity and to implement and monitor the planning standards 
(including inspections and permit issuance) and improve customer service will be required. 
Work on the preparation of urban planning standards, codes and a manual for planners will be 
developed. The component will include a public awareness campaign to improve awareness of 
the public of the importance and necessity of adhering to formal procedures.  
 
Component  3. Business Environment Improvement.  State regulation of business activities 
while ensuring general public good objectives should create business environment conducive for 
business entry and growth. While it is beyond the scope of this project to review the overall 
business environment, in keeping with the planning and property registration focus, this 
component would support efforts to simplify and improve the processes and regulatory 
framework for issuance of permits that enable a business to occupy and utilize premises for 
business activities.  
 
Component 4:  Project Management.   The MED would be responsible for project management 
and funds will be provided for assistance in financial management, procurement and monitoring 
and evaluation as necessary.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
Montenegro - the whole country   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutions involved include the Real Estate Registration Department (under the Ministry of 
Finance) and the Ministry of Economic Development MOED). The MOED is responsible for 
national spatial planning and business regulation. Municipalities are responsible for developing 
urban and local spatial plans. Municipalities in particular have limited capacity and human 
resources for planning and the project will focus on training and capacity building for all 
involved institutions. The full extent of these needs will be determined during project 
preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
The environmental category to be decided at the next safeguards meeting before the QER. 
The level of building renovation works will be assessed during project preparation. In the case 
where building renovation works takes place an Environmental Management Plan will be 
prepared.  
 
Project lawyers will review compliance of the State's policies for physical cultural resources 
(OP 4.11) This policy will not be triggered as part of the project but physical cultural resources 
will likely be taken into consideration during the planning process.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
New urban plans and investigations into illegal and informal settlements may result in this 
policy being triggered. An assessment will be incorporated into project preparation to examine 
possible resettlement and resulting issues and social impacts. A resettlement policy framework 
will also be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/20/2008 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
October 2007 to January 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gavin P. Adlington 
09/11/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
09/11/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
09/12/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
