Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2480 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/08/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Montenegro 
Project ID: P099749 
Project Name: TARA AND LIM RIVER BASIN WATERSHED MANAGEMENT 
Task Team Leader: Agnes I. Kiss 
GEF Focal Area: Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 4, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Water resource 
management (S);Land administration and management (S);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
4.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to reduce flood-related economic losses, and to introduce 
an integrated watershed management approach for maintaining the landscape and natural 
resources for sustainable economic development in the Tara and Lim River basins. The Global 
Objective is to develop and begin implementation of an integrated approach to restore and 
maintain ecological and hydrological processes within the Tara and Lim River basins.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support the introduction of integrated watershed management as an umbrella for 
land use planning, sustainable natural resource use and conservation of natural habitats, 
biodiversity and ecological functions.  This will include both development of the knowledge base 
and institutional capacity for well-coordinated, participatory planning and on-the-ground 
investment to begin implementing some key building blocks of the IWM approach.  The project 
Page  2
is expected to have a positive environmental impact and contribute to sustainable economic 
development through landscape protection and maintaining the natural asset base.  
 
Component 1:  Institutional capacity building for integrated watershed management:   
supporting:  development of legislation and regulations to establish an appropriate institutional 
and incentive framework, aligned with the EU-WFD;  awareness raising, education, stakeholder 
mobilization and consensus building;  institutional development and capacity building; 
development of databases and monitoring systems needed for watershed level planning;  
preparation of a management plan and establishment of data collection and monitoring systems 
for the Tara River Biosphere Reserve (covering the entire Tara River basin).  
 
Component 2:  Forest restoration:  supporting:  biodiversity surveys and monitoring in the 
target areas;  preparation of ecological restoration/reforestation plans targeting steep slopes and 
other ecologically significant areas;  production of indigenous seedlings;  enrichment planting or 
reforestation;  and capacity building to strengthen forest management and protection in the target 
areas.  Areas to be restored will all be designated as protected or protection forests, and therefore 
not open to commercial logging in the future, although some areas may be open to sustainable 
harvesting of fuel wood and non-timber forest products by local inhabitants.  The project may 
also assist the GRM to develop a carbon finance project if preparation studies indicate there is 
potential for this.  
 
Component 3:  River management and protection:  supporting a shift away from the traditional, 
strictly infrastructure-centered approach to flood management (retaining walls, channeling, etc.), 
towards an integrated watershed management approach which maintains as much as possible of 
the natural hydrological system while reducing the negative economic, social and environmental 
impacts of flooding.  Activities will include:  participatory preparation of pilot integrated 
watershed and riverbed management plans for priority sections of the rivers;  measures to reduce 
the risk of failure of a mine-tailings dam at Mojkovac; possibly other environmental investments 
such as interventions at other abandoned industrial sites, wastewater treatment and/or solid waste 
management for some towns along the rivers, etc.  (non-GEF co-financing would be sought to 
cover most of such investments).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project area is the whole of the Tara and Lim River Basins in Montenegro covering areas of  
2052 km2 and 3031 km2, respectively.  The entire Tara River Basin falls within the Tara River 
Basin Biosphere Reserve, which includes 193km2 of core conservation areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The legal framework for environmental protection in Montenegro includes the following key 
legislation:  
 
The Environment Law (1996) provides the legal framework for environmental protection, 
including the requirement of preparing an environmental impact assessment (EIA) for activities 
that can affect the environment, and identifying the Ministry of Environmental Protection and 
Physical Planning (MEPPP) as the authority responsible for approval of  EIA reports and 
granting environmental permits.   MEPPP also has a regulatory and coordinating role on housing 
Page  3
issues such as waste and wastewater management.  However, implementation of the water laws 
and regulations fall under MAFWM.  The responsibilities of the two Ministries overlap in 
several areas, including water quality, hunting/fishing within Protected Areas, etc.  
 
The Environment Law is supplemented by the Environmental Impact Assessment Act (1997) 
and Guidance on EIA content (1997), which together provide direction and guidance on aspects 
including the procedure and contents of EIAs, criteria for institutions licensed to carry out EIAs, 
verification methods and public participation. The EIA procedures include screening by MEPPP, 
preparation of an EIA statement by the investor/project proponent, review of the EIA statement 
by a review commission, revision as needed and submission to MEPPP.  The Ministry?s review 
of the EIA includes a determination of whether or not a public hearing is required, based on its 
own technical review and public input received.   A recently adopted Law on Strategic 
Environmental Assessment (SEA), which will come into effect in January 2008.  Additional 
relevant legislation and regulations include:  Law on Nature Protection (1989); Law on Waters 
(1995; under revision); Regulations on the Quality of Wastewaters (1997) and Regulation on the 
Classification and Categorization of Waters.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
EIA will focus primarily on small scale flood control and riverbed management interventions  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
OP 4.04 is triggered because the Tara River Basin is a Biosphere Reserve and includes two 
protected areas and a World Heritage site (the Tara Canyon).  The project will help to maintain 
the natural values of these areas   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
OP 4.36 is triggered because the project includes support for restoration and improved 
management of forests to enhance the environmental services they provide (particularly soil 
retention on steep slopes).   While the project EA will explore the issue, it is expected that 
neither these forest rehabilitation activities nor preparation of a management plan for the TRBR 
(Component 1) will have a negative impact on local peoples? access to forest products.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The EA will also determine the possibility of any cultural property resources (PCR) being 
affected by civil works, and therefore whether OP 4.11 is triggered.PCR chance-finds procedures 
will be agreed with the concerned authorities and included in contract documents.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
OP 4.12:  Might be triggered based on restrictions on access to certain forest areas that are to 
be restored and protected for watershed protection.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
OP 4.37  is triggered because the project involves remedial works o
n
an existing dam used 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
for the retention of toxic substances. Inspection, review and reporting will be conducted by 
appropriate dam specialist(s). The degree to which independent review of dam safety is required 
will be determined during project preparation.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
OP 7.50 is triggered because small scale flood control works may be financed, on rivers 
which are upstream from other countries, potentially requiring notification of the riparian states.  
Any exceptions to this requirement will depend on the nature of the works to be carried out. 
LEGEN will be consulted on this matter once further project details are know.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/12/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Water quality mapping and biodiversity surveys to be carried out between 9/06 and 12/06 
will identify the nature and specifics of EIA requirements.  EIA and Social Assessment to be 
undertaken probably Jan-Feb 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
11/08/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/08/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
11/08/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
