Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2746 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Morocco 
Project ID: P104265 
Project Name: MA-ELECTRICTY TRANSMISSION 
Task Team Leader: Silvia Pariente-David 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (90%);Renewable energy (10%) 
Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Project is to increase the efficiency, reliability, and quality of electricity 
supply, while protecting the environment. This objective will be achieved through:  
 
-- strengthening the transmission and distribution infrastructure and supporting reductions in 
overall technical losses.  
 
-- supporting DSM programs to reduce electricity demand growth  
 
-- promoting wind generation.  
 
-- assisting ONE in its adaptation to function in a more liberalized power sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will consist of the following main components:  
 
(a) 
Strengthening the electricity transmission network to reduce bottlenecks and improve 
system?s reliability and quality;  
 
(b) 
Strengthening electricity distribution networks to reduce losses and improve supply;  
 
(c) 
Technical assistance for adaptation and restructuring of the national electricity company  
 
(d) 
Possibly other activities such as wind power development, rural electrification and DSM  
 
Infrastructure Investment Component  
Page  2
-- Transmission (loan amount $ 150 million): The transmission network is already not capable 
of ensuring security and quality of supply. With fast growing demand, the situation is expected 
to deteriorate even further, unless the network is reinforced before the commissioning of power 
plants under construction or planned. ONE has already conducted studies of the network 
expansion required to meet quality and security requirements, considering two options whether 
the new production capacities are connected to the 400 kV or 225 kV lines. The existing studies 
indicate that both options will deliver the required quality and security of supply but that the 400 
kV option would be more cost effective. ONE estimates the level of investment required at 4078 
MDH (approx. $ 480 million) over the period 2007-2013. Further work will take place during 
project preparation to refine the economic analysis and define the lines and substations to be 
included in the subcomponent, and identify which of the investment will qualify for Bank 
financing.  
 
-- Distribution (loan amount $ 50 million): The distribution network is already saturated for the 
major cities in the country and reinforcement of the interface transmission/distribution is 
required. The strong growth in demand will make the problem worse. ONE has identified the 
need for 14 new sub-stations 60/22 kV to be commissioned between 2007 and 2009, for a total 
investment cost estimated at 589 MDH ($ 69 million). The equipment to be financed by the Bank 
needs to be identified on the basis of further cost-benefit analysis.  
 
Technical Assistance Component  
 
-- Adaptation of ONE to the new market environment (loan amount for TA: TBD):  
 
o
Company restructuring and reorganization: a study is already under way for work on the 
legal status of ONE, partial unbundling and creation of subsidiaries for some of the business 
lines, internal contractual arrangements and the development of necessary information systems. 
Technical assistance and financing has been secured from USTDA and the Bank will not provide 
financing, but will be kept informed of study progress and results  
 
o
Development and implementation of contractual arrangements with other operators in the 
sector: ONE has already undertaken a study with a major international law firm to conduct a 
diagnostic of the legal and regulatory framework. This analysis has indicated that contractual 
arrangements between ONE and other operators in the energy market, as well as between 
different entities within ONE, are not in line with commercial and business practice. ONE has 
requested technical assistance from the World Bank on eight topics: (a) diagnostic on the 
relations between ONE and other distributors, (b) definition of ONE's roles and obligations as 
transmission system operator (TSO), (c), contractual arrangements between ONE-TSO and 
distributors, (d) contractual arrangements between distributors and municipalities, (e) 
transmission tariffs, including ancillary services, (f) contractual arrangements between 
generators and ONE-TSO, (g) general assistance for the development of financial tools and for 
supporting the legal and accounting functions of ONE and their advisors and (h) definition of 
appropriate regulatory and governance framework for the sector to function properly in a 
liberalized market. The Bank will consider financing some or all of these activities, in 
coordination with the work on the Moroccan Energy DPL.  
 
o
Trading function for both fuels and electricity: ONE is setting up a trading desk for 
purchasing the fuel supply required for its own power plants and for trading electricity with 
Spain, as well as for risk management. ONE is seeking assistance from the Bank, both for 
equipment and software and capacity building. The overall budget is estimated at 10 MDH ($ 1.2 
million).  
Page  3
o
Procurement: ONE procurement and purchasing function is already certified ISO9001 2000 
version. ONE is seeking technical assistance to ensure its procurement processes are ?state of the 
art and are adjusted to the evolving requirements of the company as the market liberalizes, in 
order to ensure the best possible performance in terms of cost, timeliness and quality.  
 
-
TA for wind power development (loan amount: TBD):  
 
Morocco is embarked on an ambitious program to exploit the wind potential of the country and 
this effort is already supported by the DPL. ONE has undertaken a program of certification of 
wind data which will be completed by 2008. ONE has requested financial assistance from the 
Bank for this activity. Under the scheme in preparation in the law on energy efficiency and 
renewable energy, ONE would be responsible for conducting the RFPs for wind power 
development and ONE would like to receive technical assistance from the Bank on this process.  
 
Moreover, the law in preparation includes the possibility of setting up a Wind Fund to ensure 
that all operators have access to the same concessionary funding as ONE. In case the company is 
given the management of that Fund, ONE would like assistance from the Bank to benefit from 
international experience in setting up such Funds and identifying the best financing structure 
(including use of such financing sources as GEF and Carbon Finance). The type and level of 
support to be provided by the Bank will be identified during the preparation mission, in 
coordination with the work on the DPL which sets the framework for the creation and operation 
of the Fund.  
 
Financial assistance in the form of Bank guarantees for wind power development also needs to 
be investigated.  
 
-
DSM (loan amount for TA: TBD):  
 
ONE has launched an ambitious DSM program which includes: scaled up use of compact 
fluorescent  lamps (CFLs), introduction of energy savings time, public lighting management, 
improved seasonal and time of the day pricing, load management, incentives for increased use of 
solar water heaters, etc.. ONE is in the process of developing a budget estimate and the required 
level and type of assistance from the Bank will be identified during the preparation mission.  
 
-
Rural electrification (loan amount for TA: TBD):  
 
Access to electricity for rural population is already very high in Morocco, with 85% of the 
population having access to electricity in 2006 and an estimated 100% in 2007. However, the 
extension of the network is mostly for residential use and is moreover a burden for ONE 
finances, as the cost of connecting rural populations is high while tariffs are not kept in line with 
costs. The objective of the next rural electrification program is to develop new uses which have a 
higher value added. Several activities have been already identified by ONE, such as participation 
in regional and local development initiatives or using the network to develop telecommunication 
services. ONE is seeking assistance from the Bank in three areas: (a) leveraging the Bank?s 
expertise and experience in other parts of the world for similar activities, (b) technical assistance 
and in particular financing of a study to be launched soon for overall project design and 
development of information systems and (c) investment financing such as network extension and 
connection of new customers (part of this infrastructure investment is also covered under 
Distribution). The infrastructure investment financing is not yet incorporated into the Project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country wide (the legal agreement will contain language that will ensure that activities to be 
financed under the proposed loan are implemented in disputed territories)   
 
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Preparation and implementation of an environmental and social impact assessment and 
mitigation plan is required. ONE has already conducted studies of alternative routes for the 
transmission lines and has started working on the environmental impact analysis and resettlement 
plans, using internationally accepted methods and in compliance with the Bank's safeguard 
policies. ONE has already been a borrower to the Bank and is familiar with Bank's procedures, 
standards and policies.  
 
A
mission in February 2007 ensured that all the applicable Safeguards requirements are well 
understood by ONE and that proper steps are taken to ensure compliance with relevant World 
Bank Safeguard guidelines. Terms of Reference for the environmental assessment and the 
appropriate social safeguards assessment have been discussed and agreed upon with the 
counterpart and a timeline for their preparation has also been agreed.  
 
The exact list of safeguards policies that are triggered will be confirmed during preparation of 
the Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNACS) 
Mr Nicolas Perrin (SDV) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
TBD   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
TBD   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
TBD   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
TBD   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/15/2007 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage 
ISDS would be prepared: 05/15/2007  
 
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS:  
 
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
Target date for launching studies: February 2007  
 
Target date for completion: June 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Silvia Pariente-David 
09/24/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
09/28/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
09/24/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
