Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2234 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Morocco 
Project ID: P100026 
Project Name: MA: National Human Dev. Initiative(INDH) 
Task Team Leader: Cecile Fruman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 12, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(40%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Rural non-farm income generation (P);Social safety nets (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
800.00
800.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will assist the Government in reaching the following outcome: “Targeted rural, urban 
and vulnerable poor (community groups, households and individuals) use expanded basic 
infrastructure and social & economic services generated through more responsive interactions 
with government.”   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Government budgetary funding for INDH is US$1 billion for the period 2006-2010, distributed 
evenly over four main program components, as described below. The World Bank is proposing 
to support INDH through an investment loan of US$200 million (estimate) under the Program-
based Approach (PBA).  
 
1. The rural component aims to alleviate poverty in rural areas.  It targets the 360 poorest 
communes with poverty levels above 30% based on the recent updated poverty map and finances 
activities that support access to basic services, the development of economic and social 
infrastructure as well as income-generating activities.  
Page  2
2. The urban component aims to alleviate social exclusion in urban areas, mostly slums.  It 
targets the 250 urban areas that are characterized by high levels of unemployment, with limited 
economic opportunities and poor access to basic services.  The component finances basic 
services and economic and social infrastructure as well as income-generating activities in these 
areas.  
 
3. The vulnerability program aims to increase the quality and efficiency of programs targeting 
particularly vulnerable groups such as people with disabilities, the homeless, street children, poor 
elderly etc. It supports activities that would promote a holistic approach to service delivery, 
based on the principles of inclusive development and prevention.  These activities will include 
upgrading and establishing welfare centers that are at proximity of the poor and the vulnerable. It 
will also provide technical assistance to government agencies and NGOs on how to improve the 
quality of their service delivery.  
 
4. The “cross-cutting” program focuses on activities that are central to the success of INDH: 
capacity building, knowledge sharing, management information and M&E systems (including 
impact evaluation), partnerships management, and communications.  In addition, this program 
will fund development projects (income generation, basic and social infrastructure) in all the 
provinces of Morocco so that all provinces can take part in INDH.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The program is located throughout Morocco but will especially focus on the poorest 
communities located in 360 rural communes and 250 urban neighborhoods (most of which are 
slum areas). The Bank's support to the program will be in the following regions: Souss-Mass-
Draa, Gharb-Charda-Beni Hassan, Chaouia-Ourdigha, Marrakech-Tensift-El Haouz, Oriental, 
Casablanca, Rabat-Sale-Zemmour-Zaer, Doukkala-Abda, Tadla-Azilal, Meknes-Tafilalt, Fes-
Boulmane, Taza-Al Hoceima-Taounate, Tanger-Tetouan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Capacity exists in Morocco to implement the Bank's safeguards policies. As part of the INDH 
program, training of trainers of environmental and social safeguards related issues (e.g., 
screening criteria)will be conducted at the regional level (including the 16 regional 
environmental authorities). Those who have been trained will in turn train those at the provincial 
and communal levels. The INDH's network of experts will also include environmental and social 
safeguards specialists who can be called upon to design or appraise projects that have more 
complex safeguards issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSRE) 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The operations manuals for the project will include simple environmental
screening tools. 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The manuals for urban and rural components of the project are currently being drafted and will 
include screening criteria for subprojects. Additional manuals will be prepared in the near future 
and will also include appropriate screening criteria. These screening criteria will be based on the 
MNA Region's "Manual for Safeguard Compliance in Demand-driven and Community 
Development Projects." An Environmental Framework which documents environmental criteria 
for the program and all required capacity building activities will be prepared. This will assist in 
monitoring the program's performance.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared. Social safeguards screening criteria will 
be included in all operations manuals and will draw on the MNA Region's "Manual for 
Safeguard Compliance in Demand-driven and Community Development Projects."   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/13/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework will be completed in 
July, 2006.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cecile Fruman 
04/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
04/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
04/06/2006 
Comments:   
