                                                                                                                                                                                                           43538


Authorized
                                                                                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                                                                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                                                                         Report No.: AC2220
          Disclosure


                    Public                                                                                  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/08/2007

                                                                                                            I. BASIC INFORMATION

                                                                                                            A. Basic Project Data

                                                                                                            Country: Morocco                              Project ID: P093719
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Project Name: MA-OUM ER RBIA IRRIGATED AGRICULTURE
                                                                                                            MODERNIZATION PROJECT
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Julia Bucknall
                                    Disclosure                                                              Estimated Appraisal Date: October 27,         Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008
                                                                                                            2008
                                              Public                                                        Managing Unit: MNSSD                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                          Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Irrigation and drainage (80%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
                                                                                                            sector (20%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):            80.00
                                                    Authorized                                              IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                                    Borrower                                                         65.00
                                                                                                                    Local Sources of Borrowing Country                               30.00
                                                                        Public
                                                                                                                                                                                     95.00



                                                                                                            B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
                                                                                                            The development objective is for participating farmers in the Oum Er Rbia basin to overcome
                                                                                                            current and future water deficits by making their water use more productive and environmentally
                                                                                                            sustainable.
                                                                              Authorized

                                                                                                             Overall project success will be measured by two indicators (i) agricultural value-added per m3
                                                                                                            of water consumed by the participating farmers (should increase), (ii) rate of groundwater
                                                                                                            abstraction by participating farmers (should remain constant or fall).
                                                                                        Disclosure

                                                                                                            C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
                                                                                                  Public
                                                                                                            The project will have three components: Modernization of the irrigation network, support to
                                                                                                            farmers and support to institutions

                                                                                                             Component 1: Modernization of the irrigation network (US$165 million)

 The project will provide integrated modernization of specific sectors within irrigation schemes.
This involves replacing open canals with pressurized systems, or improving existing pressurized
systems to ensure that service is more reliable, demand based, individual farmers can be served
separately (rather than as a block as in the current rotation based system). It will also involve
rehabilitating and improving regulation of canals with a view to improving service and reducing
losses from those canals. This will allow the irrigation agencies (ORMVAs) to determine a safe
quantity of water guarantee every year a fixed amount of water to the farmers, and enter into a
contract with farmers for that amount. Success of this component?s contribution to the PDO will
be measured by the transport efficiency: volume of water delivered to farm/ volume of water
diverted at the head of sector.

 Component 2: support to farmers (US$5 million)

 This component will help participating farmers make best use of their guaranteed quantity of
surface water. It will enhance their knowledge, access to technology, their access to financing
and markets by promoting partnerships with agro-industries, supermarkets, banks and providers,
and the role of water user associations. It will involve studies, research and development,
technology transfer, training and advisory services, and help improving farmers? access to
market. Success of this component will be measured by the total value of crops sold by
participating farmers.

 Component 3: support to the irrigation agencies (ORMVAs) (US$5 million)

 This component will support: (i) developing and applying systems to monitor water losses in
the canals and water consumption in each scheme. (ii) Support and information to farmers about
weather conditions and recommended irrigation quantities and timing, mobile laboratories and
capacity enhancement. (iii) Public awareness campaigns. (iv) Support to ORMVAs to increase
financial viability (tariff studies, preparation for possible pilot PPP, etc). Success of this
component will be measured by (i) the ORMVAs installing, using and acting on the result of
water management tools; (ii) farmers? awareness of water saving issues and techniques before
and after the project; and (iii) cost recovery ratio for irrigation water for each ORMVA.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will target Oum Er Rbia basin. This hydraulic basin spreads on a surface of 50.000
km2 and is one of the most important in Morocco, containing half of the country's large scale
irrigated areas, producing 60 percent the country's sugar beet, 40% of olives and 40% of milk.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Ministere de l'Agriculture, du Developpement Rural et des Peches Maritimes has prepared,
with success, Category B projects to Bank standards in the past including several irrigation
projects. Furthermore, Morocco has an established EIA system hosted by the Ministry of
Environment, including the review and approval of EIA studies.

 Current borrower institutional capacity in term of environmental and social safeguards will be
reviewed during the upcoming preparation mission. The outcomes of such a review will help
identify areas of improvements along with recommendations to enhance the existing capacity.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD)
    Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa (MNSSD)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    Potential adverse environmental impacts during both construction and operation are restricted
in magnitude and severity. Most of project activities will consist of replacing open canals with
pressurized systems, or improving existing pressurized systems and thus they will have no
expected major irreversible environmental impacts; on the contrary these upgrade/rehabilitation
activities of existing irrigation schemes and canals would contribute to positive environmental
and social impacts especially in terms of to improving service and reducing water losses. In
addition, the project will set as a condition that its funds do not finance any road under the
NPRR-2 that would require deforestation, or would adversely affect natural habitats,
biodiversity, and cultural heritage sites.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                 X
    To be determined based on the findings of the project ESA.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                     X
    To be determined based on the findings of the project ESA.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                              X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                   X
    To be determined based on the findings of the project ESA.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X



Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: 02/28/2008

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
    Completion of safeguard related studies is expected by September 2008.

     The borrower has initiated collection of baseline data for the proposed project site. It will
    be responsible for preparation of an Environment and Social Assessment that meets Bank
    and Government requirements. Terms of References of the ESIA study will be reviewed and
    approved by the Bank. The final report should be ready before the appraisal mission.

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Ms Julia Bucknall                                               11/06/2007
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Mr Hocine Chalal                                                11/08/2007
    Comments:
  Sector Manager:                                 Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan                                 11/08/2007
    Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


