Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2883 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Morocco 
Project ID: P095714 
Project Name: Morocco Basic Education Reform Support Program II 
Task Team Leader: Rachidi B. Radji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (50%);Primary education (40%);Adult literacy/non-formal 
education (10%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
90.00
90.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the proposed project will be to continue to support Government efforts 
to provide a basic education (primary and lower secondary education) of improved quality to all 
children and to possibly assist in the strengthening of the implementation of the literacy program. 
Specific targets will be developed in the course of the program preparation along with the 
updating of the Strategic Framework.  Project support will be provided within a comprehensive 
reform program to ensure a financially sustainable expansion of the lower secondary education, 
and a cost-efficient delivery of literacy programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Measures and actions supported by the project will be structured around the following 
components: (i) Enhance access to primary and lower secondary education in an equitable and 
sustainable manner. This components objective is to ensure that basic education (primary and 
lower secondary) is available to most school-age children by 2010, focusing on actions and 
measures to achieve an increased and equitable transition of students between primary and lower 
secondary (especially girls and youth living in rural areas in general); (ii) Improve the internal 
Page  2
efficiency and the quality of education (lower and upper).  The objective of this component is to 
improve student learning and reduce dropout and repetition rates with a focus on the need to 
ensure a regular monitoring and evaluation of achievements along with the establishment of 
some benchmarks and targets; and (iii) Strengthen institutional capacity.  This component will 
support further deconcentration/decentralization of the sector's management through capacity 
building at the central, regional and provincial levels, and the strengthening of the monitoring 
and evaluation of the literacy program.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National education reform program will be implemented throughout national territory. The 
government selects sites for specific intervention based on various information systems (school 
maps, regional plans, etc.). Project to be implemented in the following regional academies 
(regional education jurisdictions):  
 
Rabat-Sale-Zemour-Zaer, Al Gharb-Chrada-Bni H'sine, Tanger-Tetoun, Fes-Boulmane; 
Meknes- Tafilalet, Taz-Al Hoceima-Taounate, Orientale, Sous-Mass-Daraa, Marrakech-Tensift-
Elhaouz, Tadla- Azilal, Grand Casablanca, Chaouia-Ouardigha, and Doukkla-Abda.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower's institutional capacity has been reviewed during the preparation of the first program 
and led to the preparation of an environmental and social framework.  That safeguard instrument 
was consistent with the SWAP approach being pursued in this project. From an environmental 
point of view, capacity to design and implement school construction projects was addressed in 
particular. From a social point of view, the issue of the land acquisition process for building 
schools was also addressed in the ESF.  
 
A
review of the implementation of the existing EA and the ESF will be carried during the 
preparation mission (in July 2007).  The outcomes of such a review will help identify areas of 
improvements along with recommendations to enhance the existing ESF.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNSSD) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The existing Environmental Assessment (EA) will be revised and updated drawing on the 
lessons learned during the implementation of the Morocco Basic Education Reform Support 
Program in July 2007; and the update of the (EA) would look at the effects of the compensation 
and arrears reduction measures under the Morocco Basic Education Reform Support Program   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The existing Social Framework (SF) will be revised and updated drawing on the lessons 
learned during the implementation of the Morocco Basic Education Reform Support Program in 
July 2007; and the update of the (SF) would look at the effects of the compensation and arrears 
reduction measures under the Morocco Basic Education Reform Support Program.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/17/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
review of the safeguards instruments will be carried out in July 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Rachidi B. Radji 
05/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
05/22/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
05/22/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
