Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2220 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/24/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Morocco 
Project ID: P093719 
Project Name: Oum Er Rbia Water Resource Conservation 
Task Team Leader: Julia Bucknall 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (40%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
74.00 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
80.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
6.00
160.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's objective is to improve water management in the Oum Er Rbia basin, by increasing 
incentives to farmers to improve irrigation efficiency and to municipalities/industries to treat 
wastewater. The project's success in the medium-term will be measured by intermediate 
indicators such as:  
 
*
Increased efficiency of water use in agriculture (measured by the increase inarea equipped 
with water saving technology);  
 
*
Improved water quality (measured by reduction in emissions of organic material to the Oum 
Er Rbia river);  
 
*
Effectiveness of the river basin agency (measured by stakeholder satisfactionwith the agency's 
role in water allocation, its effectiveness in enforcing the water law, and the extent to which it 
has succeeded in co-financing investments in the basin).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
Component 1: On-farm Irrigation Improvement (US$30 million plus possible GEF grant of 
US$6mn): A Water Saving Fund will be created through which the Agence de Bassin 
Hydraulique de l'Oum Er Rbia (ABHOER) will provide subsidies for on-farm water saving 
investments according to eligibility and cost-sharing criteria. In most cases, this will involve 
creating a water storage tank on each farm, installing a pump and providing tubing for drip 
irrigation. Farmers in large and small/medium scale irrigation schemes will be eligible, and will 
need to demonstrate that they have reduced total water consumption and increased output per 
unit of water used. The Fund will be financed by loan proceeds and ABHOER revenues from 
water abstraction charges. It will supplement resources available at the national level (e.g. the 
Fond de Developpement Agricole). The irrigation service providers (ORMVAs) in the basin will 
coordinate the process and help farmers prepare their applications for funding. A preliminary 
estimate indicates that this component could support water saving technology on 30-40,000ha, 
potentially saving 60-80 million m3 of water. To provide an additional incentive for farmers to 
convert to water saving technology, the project will investigate the possibility of guaranteeing a 
water allocation to any farmer that has installed water saving technology on his land. The fund 
activities will complement the government's plans for ORMVA reform.  
 
Component 2: Water Quality Improvement (US$20 million). A Water Pollution Prevention 
Fund will be created through which the ABHOER will provide subsidies for investments in 
water quality improvement according to eligibility and cost-sharing criteria.  The Fund will be 
financed by loan proceeds plus ABHOER revenues from water pollution fees. The Fund will 
supplement other resources available at the national level.  The National Sanitation plan has 
identified 33 priority sewer extension and wastewater treatment plants in the Oum Er Rbia basin, 
and ABHOER has identified a series of priority industrial outfalls.  
 
Component 3: Technical assistance to the ABHOER and ORMVAs (US$5 million). Technical 
assistance will be provided to help the river basin agency undertake the following: development 
of a basin level water management plan; public awareness campaigns; development of a 
groundwater licensing scheme and support for its role enforcing the water law. Technical 
assistance will help the three ORMVAs in the basin assist farmers prepare their applications for 
the water saving funds, prepare the annual programs to be submitted to ABHOER, provide 
training and advisory services to farmers on operation and maintenance of the new technology as 
well as on water management and agricultural production improvement.  
 
Component 4: Improvements in the secondary and tertiary irrigation canals in target areas.  This 
component will be implemented through the three ORMVAs and operate in pilot areas currently 
in need of rehabilitation.  The component will support their conversion to a continuous flow 
pressurized system.  Although this system is more expensive (energy costs are higher as the 
water is pressurized), it has considerable advantages: (i) it makes water continually available to 
farmers, rather than on the basis of a set rotation under gravity systems.  This gives farmers more 
certainty and allows them to risk planting higher value but more water sensitive crops.  (ii) It 
allows farmers to convert to drip irrigation without having to establish a storage pond and install 
a
pump.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Oum Er Rbia basin   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
It is not yet clear whether the borrower will be the Ministry of Territorial Planning, Water and 
Environment or the Oum Er Rbia River Basin Agency (ABHOER).  The former has strong 
capacity for implementing safeguard policies.  The latter has strong technical capacity but 
limited staff and little experience with safeguards and therefore would need support. Prior to 
appraisal the Bank will carry out an institutional assessment of the implementing agency. Based 
on the results of this assessment and when details on the components of the project are more 
clearly defined, the Bank will either confirm the FI rating or re-rate this project.  
 
The institutional assessment will considere issues such as the capacity of the ABHOER to (a) 
screen subprojects; (b) obtain the necessary expertise to carryout environmental assessment; (c) 
review the findings and results of environmental assessments for individual sub-projects; (d) 
ensure implementation of mitigation measures including Environmental Management Plans 
where applicable; and (e) monitor environmental conditions during project implementation. The 
operation is not expected to have Category A subprojects. However, because the size of some of 
the planned investments in wastewater treament is not certain, it is possible that the project might 
finance a Category A subproject. If this is the case, before appraisal, the Bank will assess the 
institutional mechanism the financial intermediary will use for its subproject EA work. If 
necessary the operation will include components to strengthen such EA arrangements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef (MNSRE) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSRE) 
Mr Niels B. Holm-Nielsen (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Category A subprojects are not expected. However, several Category B subprojects are 
likely.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Information will be added when more clarification of location of subprojects is available.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Information will be added when more clarification of location of subprojects is available.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Information will be added when more clarification of the specific character of subprojects is 
available.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Information will be added when more clarification of location of subprojects is available.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/13/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Completion of safeguard related studies is expected by May 1, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Julia Bucknall 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
