Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2433
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Morocco 
Project ID:  P100026 
Project Name:  MA: National Human Dev. Initiative(INDH) 
Task Team Leader:  Meskerem Brhane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 12, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(40%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Rural non-farm income generation (P);Social safety nets (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
900.00
900.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will assist the Government in reaching the following project development 
objective: Poor and vulnerable groups living in targeted communities use expanded basic 
infrastructure and social and economic services generated through improved governance 
of local service delivery.  
 
Key PDO Indicators are:  
 
(a) Percent of households, women and youth reporting increased access and use of basic 
infrastructure after sub-project implementation (opinion surveys)  
 
(b) Percent of households, women and youth reporting increased access and use of 
socio-economic services after sub-project implementation (opinion surveys)  
 
(c) Funding for activities in which women are the main beneficiaries reaches 15% of 
overall INDH financing by 2010 (target figure to be confirmed)  
 
(d) Beneficiary contributions to INDH projects reaches 20% of overall project costs by 
2010  
Page  2
(e) Percent of sub-projects identified by target communities and put forth to line 
ministries for consideration that are indeed funded (measures responsiveness of line 
ministries to priorities identified by target communities)  
 
(f) 100 % decisions made by community-level, provincial or regional INDH committees 
are made public (posters, announcements in local media, internet, etc.)   
 
3. Project Description 
There are four project components, consistent with the original design of the program put 
forth by GoM in August 2005.  
 
Component One: Alleviate Poverty in Rural Areas (the rural component) [estimated 
cost: US$ 200 million].  The rural component targets the 348 poorest communes with 
poverty levels above 30 percent based on the recent updated poverty map and an 
additional 55 communes that have poverty levels between 22 and 30 percent combined 
with low social indicators (selected by the provincial INDH committees).It finances 
activities that increase access to basic social services, enhance the economic 
infrastructure and support income-generation. These activities are to be identified and 
prioritized through a participatory planning process that includes all social groups at the 
commune level and relies on full transparency in the decision making process.  
 
Component Two: Alleviate Social Exclusion in Urban Areas (the urban component) 
[estimated cost: US$ 210 million]. The urban component of INDH targets 264 urban 
neighborhoods in 30 cities. It finances the same types of activities as the rural component 
and also relies on a participatory process. The general features that characterize the 
targeted neighborhoods are high levels of unemployment, poor housing conditions and 
poor access to basic social services. However, given that neighborhoods are not 
administrative entities, very little data on the above criteria was available at this level, 
and the targeting of neighborhoods relied more on judgment by the provincial INDH 
committees than on hard data, as in the case of the rural component. The Bank team has 
selected for financing those cities in which the choice of neighborhoods was made on the 
basis of objective and transparent criteria of social exclusion and urban poverty. 
Therefore, the number of neighborhoods that will be supported by the Bank financing 
will be in cities.  
 
Component Three: Alleviate Extreme Vulnerability (the vulnerability component) 
[estimated cost: US$ 180 million].  This component aims to improve access by people 
living in extreme vulnerability to a choice of quality social services, with a special focus 
on improving opportunities for social and economic inclusion. It supports direct financing 
of social services implemented by government agencies or Non Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs), and institutional strengthening activities for these agencies and 
NGOs.  
 
Component Four: Strengthening of Institutional Capacity [estimated cost: US$ 70 
million].  This component focuses on activities that are central to the success of INDH: 
capacity building at all levels of stakeholders, knowledge sharing, management 
information and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems (including impact evaluation 
Page  3
-
TBC), partnerships development, and communications. As part of partnerships 
development, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) of an amount of US$ 20 million 
has been signed with the National Federation of Micro Credit Associations to expand the 
supply of micro credit services in rural areas.  
 
The Government's program also includes a large Provincial Competitive Fund 
[estimated cost: US$ 230 million] as part of Component 4. This Fund is intended to 
finance development projects on the basis of a call for proposals in all the provinces of 
Morocco. The objective of this fund is to allow all provinces to fully participate in the 
INDH program and to implement the INDH governance mechanisms and processes 
throughout the country.  The Bank loan will not finance this fund as it's contribution to 
the project development objectives is not as significant as that of the other three 
components. This is mainly due to the fact that this Fund is not specifically targeted to 
poor communities or groups.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This poverty reduction program targets 264 urban neighborhoods and 403 rural 
communes among the poorest and most excluded communities. The Bank project will 
finance INDH programs in the following provinces: Souss-Mass-Draa, Gharb-Charda-
Beni Hassan, Chaouia-Ourdigha, Marrakech-Tensift-El Haouz, Oriental, Casablanca, 
Rabat-Sale-Zemmour-Zaer, Doukkala-Abda, Tadla-Azilal, Meknes-Tafilalt, Fes-
Boulmane, Taza-Al Hoceima-Taounate, Tanger-Tetouan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNSRE) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The two safeguards policies that apply to the project are OP 4.01 and OP 4.12. To 
address the environmental impacts of the project an EMP has been prepared by the 
government and has been considered acceptable by the Bank. Negative environmental 
impacts that may arise as a result of this project are addressed through the mitigation 
measures which have been clearly identified in the EMP. The EMP identifies simple 
environmental screening tools which have been integrated into all relevant project 
manuals. It also identifies required capacity building activities.  
 
Existing land acquisition procedures in Morocco are, in general, consistent with Bank 
policy. The resettlement issues that may arise are expected to be minor. However, 
because project sites are not yet known, a  Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared during project preparation. The preparation of the RPF was based on findings 
from field visits of INDH activities under implementation and included consultations 
with communities and project implementers. The document has been reviewed 
satisfactorily by the Bank. The RPF includes simple screening criteria which will be 
included as updates to the operations manual. Capacity building and monitoring of the 
RPF has also been included.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The EMP notes that financing of basic infratstructure projects or income generating 
activities could lead to negative impacts on the environment and that the cumulative 
impact could be significant and will therefore need to be monitored carefully.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Due to the programmatic and participatory nature of the project and the type of financing 
involved (SWAp, no project alternatives were considered. It was considered that the 
mitigation measures prescribed in the EMP and RPF are sufficient to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts and that capacity to implement these measures can be 
adequately developed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an EMP and RPF to mitigate any negative impacts. The 
participatory approach adopted by INDH involves local communities, elected 
representatives from communes and wards, and civil society representatives. The INDH 
decision-making bodies including committees at the local, provincial, regional and 
national level will implement the program. All these have limited experience in 
mitigating against negative environmental and social impacts. As a result, a training and 
capacity building component at each level has been built in to the program.The cost of 
implementing the EMP and RPF have been estimated to be approximately US$1 million 
Page  5
and the counterpart has agreed to commit necessary resources. Moreover, the overall 
monitoring of the program implementation will include monitoring of safeguards aspects 
according to the approach identified in the EMP and RPF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the project are associations, civil society organizations, local 
governments, communities and provincial leaders. The EMP and RPF were prepared on 
the basis of consultations with some of these stakeholders consistent with the 
participatory nature of the INDH program. The two documents have been publicly 
disclosed on the INDH's website (www.indh.ma) and have been sent to all 71 provinces 
and prefectures for public disclosure. The provinces and prefectures are also sending 
these documents to all targeted communes and neighborhoods which participate in the 
INDH program. The procedures for both documents stress the importance of consultation 
with potentially affected people. All relevant stakeholders (especially project 
implementors) will also be fully trained in the use of the mitigation instruments.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/08/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/11/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/11/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  6
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cecile Fruman 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bachir Souhlal 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
 
Comments:   
