Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2674 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P104566 
Project Name: Water Services and Institutional Support Project 
Task Team Leader: N. Jane Walker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 19, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the project  are to: (i) increase coverage in the five cities of 
Maputo, Beira, Nampula, Quelimane, and Pemba to consolidate financial sustainability of  
FIPAG, maintain the delegated management model, and increase growth prospects of benefiting 
cities; (ii) provide capacity building and institutional support to fill the gap in sector strategy  for 
smaller cities and towns; (iii) support on-going GoM/donor efforts to establish a  SWAp for the 
village systems to help align future Bank activities with programmatic approaches.  The 
objectives will be accomplished through the following implementation strategies:  
 
Consolidation of NWDP II gains: First, the project will help consolidate the gains made by 
FIPAG and supported by CRA, by building on institutional strategies and policies developed 
under NWDP II, and by providing investment funds to expand networks and distribution in the 
short term. These investments will take advantage of the increased production capacity achieved 
under NWDP II and improve service coverage in the FIPAG towns. By serving more consumers 
and by improving its operational performance, FIPAG's financial position will strengthen and 
this will also create an improved business opportunities for the private sector operators, key 
players in the delegated management framework.  
Page  2
GAPASU for town water supply:  Second, the project will support DNA and the creation of the 
proposed Office of Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (GAPASU).  GAPASU is modeled on 
the delegated management model in that it will be empowered to manage assets, plan and 
oversee the execution of investments, and engage third party operators in smaller cities and 
towns that are not sufficiently viable to meet the FIPAG criteria of financial viability.  GAPASU 
addresses the gap for smaller cities and market towns that were piloted under NWDP I, and will 
be supported under the project with capacity building and operational costs.  GAPASU will be 
closely linked with investment funding under the proposed MCC project and therefore will be 
piloted in Zambezia and the three northern provinces of Mozambique, Cabo Delgado, Niassa and 
Nampula.  Eventually it is expected the model will be rolled out nation wide though there will be 
a
steep learning curve and considerable risk associated with this new institution.  
 
Support for the preparation of SWAp: Third, the project will provide capacity building and 
institutional support with respect to development of the SWAp approach for rural systems - 
village and remote point source. The project will support DNA, in collaboration with other 
donors, in preparing the medium-term expenditure framework and a strategy to implement its 
sector policy and to the extent possible, common guidelines for all future investments in the 
sector regardless of the source of financing. Though this close dialogue with donors, it is 
expected that analytical work within the sector can be undertaken jointly as the sector moves to 
more program-based lending.  The Bank's value added includes recent experience in regional 
water sector Swaps in Tanzania and the comprehensive approach to the water sector in Uganda.  
 
Harmonization and Implementation strategies:  The implementation strategies enhance the main 
elements of the harmonization agenda. GAPASU, like FIPAG, is expected to be an autonomous 
agency and capacity and skills build-up in the agency will be fully interested into the sector's 
institutional structure and will not relay on a parallel PIU.  The SWAp, in addition to 
transitioning the Bank to a programmatic approach, offers a wide range of opportunities for 
donor coordination and sharing of analytical work.  At present the project preparation has relied 
greatly on baseline institutional studies done by MCC in the development of Gabinet de Gestao 
do Patrimonio do Abastecimento de Agua e Saneamento Urbano (GAPASU).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will finance the following two components: (A) investments and support in the cities 
under the responsibility of FIPAG - mainly supported by the ACGF; and (B) capacity building, 
institutional and operational support to DNA mainly supported by the IDA credit.  The lending 
instrument is suggested is a specific investment loan (SIL).  
 
The proposed project is expected to enhance the effectiveness of an additional US$300 million 
plus grant from MCC.  The MCC is keen to rely on the Bank's experience in the sector, 
particularly with respect to institutional arrangements already in place via FIPAG and new 
arrangements through GAPASU.  While the MCC investments would go ahead with out the 
Bank's project, these investments may be scaled down without the Bank's support of the key 
sector institutions.  
 
Page  3
Component A: Investments and support in the Cities under the responsibility of FIPAG (US$15 
million) via the ACGF).  This will: (a) Expand and extend the networks and distribution through 
limited investments in small works in Pemba, Nampula, Quelimane, and Beira, currently 
operated and managed by a private operator; (b) Provide physical investments to improve the 
operational efficiency in the urban cities currently under the responsibility of FIPAG; and (c) 
Support the appropriate type of private operator contract in the four cities to consolidate gains 
under NWDP II.  
 
Component B: This Capacity building, institutional and operational support to DNA (US$5-10 
million)  
 
Sub-component B1: Establishment and Operationalization of GAPASU:  This will: (a) Adapt 
the proven sustainable institutional  and regulatory modalities for secondary cities (GAPASU), 
based on the delegated management model proven in the experience from FIPAG cities where 
FIPAG can act as mentor; (b) Ensure that the appropriate regulatory, policy, and institutional 
framework will be developed and tested as the delegated management model is scaled up; (c) 
Build the capacity of the sector players, including DNA, district and local governments, 
municipalities, public and private sector, and small scale providers; (d) Promote small scale 
private sector participation in service delivery; (e) Provide bridge subsidies during the transition 
period in achieving O&M and cost recovery.  
 
Sub-component B2: Implementation of Sector Policy/Preparation of SWAp: This will: (a) 
Develop a strategy to scale up the demand driven community participatory model  for village 
piped systems and non-piped systems; (b) Support the government in developing a clear strategy 
and time-bound plan for implementing its sector policy and achieving the MDGs for water and 
sanitation, particularly the guidelines for rural water SWAp; (c) Include measures to mitigate the 
risks from HIV/AIDS, develop a strategy and an implementation plan through a consultative 
process that involves all sector stakeholders.  
 
MCC's Project: Urban, Town, and Village Water Supply and Sanitation Investments (up to 
US$370 million).  Concurrently, the MCC is planning to implement a project in the North of 
Mozambique at the request of the Government.  Actions between the Bank's proposed project 
and that of MCC intend to be fully coordinated.  This MCC project will: (a) Improve water 
supply and sanitation services in three FIPAG cities and seven second tier municipalities in the 
Northern Provinces, including Cuamba, Lichinga, Nacala, Ilha de Mozambique, Angoche, and 
Macuba, currently managed by parastatal companies; (b) Improve water supply in 16 small 
towns through rehabilitating the existing systems; (c) Improve water supply in rural areas of 
Cabo Delgado and Nampula through drilling 1,500 boreholes and wells; and (d) provide 
Community mobilization activities to ensure proper O&M for rural systems, either through 
community-user group management or contracting out to operators.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Maputo, Pemba, Nampula, Quelimane, and Beira area   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
FIPAG has build up capacity for environment and safeguards under the implementation of 
NWDP II.  The environmental and safeguard considerations for NWDP II included large civil 
Page  4
works and two substantial RAPS.  These have been completed to a satisfactory status so far.  
NWDP III will include mainly extension to water supply networks and distribution systems.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) Policy will be triggered by the proposed 
project due to its focus on extension the water supply networks and distribution systems.  
 
As the project is a repeater, it is expected that the environmental assessment report as 
established under NWDP II and implemented by FIPAG will serve as a guideline.  This will 
need to be updated where necessary, approved and disclosed prior to appraisal. Subproject EAs 
and/or environmental management plans (EMPs) will be prepared, as required, and disclosed 
prior to the approval of subproject financing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Involuntary Resettlement (Op/BP 4.12) Policy may be triggered by the proposed project 
because project activities such as extension of water supply facilities can result in temporary or 
permanent loss of  assets, ie. land, crops, and other means of income generation.  A Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for NWDP II  will be revised to handle such unforeseen 
circumstances.  The revised RPF document will be disclosed prior to appraisal.  If necessary, 
RAPS will be prepared and disclosed prior to the approval of subproject financing.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Assessment Report prepared for NWDP I was updated in February 1999  
to ensure full coverage of the final project scope of the NWDP II .  The EA took account of 
the beneficiary assessment studies for the five cities which obtained and analyzed 
information on social structures, views of existing and potential future customers on existing 
water facilities and services (formal and informal), other urban services, preferences for 
water supply service options, and willingness to pay for improved services.  These 
beneficiary studies were updated in 2003.  Currently beneficiary studies are monitored by 
CRA - the regulatory authority with respect to tariff policy.  
 
(1)   Update the current EA for NWDP II including the Environmental Management Plan: 
February 15 - March 1, 2007  
 
(2)   Update the NWDP II - Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): February 15 - March 1, 
2007  
 
(3)   EAs/EMPs and RAPS for the first year  physical works to be reviewed, cleared and 
disclosed prior to the approval of subproject financing.  
 
The Sector Manager Unit has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms N. Jane Walker 
02/06/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/06/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
02/06/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
