Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC3060
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P105205 
Project Name:  MZ Higher Education Project (Supplemental) 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaoyan Liang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (80%);Vocational training (20%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project provides additional financing to an existing IDA credit.  It supports 
the same Development Objectives as the original Higher Education Project (HEP) which 
are (i) to enhance the internal efficiency and to expand the output of graduates, (ii) to 
improve equitable access, and (iii) to improve the quality of teaching and learning and the 
relevance of the curriculum.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is aligned with the design of the original project and will 
specifically support the implementation of the following components and activities:  
 
Component A: system-wide reform and policy development (US$0.5 million), to 
support the project management, monitoring and evaluation activities.  
 
Component B: Institutional Development and Investment (US$10  million), to support 
the completion of ISRI campus and rehabilitation of Faculty of Engineering in the 
University of Eduardo Mondlane and the MDLN Lichinga Resource Center; the furniture 
and equipping of ISRI, UP, UEM Central library, and MDLN Lichinga Resource Center. 
Page  2
Further, this component will support another cycle of the Quality Enhancement and 
Innovation Fund.  
 
Component C: Provincial Scholarship Fund (US$1.5 million), to finance the 200 
provincial students to continue their study until June 2009.  
 
Component D: Science and Technology (US$ 3 million), to finance another cycle of the 
National Research Fund and to develop scholarship scheme for science and technology.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The HEP additional credit will finance the completion of construction in the Institute 
Superios da Rlacion Internacional (ISRI) and some rehabilitation in the existing campus 
of Faculty of Engineering in the University of Eduardo Mondlane and the Mozambique 
Distance Learning Network (MDLN) Lichinga Resource Center. The new ISRI campus is 
located in Zimpeto, about 15 km away from the Maputo City.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project activity which triggered the environmental assessment safeguard is the 
construction of ISRI campus.  An in-depth Environmental Assessment was carried out.  
No significant issue was identified as having severe negative impact.  The issues 
identified which could have medium level environmental impact include during the 
construction stage, the treatment of solid but non-dangerous and dangerous wastage, 
water contamination due to construction, noise and traffic generated.  During the 
operation of the buildings, issues identified to have medium level impact include 
Page  3
pollution from the building maintenance and occupation, sewer system, access to safe 
water, and increased traffic due to the new establishment.  
 
Regarding the social impact, the study further identified possible increase of HIV/AIDS 
due to concentration of workers.  However, positive social impacts including 
employment generation and boost to the local economy were identified also.  
 
The consultancy further developed an Environmental Management Plan which seeks to 
mitigate the environmental and social impact identified by the study.  These mitigation 
measures have been accepted by the implementing agency and will be implemented 
during the course of the project. Examples of the mitigation measures include proper 
training and safety equipment for personnel who handle the wastage, confining the waste 
materials in specific well ventilated areas, and building appropriate septic tanks located at 
least 50 meters away from water sources.  
 
The Bank will include in its supervision team an environmental specialist to supervise 
the implementation of such measures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential indirect and/or long term project impacts are not anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No severe environmental or social impact was found. The discussion of project 
alternatives was not relevant because the project was designed in the context of the 
government's education strategy.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The government has conducted an in-depth EA study and has developed an 
Environmental Management Plan for the ISRI campus.  The implementing agency has 
the capacity to implement the EMP which has been clearly costed and project budget 
estimates revised to reflect the costs of EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ISRI site is on a previously vacant land allocated by the Maputo City Municipality.  
The consultant who conducted the EA study interviewed the key stakeholders living 
nearly the site.  Further a public forum was held on May 14, 2007 to disclose the findings 
from the EA.  During the Forum, the public including government officials from the 
Ministry of Environment was generally satisfied with the findings but pressed for further 
developing a costed Environmental Management Plan to be implemented as part of the 
project.  The consultant subsequently elaborated and costed the EMP.  A period of two 
weeks was given for additional public comments. No substantial comments were 
received.   
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/25/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/14/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/08/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaoyan Liang 
06/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
06/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
