Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2007 
Report No.:  AC2525
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P083325 
Project Name:  Roads and Bridges Management  and Maintenance Program - Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Dieter E. Schelling 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
334.10 
 
African Development Bank 
44.60 
 
DENMARK: Danish Intl. Dev. Assistance (DANIDA) 
10.10 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  20.00 
 
EC: EU - European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR) 
184.30 
 
FRANCE:  Govt. of  [MOFA and AFD (C2D)] 
0.50 
 
IRELAND, Govt. of 
2.00 
 
US, Govt. of 
137.00 
 
Islamic Development Bank - Al Aqsa Fund 
12.40 
 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
0.10 
 
ITALY: Dev. Coop. Department (MOFA) 
19.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
74.90 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
11.80 
 
Nordic Development Fund (NDF) 
8.50 
 
NORWAY: Norwegian Agency for Dev. Coop. (NORAD) 
2.20 
 OPEC 
FUND 
8.10 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
67.90 
 Financing 
Gap 
5.70
943.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
Page  2
2. Project Objectives 
The primary objective of the Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Program 
(RBMMP), as set out in APL1, is to stimulate growth and contribute to poverty reduction 
through improved road infrastructure, better sector policies, and enhanced roads sector 
management.  
 
The program is being implemented in three phases, with the start of each stage based on 
measured progress on agreed targets in the previous stage, including policy and 
institutional reforms, as well as implementation of physical works.  The program includes 
an integrated package of investments focusing on (i) rehabilitation of key links in the 
road network to reduce constraints on trade and growth, increase access by rural 
populations, and reduce transport costs; (ii) strengthening road planning, management, 
and implementing financial reforms to ensure sustainability; (iii) completing institutional 
reforms to align technical and managerial capacity at the central and provincial levels; 
(iv) improving road safety policy and implementation; (v) addressing environmental and 
social impacts by taking measures to incorporate environmental protection requirements 
in design standards and during implementation of works; and (vi) improving sector 
performance through a well-designed (and funded) monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
framework, and dissemination of M&E indicators.   
 
3. Project Description 
Phase II of RBMMP supports PRISE, the 2007-09 road sector program of the 
Government of Mozambique (GoM). PRISE is being implemented in a sector wide 
approach (SWAp) mode. PRISE incorporates a coherent GoM-owned-and-led roads 
program in a comprehensive and coordinated manner, with emphasis on planning, 
finance, implementation monitoring, and evaluation.  The SWAp mode will foster 
stronger country ownership and leadership in the road sector.  It will also facilitate a 
coordinated and open policy dialogue for the entire sector, involving the key GoM agents 
MoPWH, ANE, Road Fund, and other local stakeholders as well as the road sector 
development partners (DP). PRISE is developed consistent with the priorities and 
objectives of the GoM road sector policy, the action plan for the reduction of absolute 
poverty (PARPA), the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF), and the Road 
Sector Strategy (RSS).  
 
The cost estimate of the PRISE 2007-09 is $1043 million comprising $69.6 million (7 
%) for overheads, $263.9 million (25 %) for maintenance and $709.8 million (68 %) for 
investments.  Total DP contribution to PRISE is $709 million or 68 % of the total. Out of 
this, $114 million will be provided as pooled funding and the balance of $595 million 
through traditionally dedicated funding. The IDA support to PRISE of $100 million is 
allocated as follows: (a) $35 million contribution to the pooled fund for overhead and 
maintenance expenditures; and (b) $ 65 million dedicated funding for the rehabilitation 
and upgrading of three sections of the N1.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Throughout Mozambique, with Component C being investments into sections of the N1 
in Maputo, Gaza and Inhambane Provinces.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (AFTEG) 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTS1) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental assessments show that the potential environmental impacts are modest 
and include: slight changes to surface drainage during implementation, noise, dust during 
construction, temporary loss of accessibility, some changes to commercial structures, 
change of land use, and short term erosion and sedimentation and impairment of water 
quality.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The are no potential negative indirect and/or long term impacts identified.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental assessments and resettlement action plans have been cleared and disclosed 
for the 3 segments of EN1 to be supported. A resettlement policy framework has been 
cleared and disclosed.  
 
The social and environmental unit of ANE (UASMA) has made significant strides in 
building capacity for safeguards management in particular, social assessments, 
resettlement action plans, and HIV/AIDS related activities.  Several outstanding issues 
Page  4
were identified during the course of project preparation related to the current composition 
of the unit, reporting, supervision and monitoring mechanisms, and training needs.  The 
following recommendations will be implemented by ANE to meet some of these gaps as 
well as to ensure that the "basket-fund" mechanism proposed under this project is 
managed in compliance with all pertinent safeguards policies, as the Bank is one of the 
sources of funds:  
 
(a) UASMA should be headed by a senior level Environmental Engineer to review the 
implementation of mitigation measures and other needed environmental protection 
requirements and monitor/report on environmental due diligence;  
 
(b) One person in each province should be the designated Environmental Representative 
for EMP implementation and supervision; and  
 
(c) Provision of adequate training for engineers of public works once the institutional 
arrangements have been realized.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Initial and detailed consultations took place with different stakeholders from Government 
Departments, Local Authorities and local communities. These are envisaged to be an 
integral part of the project design. Communities have a mandate for natural resource 
management and conflict resolution and will continue to take active part in the decision 
making process. This provides an enabling environment for community participation for 
development projects, especially in the context of road infrastructure development.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dieter E. Schelling 
04/13/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
04/13/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Colin P. Rees 
04/13/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
04/13/2007 
Comments:   
