Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: 39601 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  04/18/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID:  P104945 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: 
Mozambique 
 Water Private Sector Contracts 
–
OBA for coverage 
expansion 
Task Team Leader:  Luiz Tavares/Jane Walker 
Estimated Appraisal Date
:
June 18,2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  GPOBA (Trust Fund) 
Grant 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
 
Other financing amounts by source: GPOBA Grant Amount (US$m): 10 
Environmental Category: C 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [X]                              No [] 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]: 
 
The proposed GPOBA program will increase coverage and facilitate access for low- to 
middle- income households that currently have no access to piped water. Specifically the 
project would subsidize the cost of new connections for domestic customers in five (5) 
cities (Maputo, Pemba, Nampula, Quelimane, and Beira) to piped distribution networks 
that already exist or are being financed by others (e.g. AfDB, Water Aid, World Bank 
NWDP II and WASISP). 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]: 
 
Program for Maputo
:
The proposed GPOBA program would subsidize the cost of new 
connections for domestic customers in Maputo. This will facilitate access for low- to 
middle-income households that currently have no access to piped water. It is proposed 
Page  2
2
that a per connection subsidy be adopted
 
equal to
 
the connection cost paid by the 
household to the Operator [(
Águas de Moçambique (AdM)]. This approach will avoid 
any change in the present lease agreement or any additional direct benefit to AdM (the 
operator), other than the increased revenue base from the provision of additional services 
to new costumers. By enlarging the installed base (number of connections) AdM can 
increase their revenue base. The revenues are related to the consumptions of water (m3) 
by individuals.   
 
Program for Beira, Pemba, Quelimane, and Nampula:
 The present management 
contract for these four cities will expire in July 2007. Fundo de Investimento e 
Património do Abastecimento de Água (FIPAG) would like to procure a new set of 
contracts by the first half of 2007.  Under the new set of contracts, probably following the 
lease model, the private operator will be responsible for the entire operation of the water 
infrastructure. FIPAG will continue to be the asset holder responsible for financing the 
necessary civil work to rehabilitate and expand the systems, and Water Supply 
Regulatory Council/Conselho de Regulação de Abastecimento de Água (CRA) will 
continue to perform the tariff and service regulation independently. It is proposed that a 
per connection subsidy be adopted
 equal to the total cost of 
the connection paid by the 
household to obtain each new connection. 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known): 
 
Maputo:
 
Laulane area  
Pemba: 
Ingoname, Natite, and Marangania areas 
Nampula:
 
Muahivire, Muahivire expansao, Nampicopo, Namutequelina, Bamboo in 
Netikiri, and Muhala Expansao areas 
Quelimane:
 
Janeiro and Torrone Novo, 17 de Setembro, Sangariveira, and 3 de 
Fevereiro areas 
Beira/Dondo:
 Macurrungo West,  Manga, and Inhamizua , Consito, and Mafarinha areas 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
FIPAG has build up capacity for effective safeguards management under the 
implementation of National Water Development Project II (NWDP II).  The 
environmental and safeguard considerations for NWDP II included large civil works and 
two substantial RAPs.  These have been completed to a satisfactory status so far.  The 
Water Services and Institutional Support Project (WASISP) will include mainly 
extension to water supply networks and distribution systems. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Mr. Warren Waters 
 
Page  3
3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No  TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
 
This will be an EA Category C project since it involves installing only simple yard taps 
fed from water distribution pipes in the roadway adjacent to the households.  Thus, it is 
likely to have no or minimal adverse environmental impacts.  Similarly, land acquisition 
will not be required.  FIPAG’s normal contracting arrangements will ensure that 
operators, as needed, restore household property (e.g. fences, walls, walkways, yards) to 
at least their pre-existing condition. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-
stage ISDS would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the 
PAD-stage ISDS:  May 2007 
 
C.  Time Frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related  studies that may be 
be needed.  The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-
stage ISDS:   No safeguard reporting instruments are required.
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at 
the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to 
potentially affected persons.
 
Page  4
4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jane Walker/Luiz Tavares 
04/18/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Warren Waters 
04/18/2007 
Comments:  
No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, 
should project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, 
consult ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Jaime Biderman 
04/18/2007 
Comments:   
Page  5
5
