Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2853 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P105205 
Project Name: MZ Higher Education Project (Supplemental) 
Task Team Leader: Xiaoyan Liang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (80%);Vocational training (20%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project provides additional financing credit to an existing IDA credit.  It supports 
the same Development Objectives as the original Higher Education Project (HEP)which are (i) to 
enhance the internal efficiency and to expand the output of graduates, (ii) to improve equitable 
access, and (iii) to improve the quality of teaching and learning and the relevance of the 
curriculum.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is aligned with the design of the original project and will specifically 
support the implementation of the following components and activities:  
 
Component A: system-wide reform and policy development (US$0.5 million), to support the 
project management, monitoring and evaluation activities.  
 
Component B: Institutional Development and Investment (US$10  million), to support the 
completion of ISRI campus and rehabilitation of the Faculty of Engineering in the University of 
Eduardo Mondlane and the Mozambique Distance Learning Network (MDLN) Lichinga 
Resource Center, the furniture and equipping of ISRI, UP, UEM Central library, and MDLN 
Page  2
Lichinga Resource Center. Further, this component will support another cycle of the Quality 
Enhancement and Innovation Fund.  
 
Component C: Provincial Scholarship Fund (US$1.5 million), to finance the 200 provincial 
students to continue their study until June 2009.  
 
Component D: Science and Technology (US$ 3 million), to finance another cycle of the 
National Research Fund and to develop scholarship scheme for science and technology.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The HEP additional credit will finance the completion of construction in the Institute Superios da 
Rlacion Internacional (ISRI) and some rehabilitation in the existing campus of Faculty of 
Engineering in the University of Eduardo Mondlane and the Mozambique Distance Learning 
Network (MDLN) Lichinga Resource Center. The new ISRI campus is located in Zimpeto, about 
15 km away from the Maputo City.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
HEP is implemented by the Ministry of Education and Culture (MEC) and the Ministry of 
Science and Technology (MCT) in collaboration with the institutions which are supported by the 
project. MEC has extensive experience in implementing IDA projects and has the capacity to 
adhere and implement safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTU2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The civil works planned under the additional financing credit is to complete the works in 
ISRI campus and other rehabilitation work were appraised in 2002 under the original Higher 
Education Project. The construction activities (ISRI campus and other rehabilitation work) to be 
funded under the proposed financing are expected to trigger OP 4.01.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/08/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Assessment including the associated Environmental Management 
Plan was completed, approved, and disclosed in Mozambique on May 14, 2007 and sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop on June 8, 2007.  
 
The sector unit accepts transfer of management responsibility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaoyan Liang 
06/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
