Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2260 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P083325 
Project Name: Roads and Bridges Management  and Maintenance Project 
Task Team Leader: Dieter E. Schelling 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
85.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overriding goal of the project would be to support GOM in the implementation of its road 
sector strategy (2007-11) (RSS). The objectives of the RSS are to ensure sustainability of the 
network, provide connectivity and enhance rural accessibility.  The development objectives of 
the proposed project are to: (a) address sustainability through adequate maintenance, including 
periodic maintenance, for the ???maintainable??? network (about 18,000 kilometers); (b) 
enhance connectivity and rural accessibility through upgrading of the primary network, and 
transitability improvements on the rural network; (c) enhance network management capacity, 
including issues of axle load control, road safety and the management of the local network.  
 
The outcome indicators to monitor the above will be jointly determined by GOM and donors at 
the planned SPAF workshop in June 2006. Suggested key outcome indicators are: (a) vehicle 
operating cost savings on the improved national road network; (b) percentage of rural population 
provided with reliable access; and (c) reduction in number of accidents due to enhanced road 
safety.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is phase 2 of the Road and Bridges Management and Maintenance Project 
(RBMMP), and has the following components (and the following financing planned during year 
one and two of the implementation of the strategy):  
 
(A) 
Support to road maintenance program through untied funding to the road fund.  This fund 
would be allocated to the RF in (twice?) annual tranches.  Its disbursement would depend on the 
provision of satisfactory progress reports and technical and financial audits.  Estimated allocation 
about $20m per annum.  
 
(B) 
The funding of upgrading works on the national network.  This essentially are 
rehabilitation and upgrading works on N1 from Maputo to Maxixe that were not financed under 
phase one of the APL due to cost increases.  Design and bidding documents for these road 
sections have been prepared already for phase one and are currently being updated. Estimated 
allocation a total of $50m for the two years.  
 
(C) 
Capacity building:  the following is planned to be financed under this component: (i) 
outsourcing of the services of ANE at the provincial level during its transformation to a road 
agency; (ii) axle load control measures; (iii) road safety measures; (iv) the preparation of local 
government policy and strategy; (v) TA, training and equipment for ANE, RF and the planning 
unit at MOTC; (vi) preparation of design and bidding documents for the outer years of the 
program; (v) various studies needed for the continuation of the program.  Estimated allocation 
over the two years??? period: $30m.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Mozambique.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Environmental and Social Unit (UASMA) currently consists of 4 members (environment-2, 
social-1, HIV/AIDs-1).  There are no resettlement/compensation specialists.  Both technical 
assistants (social 1997-2005, environment 2003-2005) have left and no further long-term 
technical assistance is envisioned. In order to fill in the capacity gaps and help strengthen the 
existing capacity, it has been recommended that short-term technical assistance be explored to 
help the UASMA.It is expected that the new Technical Assistance (TA) team will be mobilized 
by May 2006, and will include among others, a Social and Environmental Specialist for short 
term technical assistance and consultancies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Civil works are likely to have an impact on the bio-physical environment for all 3 proposed 
road sections.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The potential impact on natural habitats will be determined in the EA.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Rehabilitation works are likely to have an impact on many settlements and businesses on the 
heavily trafficked and settled urban area for one of the sections on N1.  The other 2 proposed 
road sections would require less land acquisition, however Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for 
all 3 sections will be prepared prior to Project Appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/25/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EAs and RAPs for all road sections to be rehabilitated (Maputo-Marracuene, Manhica-
Incoluane and 15km north of Zandamela) will be cleared and disclosed prior to Project 
Appraisal.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be cleared and disclosed prior to Project 
Appraisal.  
 
All other roads will be funded under the basket funding mechanism and will be subject to an 
assessment of ANE???s institutional capacity to manage environmental and social impacts of 
road works.  An environmental procedures manual and the RPF will apply to all projects 
executed by ANE.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dieter E. Schelling 
05/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/11/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
05/11/2006 
Comments:   
