Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/01/2006 
Report No.:  AC2097
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P096332 
Project Name:  ProMaputo, Maputo Municipal Development Program 
Task Team Leader:  Katherine Kuper 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 25, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (46%);Solid waste management 
(29%);Roads and highways (25%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
14.45
14.45 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Phase 1 Objective is to strengthen the Maputo City Council's institutional and 
financial capacity to support achievement of long term service delivery goals, and 
improve solid waste management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is financed by an Adaptable Program Loan with a first phase of three years 
and a second phase of five years with clear and agreed triggers for moving to Phase II.  
 
Phase I (three years; US$ 44.5 Million of which US$30 million in IDA) will focus on:  
 
-
institutional development and municipal governance  
 
-
municipal finance reforms in both revenues and expenditures  
 
-
low cost, quick win infrastructure and service delivery improvements  
 
-
planning for Phase II larger infrastructure and service delivery investments  
 
Phase II (five years, US$80 million in IDA) will focus on:  
 
-
consolidation of Phase I institutional and financial reforms by the subsequently 
elected municipal assembly and mayor  
Page  2
-
investment in infrastructure and service delivery improvements on a larger scale 
subject to financial viability (especially sustainability) and funds leveraged  
 
-
greater involvement of non-IDA financing (private sector, ADB, bilaterals etc.) due to 
lower risk  
 
The outcome indicators for Phase II will be determined during the third year of phase I, 
since projections on service delivery needs will be done based on the census of 2007. It is 
also expected that if Phase I produces the anticipated institutional and financial reforms, 
there will be greater interest of other lenders and the private sector to add resources, thus 
providing greater potential to expand services.  
 
Phase I: Maputo Institutional and Financial Reform  
 
Component A. Institutional Development and Municipal Governance (approx. $8 
million)  
 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Reform and Strengthening  
 
The objective of this subcomponent is to enable CMM processes and structures to 
effectively face the challenges of municipal development. It entails six specific 
objectives: (a) to simplify CMM organization and management; (b) to implement 
strategic human resource management; (c) to improve the performance of support 
systems and service delivery; (d) to decentralize and integrate planning and management 
of CMM programs; (e) to decentralize and integrate planning and management of CMM 
programs; and (f) to ensure adequate material recourses for CMM operations through 
procurement, allocation, and maintenance of municipal buildings, vehicles and office 
equipment.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Improved Municipal Governance  
 
The objective of this subcomponent is to improve CMM transparency and 
responsiveness by increasing the involvement of various stakeholders in municipal 
governance.  It entails five specific objectives: (a) to increase the transparency of 
resource management and improve CMM communication with internal and external; (b) 
to improve the interaction between the CMM and the Municipal Assembly; (c) to 
improve coordination between CMM and other public sector actors; (d) to increase the 
number and effectiveness of partnerships between CMM and nongovernmental actors; 
and (e) to increase the number and effectiveness of partnerships between CMM and 
nongovernmental.  
 
Component B. Municipal Finance (approx. $5.5 million)  
 
Sub-component B.1.  Revenues  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to increase municipal revenues by enhancing the 
capacity of the municipality to better utilize its own revenue sources. It entails five 
specific objectives: (a) an intermediate solution to improve the current systems of taxes 
and fees in the short term; (b) a medium and long term solution to improve the systems of 
Page  3
taxes and fees; (c) to improve the internal management of the different fees; (d) to 
improve the capacity to attract additional revenues; and (d) to provide general support to 
improve the municipal revenue system.  
 
Sub-component B.2. Financial and Asset Management  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to improve the Municipality's planning, 
execution, and control of budgetary functions and systems. To do so, the following six 
specific objectives will be pursued: (a) to improve the process of budgetary planning, in 
order to ensure that the different units submit their budget plans in a timely and accurate 
fashion; (b) to improve the distribution of financial resources, in order to ensure that 
budgets are executed according to the plans; (c) to improve the financial, procurement, 
and management systems; (d) to improve the budgetary execution and control systems; 
(e) to support the implementation of the national budgetary system-SISTAFE; and (f) to 
provide general support to improve the municipal expenditure system.  
 
Component C. Planning, Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Service Delivery 
Improvements (approx. $26.5 million)  
 
This component will support urban planning and targeted investments to improve 
critical urban services. It is divided into two subcomponents:  
 
Sub-Component C1 - Planning and Management of Urban Space  
 
This sub-component will provide support to the municipality to improve the efficacy of 
the management and the planning of services through the development of Spatial and 
Sectoral Plans and the implementation of a Geographic Information System (GIS). It will 
provide the municipality with the methodological tools, training, technical assistance and 
mentoring to undertake planning. It will also review the tasks that are needed to improve 
the management of urban space, assist in the approval of infrastructure plans, develop 
spatial and sectoral plans, as well as the restructuring of the processes and procedures 
related to the granting of land use rights and land ownership, and the implementation of 
an information system for these purposes. It entails two specific objectives: (a) to 
improve the management of urban space; and (b) to improve the design and quality of 
municipal services.  
 
Sub-Component C2 - Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Service Delivery Improvements  
 
The objective of the sub-component is to increase the availability and the quality of 
infrastructure and equipment to improve service delivery through an adequate 
management of investments to show tangible improvements. The sub-component will 
include the following results and associated activities: (a) Rehabilitation of existing 
paved and unpaved roads & associated drainage, and establish conditions for future 
expansion; (b) increase the quality and coverage of solid waste management services 
through improvements in the CMM's internal SWM operations as well as partnerships 
with the private and non-government sector; (c) improve the quality of cemeteries 
provided by municipalities; and (d) increase public safety through increased street 
lighting.   
 
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
During Phase I the project will exclusively cover the municipality of Maputo in 
Mozambique, which has an area of approximately 300km2 and a population of 1.3 
million.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Phase I of the project has small investments in service delivery and (drainage, road 
rehabilitation, solid waste management, cemeteries and lighting) triggers Bank's 
Safeguards Policies OP 4.01 and OP 4.12 respectively and Phase II will also trigger same 
policies even though the investments will be larger.  
 
The environmental classification of the proposed project is Category B and as a result, 
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed in country and at the InfoShop on 
October 27, 2006. These documents are to (i) assess the environmental and social impacts 
of the expected subprojects; (ii) outline environmental management procedures and 
provide the requisite tools, including a screening process with sub-project assessment 
forms and guidelines for mitigating impacts; and (iii) integrate environmental 
considerations into each phase of the sub-project cycle. Apart from the formal disclosure, 
the contents of these documents will be disseminated in Maputo through a series of 
stakeholder workshops and both frameworks and their screening processes will be 
integrated into the Operational Manual of the project.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As the program activities are small, the project does not foresee any long term or 
irreversible environmental damage caused by these activities. In any case precausive 
measures are taken through the preparation of the framework documents which will 
screen every sub- project on their social and environmental merits to ascertain that any 
indirect impact will be appropriately captured and addressed in a timely fashion.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will be managed within the Municipal Council of Maputo (CMM). This is 
not the first time that the CMM manages funds from a World Bank project. Maputo is 
one of the eight pilot municipalities under the Municipal Development Program (MDP), 
and as such is familiar with World Bank safeguards policies. However, weak capacity 
was recognized as an obstacle to ensuring implementation of the safeguards 
recommendations under MDP. For this reason, and to build the institutional and human 
resources capacity for environmental management at the level of the Municipality, the 
CMM has identified a person responsible for environmental safeguards. With assistance 
from the World Bank safeguards specialist, the CMM contracted consultants under the 
PPF to prepare the ESMF and RPF that were disclosed in-country on 21 October and in 
InfoShop on 24 October. Further revisions may be necessary during implementation, 
particularly as larger infrastructure projects will need specific studies to be conducted for 
phase II. The objective of the program is to build the City's institutional capacity to 
undertake various functions over the long term, including environmental safeguards. The 
Capacity Building required for environmental management is part of the bigger capacity 
building framework, which will be funded by the project. As indicated below, a budget 
will be set aside to honor the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed between 
MICOA and the Municipality of Maputo to ensure their participation in the 
implementation of the ESMF and to also ensure that the required institutional and human 
resources capacities are built for sustainable environmental management of the City of 
Maputo.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Intra- and interdepartmental coordination will be overseen by the GDEI. The GDEI will 
also be responsible for ensuring compliance concerning public consultation and 
disclosure. A local communication strategy stressing awareness-raising activities about 
the program and resettlement procedures and entitlements should be carried out 
throughout preparation and implementation of resettlement in order to promote dialogue 
and to reduce misunderstandings and grievances. Communities will be involved in 
awareness-raising and training concerning their rights and obligations; how to obtain 
legal advice and representation, and how to seek redress against what they regard as 
Page  6
unfair practices. Training for technical personnel from the CMM, the district CC 
Resettlement Working Group members and local leaders in conflict management can 
assist in minimizing the negative impact of conflicts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  7
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Katherine Kuper 
11/01/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
11/01/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
11/01/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
11/01/2006 
Comments:   
