Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC2842
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P104566 
Project Name:  Water Services and Institutional Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  N. Jane Walker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to increase access to water in the cities of 
Beira, Nampula, Quelimane, and Pemba under the delegated management framework and 
an institutional and regulatory framework established for smaller cities and towns.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance the following three components: (A) investments and continuing 
support in the four cities under the responsibility of FIPAG; (B) capacity building, 
institutional and operational support to DNA for AMU, PWBs, and SWAp; and, (C) 
operational support to CRA with respect to expanded regulatory responsibility for smaller 
towns and cities.  
 
Component A: Investments and continuing support in 4 Cities under the responsibility 
of FIPAG (US$22 million). Under component A, the project will support an 
improvement of water supply access from the construction of approximately 370 
kilometers  of network resulting in 10,000 new connections in the four cities. These 
investments will take advantage of the increased production capacity achieved under 
NWDP II and will improve service coverage in the FIPAG towns. Specifically, this will:  
(a) expand and extend the networks and distribution through limited investments in small 
Page  2
works in Pemba, Nampula, Quelimane, and Beira, operated and managed by a private 
operator; (b) provide physical investments to improve the operational efficiency in the 
urban cities currently under the responsibility of FIPAG; and (c) support follow-on 
private operator contracts in the four cities to consolidate gains under NWDP II.  
 
Component B: Capacity building, institutional and operational support to DNA (US$5.5 
million). Component B is divided into 2 sub-components- Component B1 and B2.  Under 
Component B1, small towns and cities will be piloted with the creation of an Asset 
Management Unit (AMU) under DNA. The AMU is modeled on the delegated 
management model in that it will be empowered to manage assets, plan and oversee the 
execution of investments, and engage third party operators in smaller cities and towns. 
The AMU will facilitate the creation of Provincial Water Boards (PWBs). Both the AMU 
and the PWBs will be supported under the project with capacity building, institutional 
support, and operational costs. The AMU will be closely linked with investment funding 
under the proposed MCC project and therefore will be piloted in the four Northern 
provinces. The pilot provinces will be selected from Zambezia, Cabo Delgado, Niassa 
and Nampula.  Eventually it is expected that the model will be rolled out nation wide 
once the new institutions are well established.  
 
Specifically, sub-component B1 will establish and operationalize the AMU and PWBs.  
This component will: (a) adapt the proven sustainable institutional and regulatory 
modalities for secondary cities under an AMU  based on the delegated management 
model proven in the experience from FIPAG cities where FIPAG can act as mentor; (b) 
ensure that the appropriate regulatory, policy, and institutional framework will be 
developed and tested as the delegated management model is scaled up via pilot projects; 
(c) build the capacity of the sector players, including DNA, district and local 
governments, municipalities, public and private sector, and small scale providers; (d) 
promote small scale private sector participation in service delivery; and, (e) provide 
operational subsidies during the transition period to support O&M.  
 
Component B2 will support the preparation of the SWAp in the rural water sub-sector.  
The project will co-ordinate with other donors to provide capacity building and 
institutional support with respect to development of the SWAp approach for rural areas - 
small piped and non-piped systems. The African Development Bank, among other 
donors, is supporting this effort significantly.  The Bank's value added will be to provide 
support in  preparing the medium-term expenditure framework  to facilitate  the 
implementation of the sector policy and, to the extent possible,  support the preparation of 
common guidelines for all future investments in the sector regardless of the source of 
financing.  
 
Sub-component B2 will provide for the implementation of Sector Policy via support to 
the   preparation of the SWAp. This will: (a) provide resources to complement a donor-
wide initiative lead by DNA to develop a strategy to scale up the demand driven 
community participatory model for village piped systems and non-piped systems; and, (b) 
complement, as necessary, measures already underway to mitigate the risks from 
HIV/AIDS in DNA (see Annex 14 for further elaboration on DNA and FIPAG 
HIV/AIDS Policy).  
Page  3
Component C:  Capacity, Institutional and operational support to CRA (US$2.5 
million). Under component C, the project will support the development of regulatory 
frameworks to cover the smaller towns and cities as the AMU is set-up and expanded via 
the PWBs.  The project will continue operating cost support to CRA as well as TA, and 
additional operating support at provincial level as the new regulatory models are rolled-
out to meet the needs of these new agencies.  This component will:  (a) provide resources 
to complement CRA's expanding work on extending regulatory frameworks and 
oversight to smaller cities and towns; and, (b) provide continuing operational support, 
capacity building, and technical assistance to CRA.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Four cities: Beira, Nampula, Quelimane, and Pemba   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will finance network extensions, and civil works will be comprised of trench 
excavations, laying of pipes and accessories, and back-filling including testing and 
commissioning.   Environmental and social safeguards issues are expected to be minor 
and limited to construction impacts and, perhaps, some land or right of way acquisition.  
The likelihood of large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts is considered to be 
nil.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Final design of the network extensions will consider alternative alignments to avoid or 
minimize adverse environmental and social impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
FIPAG has a robust Environmental Management System (EMS), and has prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  FIPAG has a well-developed capacity, and 
demonstrated track record, for employing these instruments to avoid or minimize adverse 
safeguards issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the municipal authorities, and neighborhood leaders and residents, 
where the network extensions will be constructed.  The former were consulted in 
preparing the RPF.  The EMS and RPF were disclosed through FIPAG offices and 
Infoshop. Final design of the extensions, and the construction plan and schedule, will be 
discussed and agreed with all stakeholders before they are finalized.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/02/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/02/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/02/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  5
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms N. Jane Walker 
04/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
04/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
04/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
04/10/2007 
Comments:   
