Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/07/2006 
Report No.:  AC2200
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P093165 
Project Name:  Market led Smallholder Development in the Zambezi Valley 
Task Team Leader:  Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Es 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P098040 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);Animal production 
(20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Crops (20%);Agricultural extension and research 
(20%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income generation (S);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.46 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to increase the income of smallholder farmers 
in selected districts of the Zambezi Valley region of central Mozambique. Increased 
incomes will be achieved not only by direct support to smallholder groups and other 
supply chain participants, but also through the strengthening of local level capacity to 
undertake and manage service delivery within the context of the GoM decentralization 
policy. The Global Environment Objective is to limit land degradation and improved 
ecosystem’s resilience towards climate change.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be closely integrated with ongoing decentralization policies and strongly 
district focused. It will achieve its objective of increasing the incomes of smallholder 
farmers within the project area through three technical components, with a fourth 
component dedicated to management, coordination and monitoring. The three technical 
components are:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Community Group Organization and Local Institutional Strengthening 
(Total US$8.5 million, IDA 
–
US$7.4 million, GEF – US$1.1 million) comprising: (a) 
community based organization capacity development; (b) rural financial services, and; (c) 
district capacity development. Expenditures under this component include consultancy 
services and training, goods and equipment and modest amount of civil works.  
 
Component 1 encompasses the mobilization and support of groups formed of small 
producers and other supply chain participants in such areas as marketing, savings and 
credit, and agribusiness development, as well as the strengthening of district level 
agricultural institutions and the planning processes which they contribute to.  
 
A
primarily group-based approach to smallholder farmer and supply chain participant 
outreach is dictated by the current lack of outreach capacity for the target group at district 
level, rendering the support of development activities through individual farmers 
infeasible. Furthermore, the lengthy civil conflict which was at its most intense in the 
project area, and the major dislocation of population and abandonment of settlements 
which occurred as a result, have resulted in low levels of social coherence and 
collaboration. Given the low resource endowments of the vast majority of the target 
group, collaborative responses to development constraints and priorities is considered 
essential, and will require a significant increase in social capital. The component 
therefore will focus on ‘empowerment’, through support for the mobilization and 
strengthening of common interest groups, as well as on building capacity of local 
government and non-government organizations to sustain and contribute to the needs of 
such groups. This will include the mainstreaming of agricultural and environmental needs 
(including through community land use planning) within the recently established district 
participatory planning process.  
 
The establishment of savings and loans groups (SLGs) will, in particular, be supported. 
SLGs, may evolve from other common interest groups, or be an initial focus of group 
activity. With the assistance of the project, they are expected to eventually develop into 
local savings unions, or apex institutions. In addition, the project will promote and 
facilitate the expansion of financial institutions (that have adequate liquidity) into the 
project area, through the provision of technical assistance and start up costs.    
 
The key inputs in this component will be provided through (a) a group promotion 
service provider, and (b) a rural financial services development provider. Inputs will 
include training and support services to providers, district level government agencies and 
financial institutions. The key output will be functioning common interest groups, 
including SLGs which are able to define their own needs and priorities and act upon 
them, as well as a greater capacity among local institutions to support such groups.  
 
Component 2: Agricultural Production and Marketing Development (Total US$6.3 
million, IDA – US$3.2 million, GEF – US$3.1 million) comprising: (a) production 
(rainfed and irrigated) and post-harvest extension services; (b) agribusiness and market 
development, and; (c) studies, applied research and training.  
Page  3
This component provides technical support for broad-based sustainable agricultural 
development, including not only direct outreach to groups and agribusiness participants 
in production, marketing and other supply chain elements, but also encompassing 
awareness campaigns and education, applied research, demonstrations, training, natural 
resource management and the expansion of local extension capacity.  
 
Although it is fully recognized that group formation can not occur in isolation, and must 
be closely tied to common needs and priorities among group members, it is also 
recognized that the response to those needs would require a technical base that might be 
best provided on a long term basis through the existing district agricultural network, 
although this network will require significant strengthening. Extension staff will work 
with community based groups to identify and develop improved approaches to increased 
productivity, diversification, sustainable natural resource management and other 
agriculturally related income generation activities. Additionally they will ensure that 
related infrastructure needs are taken into account in district planning processes. A strong 
emphasis will be placed on agribusiness and market development to ensure linkage of 
participatory groups to broader opportunities. Support will also be provided for 
demonstrations, applied research, awareness campaigns and outreach (radio and cell 
phone) to provide impetus for the adoption of improved technologies and practices. 
Additionally, technical support will be provided to ensure sustainable management of 
land and water management through agroforestry and soil conservation and alternate 
energy sources.  
 
The key inputs under this component will be the strengthening and expansion of district 
extension services, supported by short term advisors on specific production, marketing, 
agribusiness and natural resources management aspects. The key output will be groups 
actively engaged in the validation and adoption of improved technologies and entering 
into closer links with other supply chain participants.  
 
Component 3: Community Agricultural and Environmental Investment Fund (Total 
US$9.0 million, IDA 
–
US$7.0 million, GEF – US$2.0 million) comprising the following 
windows: (a) agriculturally related infrastructure; (b) small-scale agricultural investment, 
and; (c) natural resources management  
 
The Fund will operate under a demand driven approach linked with the participatory 
district planning process and would provide resources for identified priorities in 
agriculturally related infrastructure, small scale investment and improved natural 
resources management. Anticipated subproject investments include, for example: farm 
power, farm equipment and implements, small tributary dams and irrigation schemes and 
facilities, post-harvest and handling equipment and means, technology and marketing at 
agro-enterprise level; and handling, transportation, storage and processing assets 
improvements.  Small-scale agriculture and commercial farming projects may involve 
strengthening existing practices, introducing new and perhaps exotic crops, or crop 
diversification or intensification with new farming systems.  They may also assist people 
move from shifting to settled agriculture, from subsistence to cash cropping, and/or from 
Page  4
labour-intensive to mechanized farming.  Land clearing and preparation, perhaps of 
marginal lands, may be required, as well as new water supply and management systems.  
 
No formal financial institutions currently operate within the project area, and very few 
informal financial associations, although this lack will be addressed during the project 
implementation period (Component 1). In addition, district administrations have only 
very limited resources to develop and maintain infrastructure, particularly infrastructure 
of priority for agricultural production. Under these circumstances, access to investment 
resources and support infrastructure is a key limiting factor for many smallholder 
producers. Additional resources have been made available to target districts in recent 
years under the current decentralization efforts of GOM, as well as through DPFP local 
investment grants. However these resources are not generally targeted at agriculture. The 
third component therefore aims to supplement these resources with funds directed 
specifically at agricultural development needs, including agriculturally related 
infrastructure, small-scale investments and improved management of natural resources.  
 
The key inputs under this component will be financial resources and an adequate 
associated support system, while the key outputs will comprise increased levels of 
investment both at smallholder and small agribusiness enterprise level, and key 
infrastructure investments that address needs critical to sector performance.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
((Total US$3.2 million; IDA 
–
US$2.9 million; GEF – US$0.3 million).  This component 
will include technical supervision and coordination, financial management and work plan 
and reporting functions at district, provincial and national levels. The component will be 
congruent, as far as is feasible, with government policies on decentralization and will 
largely utilize public sector structures and staff for management roles as well as existing 
inter-ministerial national and provincial steering committees established under DPFP. 
Additional financial staff will be recruited and integrated into relevant government 
structures at all levels. In addition, two key technical positions will be the recruited as 
project staff; a District Facilitator in each district and a Field Management Advisor who 
will work on a project-wide basis.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in two phases across five districts within the Zambezi 
Valley region of Central Mozambique over a six year period. The project would 
commence implementation with two adjoining districts; Mutarara, Tete province and 
Morrumbala, Zambezia Province. A further three districts are proposed for inclusion 
during the second year of implementation. Preliminary selection of the remaining three 
districts has identified Mopeia in Zambezia province and Maringue and Chemba in 
Sofala Province, although these could be modified during the initial stage of 
implementation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Page  5
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is expected to cause no or limited environmental impacts that would be local 
and readily managed using known methods. OP4.01 is triggered to ensure that these 
methods are applied as needed.  Measures to avoid or minimize adverse environmental 
effects from project investments, including changes to agricultural practices and the use 
of agricultural chemicals, are being included in an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) required under OP4.01.  
 
No displacement or land acquisition is foreseen in this project.  However, because 
component 3 (Community Agricultural and Environmental Investment Fund) aims at 
developing and sustaining the basis of production through small scale investments, 
including water and land based small investments and in the area of agribusiness which 
might require either land acquisition and/or displacement of people, it has been decided 
to trigger OP/BP 4.12 related to Involuntary Resettlement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As specific investments are considered during implementation, alternatives will be 
examined as needed to avoid or minimize adverse environmental and social impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Because the precise nature and location of subproject investments will only be 
determined during project implementation, an ESMF and RPF are being prepared to 
Page  6
address safeguards policy issues as they are identified.  Borrower capacity to address 
these issues, especially at the local level, is weak, so both the ESMF and RPF will specify 
substantial training and capacity building. Review and approval of the sub-projects will 
be carried out by the District Technical Teams (DTT) and District Facilitators (DF), 
together with other technical assistance that may be necessary.  These people will be 
trained and provided with technical assistance to carry out their responsibilities under the 
ESMF and RPF.  Adequate funds will be provided under the project for the training, 
technical assistance and studies as required.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are the local communities, the local authorities and NGOs 
operating locally and regionally. During preparation of the project a number of 
stakeholder discussions were carried out in the districts of Muturara and Morrumbala by 
the study team in January 2006. Subsequent workshops will be held in March 2006 led by  
the Department of Rural Development in the two districts and provincial capitals of Tete 
and Zambezia with all stakeholders.   Stakeholder consultation will be integral to the 
identification, preparation, approval and implementation of subproject investments.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/05/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/05/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/05/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Frank Fulgence K. Byamugisha 
 
Comments:   
