Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1994 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/30/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P096332 
Project Name: Maputo Urban Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Katherine Kuper 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 21, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (70%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (20%);Solid waste management (10%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P);Municipal finance (P);Access 
to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of this project is to increase the coverage and quality of Maputo Mu
nicipality’s 
services to its citizens through strengthening the institutionaland financial capacity of the City 
Council.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The team proposes that the lending instrument be an Adaptable Program Loan (APL), with a first 
phase of 3 years and second phase of 5 years, to be based on clear triggers agreed for moving to 
phase II.  
 
The first phase (3 years) will focus on:  
 
•
institutional restructuring, capacity building and fundamental reforms in general financial 
management and revenue generation and collection in particular.  
 
•
improved governance through increased responsiveness and transparency towardscitizens  
Page  2
•
low cost, quick win infrastructure and service delivery improvements  
 
•
planning for Phase II larger infrastructure and service delivery investments  
 
•
mostly IDA & bilateral financing with some private sector involvement where possible  
 
•
establishment of a framework and testing systems for contracting out, and other public private 
partnerships  
 
The second phase (5 years) will focus on:  
 
•
consolidation of first phase reforms by the subsequently elected municipal assembly and 
mayor  
 
•
investment in infrastructure and service delivery improvements on larger scale subject to 
financial viability (especially sustainability) and funds leveraged  
 
•
greater involvement of non-IDA financing due to lower risk  
 
Phase I: Maputo Institutional and Financial Reform  
 
Component A. Institutional & Organizational Development  (approx. $5 million)  
 
Sub-component A.1: Structural Reform and Decentralization  
 
This sub-component will aim to rationalize CMM’s internal processes for servicedelivery by (a) 
improving coordination with other public sector actors; (b) simplifying CMM’s organizational 
structure and administrative procedures; (c) decentralizing some planning and management 
functions to sub-municipal levels; and (d) increasing the number and effectiveness of 
partnerships with non-governmental actors.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Institutional Strengthening  
 
This sub-component will aim to improve the performance of CMM’s functional units by: (a) 
improving human resource management systems; (b) training and capacity building of staff; (c) 
enhancing information systems and internal coordination; and, (d) improving working conditions 
for staff, including a work plan for addressing HIV/AIDS in the workplace.  
 
Sub-component A.3: Improving Governance  
 
This component will aim to increase CMM’s responsiveness and transparency to its citizens by: 
(a) significantly enhancing its communications with citizens; (b) strengthening the interaction of 
the citizens with the neighborhood structures, municipal district administrations and the 
Municipal Assembly; (c) increasing the engagement of citizens in the neighborhood activities 
themselves; (d) making CMM more responsive to communities’ expressed priorities and 
concerns; and (e) increasing transparency in the allocation and utilization of city resources and 
initiating participatory budgeting.  
 
Component B. Municipal Finance (approx. $5 million)  
 
Sub-component B.1. Revenues  
 
The revenue sub-component consists of a number of activities that will be designed to improve 
local revenue generation. These activities include improvements in the collection of local taxes 
and fees, and strengthening the municipal capacity to attract community contributions, grants, 
credits and other external revenues. In terms of own-source revenues, the priority is to strengthen 
Page  3
the property tax system, as currently only 10 percent of the properties are taxed, so there is great 
potential to increase revenues from this source. Another important activity is engagement with 
the central government in respect of improvements in intergovernmental fiscal relations to ensure 
the timely and transparent distribution of central transfers and a fair and efficient allocation of 
tax and expenditure functions among tiers of government.  
 
Sub-component B.2. Financial and Asset Management  
 
The financial and asset management sub-component consists of a number of activities related to 
the improvement of planning, execution, and control of the municipal budget. Planning activities 
include improvements in budget preparation, such as an incremental move from an input-based 
to a results-oriented budget. In terms of internal control activities, these consist in the design of 
adequate accounting and control systems. Another major activity is the construction of a 
comprehensive system of asset management that allows the municipality to have a complete 
inventory of its assets and to capture the rents that they generate. All these expenditure and 
revenue related activities require the support of appropriate information technologies and trained 
and qualified personnel.  
 
Component C. Improved Service Delivery (approx. $10 million)  
 
This component will support urban planning and targeted investments to improve critical urban 
services. It is divided into two subcomponents:  
 
Sub-Component C1 
–
Planning and Management of the Urban Space  
 
This subcomponent will promote the use of GIS and the development of spatial development 
and sectoral master-plans for effective urban planning as follows.:  
 
C1.1 – Implementation of a GIS system for urban and peri-urban areas, linking land use 
planning and infrastructure improvements with the land and tax registries.  
 
C1.2 –  Preparation of Sectoral Masterplans, Local Spatial Development Plans and Investment 
Projects in such sectors as Erosion Management, Drainage, Transport and Road Rehabilitation, 
Markets, Parks and Cemeteries  
 
C1.2 – Revision of the municipal by-laws regarding zoning, land use and construction 
licensing.  
 
Sub-Component C2 – Improvements in Service Delivery in Priority Sectors  
 
This subcomponent will finance small physical investments selected in order to meet priority 
needs and achieve the municipality’s service delivery improvement targets in three sectors:  
 
C2.1 – Rehabilitation of Roads and Drainage:  
 
•
Investments in drainage and road improvement works especially those in peri-urban areas 
which provide critical access routes for public transport and solid waste collection;  
 
•
Spot improvements at critical points in the drainage network in order to mitigate periodic 
flooding in low elevation and highly populous parts of the city.;  
 
C2.2 – Urban Environmental Management :  
 
•
Improvement of the municipal landfill through small works and equipment purchases;  
 
•
Improvement of solid waste removal through additional equipment and vehicles especially 
those adapted to the peri-urban environment;  
Page  4
•
Design studies and specifications for the construction of small new cemeteries in order to 
meet urgent demand (largely driven by HIV/AIDS);  
 
•
Rehabilitation and improvement of coastal barriers and erosion control structures  
 
C2.3 – Enhanced Public Security  
 
•
Improvement of street lighting especially in low-income peri-urban settlements (in partnership 
with EDM)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
During Phase I the project will exclusively cover the municipality of Maputo in Mozambique, 
which has an area of approximately 300km2 and a population of 1.3 million.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be managed within the Municipal Council of Maputo (CMM). This is not the 
first time that the CMM manages funds from a World Bank project. Maputo is one of the eight 
pilot municipalities under the Municipal Development Program (MDP), and as such is familiar 
with World Bank safeguards policies. However, weak or non-existent capacity was recognized as 
a
major obstacle to ensuring implementation of the safeguards recommendations under MDP. 
For this reason, and to build the institutional and human resources capacity for environmental 
management at the level of the Municipality, the CMM will identify a person responsible for 
environmental safeguards. With assistance from the World Bank safeguards specialist, the CMM 
will contract consultants under the PPF to conduct all the required revisions of the MDP 
documents and provide the necessary training. This will continue as necessary during 
implementation, particularly as larger infrastructure projects will need specific studies to be 
conducted for phase II. The objective of the program is to build the City’s institutional capacity 
to undertake various functions over the long term, including environmental safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Phase I small investments in service delivery (drainage, road rehabilitation, solid waste 
management, cemeteries and lighting) may trigger environmental safeguards. Phase II likely to 
trigger since larger investments likely.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Investments in phase I will not trigger resettlement but may be appropriate in Phase II.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  5
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
While it is required to prepare the safeguard instruments for a categ
ory B “project,” the WB 
safeguard specialist has agreed that the proposed program could, instead of preparing new 
documents, revise the existing Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which have been prepared for the Municipal 
Development Program (MDP) and adjust the program description and objectives to suit the 
new Program and use the documents for disclosure in country and at InfoShop. These 
documents will be reviewed by the World Bank safeguards specialist during preparation. 
Most of the physical investments types have already been implemented under MDP, except 
for new cemeteries which will not involve any involuntary resettlement. With this process of 
revising MDP documents the program will meet the safeguards requirements and appraisal 
can be approved. In the second phase of the APL, when larger scale investments in 
infrastructure and service delivery improvements are expected to take in place, additional 
studies may be needed if other safeguards are triggered. The Sector Managing Unit has 
agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Katherine Kuper 
01/24/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/24/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
01/24/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
