Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/06/2006 
Report No.:  AC2466
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P080819 
Project Name:  Nepal Poverty Alleviation Fund II Supplemental 
Task Team Leader:  Geeta Sethi 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: November 2, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Learning and 
Innovation Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (26%);Primary education (26%);Roads and highways 
(26%);Other social services (18%);Micro- and SME finance (4%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural markets (S);Social risk mitigation (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to improve the livelihoods of the rural poor and 
socially excluded in Nepal by: (i) creating infrastructure, employment and income 
generating opportunities in the most depressed villages and habitations; (ii) enhancing the 
capacity of local governments, particularly Village Development Committees (VDCs) to 
provide and sustain services for poor and socially excluded groups; and (iii) creating an 
instrument where donors can come together in a coordinated manner and under 
government's oversight to target programs to the rural poor. Government of Nepal's 
(GON) focus on these development objectives--poverty and social exclusion--will also 
help strengthen the foundation for lasting peace in Nepal.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would finance the following activities:  
 
(a)  
Administration of the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF). The project would finance 
PAF staff, establishment and operating expenses including financial, procurement and 
environmental management and audits.  
 
(b)  
Income Generating Sub-projects Targeted to the Poorest and Excluded Groups: 
Examples include micro-irrigation, micro-enterprises, land productivity, animal 
Page  2
husbandry, and others. The Credit would provide matching grants for income generating 
activities to be decided on by the groups in poor communities. Social organizations (such 
as NGOs) would be recruited to work with these community groups to help them develop 
sub-project proposals.  
 
(c)  
 
Small Scale Village and Community Infrastructure: Examples include 
engineered trails, footbridges, schools, clinics and other public infrastructure of small 
scale that can be managed by community groups or VDCs. Preference would be given to 
infrastructure in VDC development plans where they exist and where the VDC is willing 
to contribute a share from its own resources.  Requirements for approval would be that 
the employment created would benefit the poorest populations, and that a credible 
operations and maintenance plan has been prepared.  
 
(d)  
Capacity Building: This would include four sub-components:  
 
(i) Mobilization of Community Groups: Support Organizations (SOs) and other 
organizations would be selected to work in target areas to disseminate information about 
the project, mobilize the community groups and work with them in developing the 
subproject proposals. Where local governments are functioning, SOs would also liaise 
with them to ensure that the proposed infrastructure projects fit into VDC's plan and 
priorities.  
 
ii) Capacity Building for Local Governments: This would focus on building capacity on 
financial management, participatory budgeting, social issues, and other relevant topics for 
local development, as well as on the rules of operation of the PAF to enable local 
governments to assist groups and communities to access PAF resources.  
 
(iii) Support to Micro-finance Intermediaries: While PAF would not finance micro-
lending, it would finance capacity building for micro-finance intermediaries.  
 
(iv) Information, Monitoring and Evaluation: This would include: (a) dissemination of 
information about the project and other government programs; (b) a standard 
management information system (MIS); (c) structured field visits to assess impact; (d) 
beneficiary assessments; and (e) impact assessment surveys starting with a baseline 
during the project's early phase.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The pilot project was implemented in six districts ranking very low in Human 
Development Index (HDI). Additional financing will be extended to 19 additional 
districts also ranking very low in HDI.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The nature and scale of the activities supported by PAF are not likely to cause large scale, 
significant or irreversible environmental or social impacts.  
 
Although the project will support multiple small investments, cumulative impacts 
attributable to the project will be difficult to distinguish from the effects of other 
unrelated local development activities. It will be ensured that subproject selection and 
design take into account local environmental conditions, and the project will track 
cumulative impacts and environmental concerns.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The community-driven development approach will ensure that alternatives will be 
considered as part of the process of sub-project selection and design.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
With Bank guidance, the government has already prepared a Vulnerable Community 
Development Plan (VCDP) that includes a section on Indigenous People (IP). The 
preparation of the VCDP involved assessing whether the project might cause any adverse 
impacts on IP groups and if any adverse impacts are identified, developing ways to 
mitigate them. However, no adverse impacts are expected so the VCDP mainly focused 
on developing ways to insure that the benefits of the PAF are equally accessible to IP 
groups-- and that this can be carefully monitored. Learning from other VCDPs developed 
for Nepal, the VCDP prepared for PAF also includes provisions to ensure that key 
documents are translated into the major IP languages, that the communication strategy for 
the project includes specific efforts to reach IP groups (through Radio, etc.) and that the 
Page  4
NGOs assisting communities to prepare their proposals and implement projects also 
include field staff fluent in IP languages of the specific area where they are active.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations have been  held with communities, NGOs, Government officials including 
line agencies, academics and independent researchers.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/24/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/24/2004 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  5
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Geeta Sethi 
02/12/2004 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
02/23/2004 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yuka Makino 
02/23/2004 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/23/2004 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Constance A. Bernard 
02/23/2004 
Comments:   
