Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/28/2007 
Report No.:  AC3010
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P099296 
Project Name:  Irrigation & Water Resources Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shyam Sundar Ranjitkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 28, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (75%);Agricultural extension and research (15%);Flood 
protection (5%);Roads and highways (5%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to: ?Improve and sustain irrigated agricultural 
productivity in selected irrigation commands and manage water resources efficiently 
through effective regulatory measures and harmonized water resources policy and acts.? 
This will be done through (a) irrigation infrastructure development and improvement 
including promotion of micro-irrigation facilities for marginal and disadvantaged groups 
of farmers; (b) completion and consolidation of irrigation management transfer reforms; 
and (c) institutional and policy support for better water management and productivity. 
The realization of these objectives will be measured by: (1) improvement in indicators of 
irrigation service delivery; (2) greater collection and more effective use of water charges 
by WUAs; and (3) increase in farm income through improvements in crop yield, cropping 
intensity and diversification into higher value crops.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project comprises of the following components:  
 
Page  2
Component A: Irrigation Infrastructure Development and Improvement (US$53.4 
million).  Under this component support will be provided for improved irrigation water 
delivery to about 50,000 ha through rehabilitation and improvement of about 193 surface 
water schemes in the mountains, hills and terai areas and development of about 67 
groundwater schemes in the terai areas of the country over the life of the project. Of this 
50 surface schemes and 3 groundwater schemes will be implemented in year 1, and 143 
surface water schemes and 64 groundwater schemes in years 2 to5. The component will 
involve (a) physical rehabilitation and modernization of small and medium surface 
irrigation FMIS in the mountains, hills and Terai; (b) develop and improve groundwater 
irrigation in the Terai using both electric and diesel power, (c) support complementary, 
demand-driven local infrastructure (e.g., water supply, micro-hydel, rural access) that 
enhances efficiency and productivity; and (d) on-farm investments in non-conventional 
irrigation technologies. The output of this component will be better irrigation services 
from existing and/or new schemes in the three Western regions (western, mid-western 
and far western regions), in the Mountains, Hills and Terai, which are or will be managed 
through Farmer Managed Irrigation System (FMIS). The principal target groups for this 
component are the medium and small farmers. The key inputs are physical rehabilitation 
of the primary and secondary irrigation infrastructure. The key outputs are higher water 
delivery efficiency and better water supply.  
 
Component B: Irrigation Management Transfer Reform (US$11.6  million).  The overall 
objective of this component is to provide improved arrangements and instruments for 
O&M of public irrigation schemes, completing and consolidating irrigation management 
transfer to Water User Associations (WUA) in the Terai. This component will turnover 
11 sub-systems of existing five public or Agency-Managed Irrigation Systems (AMIS), 
after essential improvements to WUAs. These systems include the Koshi West Gravity 
Scheme, Narayani Irrigation System, Mahakali Irrigation System, Kankai Irrigation 
System, and Sunsari Morang Irrigation System covering a gross command area of about 
72,500 ha.  
 
The first specific objective of this transfer is to empower the Water User's Association 
to take over the governance, management and maintenance of the irrigation system. The 
project assistance would focus on establishing sustainable and effective WUAs in all 
schemes, by formulating asset management plans and providing support for essential 
system improvement, which would have direct and positive impacts on irrigation 
performance, farm income, and rural employment. The component will provide improved 
arrangements and instruments for O&M, and complete and consolidate irrigation water 
management transfer to the WUAs. The management transfer would be considered 
complete with the beneficiary take-over of functions of operation and maintenance and 
management with the exception of a few defined activities that require higher levels of 
technical skill, such as the operation and maintenance of headworks and main canal 
systems, which will be performed by the government. It would also support (a) essential 
system improvement of the schemes to be transferred (b) transfer management to the 
beneficiary WUAs partially or completely in accordance with their capacity, (c) establish 
sustainable and effective WUAs through training courses developed for them, (d) 
institutionalize the process of transferring O&M responsibility to WUAs and help 
Page  3
prepare/implement an Asset Management Plan that sets priorities for rehabilitation and 
maintenance, and (e) improve capacity of DOI to facilitate transfer and develop efficient 
institutional arrangements for investments in rehabilitation and maintenance (e.g., 
contracting and outsourcing).  
 
The second specific objective is irrigation service improvement covering all irrigation 
systems/schemes included in the component. The sub-components would involve (a) 
strengthening of fee collection by water user groups; (b) use of contractual arrangements 
to clearly specify the rights and obligations of DoI as the bulk water supplier and the 
users; (c) use of benchmarking for all public irrigation services; and (d) installation of 
water measuring devices for greater transparency and accountability. To achieve this, 
training and capacity building of DoI field staff and members of users groups will be 
undertaken and the DoI will be appropriately restructured for assuming new roles (such 
as inter-sectoral planning, control and legal enforcement, and groundwater management) 
after transferring irrigation services provision to WUAs.  
 
The key inputs will be capacity building and training for beneficiary takeover and 
management of tertiary irrigation infrastructure. The key outputs are higher water 
delivery efficiency and better availability of irrigation water.  
 
Component C: Institutional and Policy Support for Better Water Management and 
Productivity (US$3.4 million).  The output of this component will be the more 
streamlined and effective provision of water-management and irrigation-related services.  
 
The component would involve multi-tiered interventions to build up the relevant 
institutions. At the national level (i) within the Water and Energy Commission (WECS) 
an Apex Monitoring Committee to harmonize the national and sectoral policies related to 
water resources sector will be established, (ii) a Water Resources Information Center will 
be established at WECS to integrate and disseminate water related data and documents 
and to implement modern information technology commensurate with the institutional 
capacity in the country, (iii) a telemetric system for water availability and allocation, 
geared to facilitate operation of hydraulic infrastructure during floods and droughts and 
support water allocation on the basis of short and medium term flow forecasting will be 
implemented (iv) criteria & guidelines for techno-socioeconomic project clearance will 
be developed (v) a ?cell? that will develop a common platform where water and energy 
professionals of civil society, media professionals and government institutions can work 
together in playing a catalyst role in fostering bilateral and regional cooperation to 
support transboundary management of water and energy will be established, (vi) a new 
Nepalese Water Resource Policy will be prepared and approved, (vii) a National Water 
Resources Bill and draft amended related legislation will be prepared, and (vii) a capacity 
building program will be prepared and implemented. . Next, in the context of multiple 
water use, in selected river basins the component would involve: (ii) conducting legal and 
institutional studies to implement a system of formal access to water; and (iii) preparation 
of legal and technical instruments to resolve multiple water use and allocation issues in 
selected river basins for medium and long term irrigation development including 
hydropower generation possibilities; and (iv) implementation of telemetric systems to 
Page  4
provide information about water availability and use at different levels for planning and 
operation purposes. Finally, in selected irrigated schemes, it would involve: (v) updating 
of inventory of irrigation systems, census of its users and total water use; (vi) 
formalization and registration of present uses and water allocation arrangements for each 
user group; and (vii) establishment of effective and equitable regulations for water 
distribution among users in each system.  
 
The key inputs will be institution building, capacity development and training for better 
administration and macro management of the water resources. The key outputs will be 
good national data base for water resources, streamlined legal and administrative 
management of water resources and irrigation related services.  
 
Component D:   Integrated Crop and Water Management (US$6.9 million).  This 
component integrates the irrigation system rehabilitation and improved irrigation service 
provided through Components A and B with downstream agricultural activities to 
achieve the project objectives. It provides a package of modernized agriculture practices 
and institutional support for both on-farm and off-farm rural population towards 
achieving optimal level of agricultural production, reduction in rural poverty, 
enhancement of-farm and off-farm income and food security. The schemes will cover 
three agro-ecological zones i.e. the Mountains, Hills and Terai. Areas selected for 
groundwater development through STW and DTW will represent poverty pockets and 
areas with potential of higher income generation through production of high value crops 
as a result of groundwater irrigation.  
 
Integrated crop and water management (ICWM) will be implemented by the farmers 
themselves. To have the farmers adopt the new technology and to achieve their 
participation in operations and maintenance of the irrigation system, an intensive process 
of training and support need to be implemented over the period of the project. In the 
proposed process, both DOI and DOA will jointly coordinate their activities with the 
WUA which would include:  
 
(i) 
Promotion of better water-use and management practices and adoption/expansion 
of non- conventional irrigation technology usage (e.g. micro irrigation, drip irrigation, 
furrow bed planting, etc.)  
 
(ii) 
Introduction of site specific agronomic practices relevant to local needs and 
market opportunities;  
 
(iii) 
Provision of pre and post production support to small farmers and other non-
farming entities (e.g. landless, disadvantaged rural poor, women, etc.) in the form of 
small rural access infrastructure, improved availability of quality inputs,  cooperative 
processing and marketing, strengthening of supply chains, improved storage 
structures/handling practices, and efficient marketing information.  
 
The component involves the following sub-components (a) extension support for 
expanding agricultural output, more intensive use of irrigated land, crop diversification, 
Page  5
small scale fisheries, small ago-processing and marketing; (b) strengthening capacity for 
OFWM and agricultural services including strengthening of DOA/DOI field staff,  
WUAs/FGs and private service providers , (c) minor investment for diffusion of IWRM 
technology including modern irrigation tools for promotion of high yielding agriculture 
and (d) supporting small processing and marketing activities linking products to markets 
including establishing community seed banks, storage and processing facilities for high 
quality seeds, establishing small market yards and collection/sales centers for input and 
output marketing, constructing small farm to market roads and bridges, etc. The key 
inputs will be training, capacity building and structural support for integrated input-
output marketing. The key output would be increase in water use efficiency, production, 
productivity, small scale agricultural infrastructure and on-farm/off farm income, 
conservation and environmental improvement.  
 
A
Specific Investment Lending (SIL) (IDA Grant)is proposed to finance specific 
investments and achieve targeted changes in the organization, management and financing 
of the sector. The total project size is about US$70 million; of which the proposed Bank 
financing is for US$ 55 million. Besides Borrower?s contribution of US $ 10.00 million, 
the beneficiary community will contribute US $ 5.00 million.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project covers different parts of Nepal. Schemes under Component A and B will be 
located in the three administrative regions of Nepal, Western, mid-Western and far 
Western regions. The sub-projects will be scattered in forty different districts.  Irrigation 
systems which will be taken up for management transfer are located in different parts of 
the country.  
 
Farmer Managed Irrigation Systems (FMIS) proposed to be included under the project 
are small (<25 ha in Hills and <200 ha in Terai), medium (25-100 ha in Hills and 200-
2,000 ha in Terai) and large (500-1,000 ha in Hills and 2,000-5,000 ha in Terai) irrigation 
systems as defined in the Irrigation Policy 2003. FMIS are both old and new, most of 
these indigenous irrigation providers developed and managed by the farming community 
in Nepal. These FMIS manage 70 percent of the country's irrigated area of 1.1 million 
hectares and thus occupy special status in the national political and agricultural economy.  
 
The proposed project area exhibits the following attributes: a) high incidence of poverty; 
b) female illiteracy; c) high level of dalits and janajatis (indigenous communities) 
population; d) high level of non-working population. The preparatory studies identified 
constraints in improving agriculture productivity and some of these are: (i) continuation 
of traditional agricultural practices and consequent limited benefits from irrigated 
agriculture; (ii) limited exposure to emerging market; (iii) limited access to institutional 
credit, farm inputs and agricultural extension services; (iv) lack or poor leadership 
quality; (v) lack or inadequate representation of/participation by vulnerable groups in 
decision-making of irrigation organizations (though there may be good representation of 
one ethnic group in the WUA where they are in the sole majority). Poverty, illiteracy, 
landlessness/ low amount of the land holding,  limited access to the available agricultural 
Page  6
extension services (such as the improved seeds, fertilizers and improved farm practices, 
etc) have also been the constraining factors of their participation in the overall 
development process including the irrigation sector.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bilal H. Rahill (CESI2) 
Mr Mohamad Hasan (EACIF) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As part of project preparation, an integrated social and environmental assessment (ISEA) 
was undertaken covering sampled subprojects under Component A (Irrigation 
Infrastructure Development and Improvement) and Component B (Irrigation 
Management Transfer). This study also covered Component D (Irrigated Crop and Water 
Management) that may trigger environmental safeguard policies. Component C 
(Institutional and Policy Support for Better Management and Productivity) is not 
expected to trigger any safeguard policies.  
 
A
detailed analysis of safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project has been 
carried out as part of an Integrated Environmental and Social Assessment (IESA). The 
assessment reveals no large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse social and 
environmental impacts due to the proposed project interventions. However, depending on 
their exact location and type of activities involved, a few of the subprojects could cause 
minor negative social and environmental consequences. These may result from diversion 
of water, construction activities, disposal of construction wastes, upgrading such as 
widening canal or realigning some portion of canal alignment or slight change in the 
location of some parts (intake), use of chemical fertilizer and pesticides, pumping ground 
water, disposal of excess water, quality of water (arsenic in groundwater and silt content 
in surface water) etc. On subproject by subproject basis, one or more issues such as those 
mentioned above could trigger safeguard policy on social and environmental assessment.   
 
Page  7
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area. Though the project has triggered four safeguard policies as 
indicated in the previous section, the community-based approach to the project should 
help ensure that most of the issues are discussed and resolved within the community 
itself.  Moreover, the physical interventions of the project are limited and focused on 
rehabilitation of existing schemes. A screening framework included in the SEMF will 
exclude subprojects in which safeguard issues could be overly problematic (e.g. severe 
and irreversible impacts, large number of dispalcees, social conflicts with regard to 
encroachments).  The screening framework would also be used to assess the application 
of each safeguard policy for each subproject.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As indicated above, subprojects with major social and environmental adverse impacts 
would be excluded. Similarly, subprojects with more than 10 mtrs bund height will not be 
included under the project. Alternative designs and locations will be considered to avoid 
land acquisition and minimize adverse social impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The results of ISEA and stakeholders consultations provided input to develop a social and 
environmental screening framework to exclude subprojects with significant and/or 
irreversible adverse impacts as a result of the project. Based on the findings of the IESA 
and consultations held with project stakeholders, a Social and Environmental 
Management Framework (SEMF) ha been prepared which provides a good basis to 
respond to the environmental and social issues in a programmatic manner. SEMF 
includes an entitlement framework for resettlement of project affected people, strategies 
for consultation and to address the issues related to tribal, and women and institutional 
strengthening activities in relation to the social and environmental management of 
project. The SEMF describes the processes to ensure that environmental and social 
aspects are integrated in planning and implementing project activities at the sub-project 
level. Model social and environmental management plans have been prepared taking into 
account the respective framework and strategies for the key issues: Involuntary 
Resettlement, Pest Management, Indigenous and other Vulnerable Groups Development 
and Gender Development and Stakeholders Consultation. It also includes institutional 
design and detailed budget for executing these plans.  
 
The country has well established institutions dealing with aspects like engineering 
design, construction, training, research, and coordination mechanism etc.  The country is 
also familiar with the Bank?s social/environmental requirements, as the country has been 
engaged with the Bank funded projects in the recently completed National Irrigation 
Support Project in water sector, Road Maintenance and Development Project and RAIDP 
in the road sector. The project envisages strengthening institutional set up to address 
Page  8
social and environmental concerns under the project and provides for capacity building of 
the relevant institutions dealing with environmental and social issues in the sector.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the project include the beneficiaries of improved irrigation 
system, affected people and functionaries of Department of Irrigation and other line 
departments (specifically Agriculture, Rural Development), District Administartion and 
NGO/Civil Society. As part of project preparation and IESA study, the key stakeholders 
(including the affected people, indigenous people and other vulnerable groups) were 
consulted through interviews and groups discussions besides organizing stakeholders? 
consultation workshops at the district levels. The strategy prepared for the project 
envisages consultation with and involvement of the key stakeholders to continue through 
out the planning, implementing and monitoring project activities at the subproject level. 
The ISEA Report, SEMF and the model social and environmental management plans will 
be disclosed as per the Bank?s disclosure policy.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/28/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/28/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/28/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shyam Sundar Ranjitkar 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bilal H. Rahill 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohammed Hasan 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
 
Comments:   
