Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2250 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/18/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P100342 
Project Name: Avian Influenza Control Project 
Task Team Leader: Daniel M. Sellen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 5, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project???s goals and components would be aligned with the recently approved Global 
Program for Avian Influenza Control and Human Pandemic Preparedness and Response, which 
provides $500 million of funding in the form of a horizontal Adaptable Program Lending (APL).  
 
The overall objectives of the Project are to minimize the threat in Nepal posed to humans by 
HPAI infection and other zoonotic diseases by controlling such infections among domestic 
poultry and to prepare for, control, and respond to an influenza epidemic and other related 
infectious disease emergencies in humans.  These objectives will be achieved in three ways: (i) 
prevention; (ii) preparedness and planning; and (iii) response and containment.  If these goals are 
achieved, the proposed Project will reduce the burden of disease, the consequent economic 
losses, the risk of human infection and the loss of productivity attributable to human infections in 
Nepal and limit the spread to other countries as well.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Three components are proposed, in line with similar projects prepared recently: (i) animal health; 
(ii) human health; and (iii) public awareness and coordination support.  
Page  2
(a) 
Animal Health: This component will support national prevention and control strategies to 
cover Nepal???s needs in the short, medium, and long term.  It will support activities for: (i) 
enhancing avian flu prevention and preparedness activities; (ii) strengthening of veterinary 
services, disease surveillance, diagnostic capacity and applied research; (iii) strengthening avian 
flu control programs and outbreak containment plans, and improving bio-security in poultry 
production and trade.  This component will also provide resources for a Compensation Fund to 
compensate poultry owners for the loss of assets caused by mandatory culling of their birds.  The 
component would be implemented by the Department of Livestock (DoLS) in MoAC and, where 
appropriate, through its non-governmental implementing partners.  
 
(b) 
Human Health: This component aims to prevent a human influenza epidemic caused by 
HPAI, and in case this cannot be prevented, reduce its impact, through: (i) year-round 
surveillance; (ii) effective and accurate methods of diagnosis and treatment; (iii) social distance 
interventions; (iv) vaccines; (v) anti-viral drugs; and (vi) strengthened medical and pubic health 
services, including adequate laboratory capacity-building.  It will support activities for training 
health workers in the public and private sector on diagnosing and treating potential cases of 
HPAI, and counseling patients and their families.  It would help improve public health program 
planning and coordinating, strengthen the national public health surveillance system and enhance 
the health system capacity to deal with the threat of HPAI in a prompt and effective manner.  
This component would be implemented in close coordination with and as a part of the Nepal 
Health Sector Program, which is a sector-wide operation, envisaging concerted donor 
harmonization, specific sector reforms and results-based programming ??? though the financing 
of the component through the APL would be in addition to the Bank???s contribution to the 
sector-wide operation.  The component would be implemented by the Department of Health 
Services (DoHS) in MoHP and, where appropriate, through its non-governmental implementing 
partners.  
 
(c) 
Public Awareness and Coordination Support:  This component is designed to promote 
national awareness on the disease and improved coordination of the national preparedness plan.  
Information and communication activities to increase the attention and commitment of 
Government, the private sector and civil society organizations and raise awareness, knowledge, 
and understanding among the general population about the risk and potential impact of a 
pandemic, methods of self-protection against infection, sources of treatment.  Communication 
efforts would also be targeted to poultry farmers on ways of recognizing the signs and symptoms 
of bird flu, safe methods of disposing of infected birds and steps to protect themselves and their 
families.  This component will also support costs associated with project management and 
coordination and monitoring and evaluation.  This component will be jointly implemented by 
MoAC and MoHP, in consultation and coordination with the Ministry of Information and 
Communications.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project would be national in scope.   
 
E.  Borro
wer’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This capacity is quite limited, as indicated by a recent Environmental Capacity Assessment. 
However, there is some experience with World Bank projects in both Ministries involved.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bilal H. Rahill (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Management Plans will be prepared under the Animal Health and Human 
Health components and implemented with project support.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/01/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
In line with similar avian flu emergency operations, the EMP will be defined during the 
initial period of Project implementation.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel M. Sellen 
05/16/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/17/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
05/17/2006 
Comments:   
