Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/19/2007 
Report No.:  AC3038
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P105289 
Project Name:  NP Access to Financial Services Project 
Task Team Leader:  Aurora Ferrari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 28, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 4, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
27.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UN Development Programme 
3.00
3.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will assist in providing urban micro and small enterprises (MSEs), especially 
unbanked ones, and urban and rural low income households with increased access to 
formal financial services (credit, savings, etc.). This will be achieved by ensuring that 
participating Nepali financial institutions (banks, finance companies, MFIs) lend 
profitably to these market segments. The proposed project objectives are in line with the 
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Nepal (2004-2007), which is intended to ensure 
broad-based economic growth, social inclusion, governance and social sector 
development.   
 
3. Project Description 
In order to support a comprehensive reform of access to financial services, a USD 30 
million multi-donor project is being designed. To date UNCDF and UNDP have 
committed to support the project. The project consists of five closely interrelated 
components:  
 
(i) 
A technical assistance fund to strengthen the capacity of financial institutions to 
expand access to new underserved market segments and to carry out a financial literacy 
campaign (USD 14.3 million)  
Page  2
(ii) 
Technical assistance to support reforms of the legal/regulatory and supervisory 
framework for microfinance, and the implementation of a secured transactions registry 
(USD 3.2 million)  
 
(iii) 
A line of credit for financial institutions interested in serving urban MSE, 
especially previously unbanked ones (USD 10 million)  
 
(iv) 
Technical assistance to reform state-owned microfinance institutions, i.e., the 
Rural Self-Reliance Fund and the Regional Rural Development Banks (USD 1.5 million)  
 
(v) 
Technical assistance to fund a public information campaign, project 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation (USD 1 million)   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will potentially cover the whole country, although component (iii) will be 
limited to urban areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There is no likelihood of any adverse social impact in any of the project components and 
no likelihood of any adverse environmental impacts in components (i), (ii), (iv) and (v).  
The only component with a potential for environmental impact, albeit minor, is 
component (iii). It is expected that the vast majority of sub-projects financed under this 
component will have minor environmental impact, if at all, because: a) the focus of the 
component is on financing small and micro enterprises, especially in the area of trade and 
services, b) sub-loans amounts will not exceed Rs. 3 million, c) the project will not 
finance any activities listed in the IFC Exclusion List. Given the very limited potential for 
adverse environmental impacts of the projects financed under the credit line, it unlikely 
that any environmental licenses or approvals are required under the Environmental 
Page  3
Protection Act (1996) and Environmental Protection Regulations (1997) or the Industrial 
Enterprises Act (1982) and the Local self Governance Act (1999). Therefore, if no 
environmental licenses or approvals are required, there will be no environmental 
regulatory oversight provided for these projects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Screening, Appraisal and Management Framework (the Framework) 
has been prepared as a template to guide the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) to 
screen potential sub-projects for adverse environmental impact.  All sub-projects which 
have adverse environmental impacts will be subject to an environmental appraisal 
process and projects that have environmental impacts that require mitigation will be 
requested to prepare a simple Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The PFIs loan 
officers will be provided with the required training under the project to undertake the 
environmental screening. Conformation to the Framework is a pre-requisite for loan 
approval from the Credit Line.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The only component with a potential for environmental impact, albeit minor, is 
component (iii). In light of this the environmental management framework is being 
disclosed locally.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/18/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/19/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  4
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Aurora Ferrari 
06/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
06/19/2007 
Comments:   
