Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2762 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P095977 
Project Name: Road Sector Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Marianne Kilpatrick 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00
8.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
B.1.The Project Development Objective (PDO) is for the residents of beneficiary districts to 
utilize all-season road access to economic centers and social services. The project targets seven 
hill districts which currently have no all-season road access.  
 
B.2 The achievement of the project will be monitored by the following outcome indicators:  
 
(a) 
% increase in the number of people with all-season road access (20 minutes or 2 km);  
 
(b) 
% decrease in travel time to key economic centers and social services;  
 
(c) 
DOR to provide effective road infrastructure services to users (measured through user 
satisfaction survey);  
 
(d) 
The Roads Board is fully functional and provides effective and sustainable funding for 
road maintenance (x percent of maintenance funding covered through the Roads Board);  
 
(e) 
Improved Road Safety Measures developed and enforced (fatal accidents per vehicles 
kilometer does not increase or reduced by x%?); and  
 
(f) 
Kilometers of sealed road being maintained per annum  
 
Baseline and target values for the above indicators will be established by appraisal. In addition, 
intermediate/output indicators will be developed.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
C.1  The proposed project is part of a programmatic support to GON to assist it in implementing 
the PIP over the next ten years. The RSDP is intended as a fast track operation in order to 
support the ongoing peace process and to demonstrate real benefits to the most remote 
communities within a short period. As such, the project is modestly sized (allowing DOR to 
quickly meet the Bank?s readiness filter for appraisal) and will focus primarily on conflicted 
affected districts and upgrading existing roads. The RSDP (if successful) will be followed up 
with a much larger project, which will cover a wider spectrum of roads and interventions, 
including new construction in hill/mountain roads.  
 
C.2  The lending instrument proposed is a Sector Investment Lending (SIL). Adjustable 
Programmatic Lending was considered but rejected because of the uncertainties in the country 
and to maintain flexibility for Bank exit if security situations deteriorate. A SWAp approach was 
also considered given the availability of the PIP and good donor coordination, but was 
considered incompatible with the objectives of a fast track operation because it will take time to 
harmonize safeguard policies. However, the project will provide the necessary building blocks to 
move towards a SWAp in the next operation.  
 
Project Components  
 
C.3 Road Improvement Component (estimated cost: $30 million). This component will upgrade 
about 364 km of existing dry-season roads/tracks to all-season standard. The roads have been 
selected from a screening exercise from a pool of more than 1000 km of prioritized roads for 
which feasibility studies have been recently completed and are economically justifiable within 
the Priority Investment Plan Framework. These roads will connect five district headquarters fully 
and two district headquarters partially.  The improvement of these roads has been identified as 
having a significant impact for those affected by conflict and contributes to the ongoing 
development of the Strategic Road Network.  
 
C.4 Periodic Maintenance Component (Cost: 11.5 million, IDA share about $3.5million).  
Support for Department of Roads? (DOR) annual periodic maintenance project by leveraging 
Government of Nepal?s Road Board funding.  The project will provide 30% of the maintenance 
cost while 70% will come from the Government.  
 
C.5 
Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reform Component (Cost: US$3 million). This 
component will provide support to the Department of Roads (DOR), Roads Board, and the 
Ministry of Physical Planning and Works (MPPW) who oversees DOR to sustain and deepen 
previous institutional and policy development activities started in RMDP, as well as support new 
ones that have been identified by GON.  
 
(i) 
Implementation of the Institutional Strengthening and Organizational Reform Action 
Plan (ISORAP). The ISORAP has been already prepared under RMDP, and covers various 
aspects of organizational strengthening and capacity development for DOR including (a) Human 
Resource Development (HRD) Policies and Strategies, (b) Management Information System 
(MIS-IT) process and policies; (c) continue to improve DOR?s capacity in core areas, such as 
planning, procurement and project management capabilities;  
Page  3
(ii) 
Establishing a Road Asset Management System based on HDM-4 and GIS;  
 
(iii) 
Technical assistance (TA) for strengthening Roads Board functions; and  
 
(iv) 
TA to establish the potential for a Private-Public Partnership cell in MPPW to promote 
BOT-type infrastructure projects.  
 
C.6 ?Safe Roads? Component (Cost: about US$1 million). This component will provide support 
for improving road transport safety in Nepal, including (i) assessment of policies and 
institutional capacity for road transport safety, (ii) prepare a national road safety strategy and 
action plan, and (iii) create awareness and develop mitigation measures for HIV/AIDS associated 
with road transport and construction.  
 
C.7 PPF Advance, pre-investment studies and other Goods and Services (Cost: about US$3 
million). This component will support the refinancing of the PPF Advance and pre-investment 
studies for a follow up project, as well as other studies yet to be identified. These studies include 
the detail design for the road sections being considered as well as some traffic studies around 
Kathmandu.  
 
Implementation arrangements  
 
C.8 The DOR will be the implementing agency. The implementation of the project will follow 
the existing institutional arrangement in DOR and will be coordinated and monitored by the 
Deputy Director General (DDG), Foreign Cooperation Branch, and Department of Roads. All 
civil works will be procured on competitive basis using appropriate ICB and NCB contract 
packages following Nepal?s Procurement Law, which was recently enacted by the government 
(and has been accepted by the Bank for use in Bank projects). The project will also follow 'good 
practices' in road construction and management by supporting the employment of consultants to 
carry out appropriate design and supervision of construction works, and integrating 
environmental planning and social safeguards in project works. In order to ensure effective 
implementation and monitoring and control at field level, project field offices will be established 
for each road section and will be headed by field project manager. These offices will be 
adequately supported by required number of engineers and other staff and logistics.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Far-West, Mid- West and Eastern hilly regions of Nepal.  The roads and districts are given as 
follows:  
 
i) Road Khodpe Chainpur, 110 Kms., Baitadi & Bajhang Districts, Chainpur District HQ.  
 
ii) Road Baitadi (Tripurasundari)-Satbanj-Gokuleswore, 74 Kms., Baitadi & Darchula Districts, 
Patan & Darchula (partially)Districts HQ.  
 
iii) Road Surkhet- Kalikot, 135 Kms., Dailekh & Kalikot Districts, Manma & Jumla (partially) 
Districts HQ.  
 
iv)Road Sunkoshi- Okhaldhunga, 45 Kms., Okhaldhunga District/HQ   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
E.1  The Department of Roads (DOR) is the lead agency in planning and developing Strategic 
Road Network (SRN) in Nepal, and has long experience of implementing donor supported 
projects including World Bank supported projects. It is a well established department dealing 
Page  4
with technical aspects of road planning and development including engineering design, 
construction, and maintenance. EPA 1996 / EPR 1997 of GON provide basic legal framework 
for environmental assessment of development activities including roads. The GON/DOR is 
familiar with the Bank?s social/environmental requirements, as the country has been engaged 
with the Bank funded projects including RMDP and RAIDP in road sector.  The department has 
established a Geo-Environmental and Social Unit (GESU) to deal with environmental and social 
aspects of road: it has played important role in mainstreaming environmental consideration in 
road planning and development.  The department has developed several documents  such as 
manual and reference book for helping internalize environmental and social aspects, and also 
conducted training on bioengineering. However, the GESU?s performance is constrained by lack 
of clarity on responsibilities, coordination, and resources (human, financial and logistics). The 
unit at present suffers from frequent transfer of staff and shortage of expertise on social and 
environmental aspects. The unit needs strengthening and capacity building for improving social 
and environmental management works particularly in the areas of monitoring and ensuring 
compliance.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (SASES) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
GON environmental legislation requires, a full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for 
a
new SRN road where as an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) would be sufficient for 
upgrading or improvement of an existing SRN road.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
As part of SWRP & PIP study, the Department of Road/GON is preparing an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for use in road sector in Nepal: this ESMF, once 
finalized, can serve as environmental assessment at the TSDP Project level. However, each of 
the roads selected for funding under the proposed TSDP should be screened separately for 
potential adverse environmental impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
As part of SWRP & PIP study, the Department of Road/GON is preparing an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for use in road sector in Nepal: this ESMF, once 
finalized, can serve as environmental assessment at the TSDP Project level. However, each of 
the roads selected for funding under the proposed TSDP should be screened separately for 
potential adverse environmental impacts.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
To facilitate the mitigation and management of potential adverse social impacts, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the road sector in Nepal is 
currently being prepared by the Department of Roads/GON.  This Framework will be used to 
define the modalities for conducting social screening to assess potential impacts, recording 
voluntary land donations, as well as the institutional structure to support social impact 
management, including monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. Wherever possible alterative 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
designs and locations will be considered to avoid land acquisition and minimize adverse social 
impacts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Where minor road alignments widening or other improvements require small scale land 
acquisition, land will be acquired on a voluntary basis. In the event that minor land acquisition is 
unavoidable the project will be designed to cause the least amount o f social, cultural and 
economic disruption. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), a Vulnerable Communities 
Development Framework (VCDF), detailed in the ESMF, will be prepared in accordance to the 
policy provisions of OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Project affected families will be compensated, relocated and rehabilitated, if required, so as 
to improve their standard of living, and income earning capacity or at least to restore them to a 
living standard they are likely to have achieved if the project had not taken place.  A 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), a Vulnerable Communities Development Framework 
(VCDF), detailed in the ESMF, will be prepared in accordance to the policy provisions of OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/04/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/04/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Screening for the potential environmental impacts and field verification of the subprojects/ 
roads proposed for TSDP funding. This should be done at early stage of project preparation 
and completed prior to feasibility studies of individual roads.  
 
Conducing (or critical review of already conducted) Initial Environmental Examinations (or 
Environmental Impact Assessments, if required) of the selected subprojects/ roads proposed 
for TSDP funding. This should be done at an early stage of engineering design providing 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
inputs to site planning and designing. An IEE (or EIA) must contain road specific 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) that should feed into estimates and Bill of Quantity.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Marianne Kilpatrick 
04/03/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/05/2007 
Comments:  ISDS is cleared. EA category B is endorsed; however, I would like to review the ESMF, 
including the resettlement and indigenous peoples plans / instruments. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
04/03/2007 
Comments:  Cleared. 
