Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC3139
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P105860 
Project Name:  Poverty Alleviation Fund II 
Task Team Leader:  Geeta Sethi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (25%);Animal production (25%);Other social services 
(25%);Water supply (25%) 
Theme:  Rural non-farm income generation (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve living conditions, livelihoods 
and empowerment among the rural poor, with particular attention to groups that have 
traditionally been excluded by reasons of gender, ethnicity, caste and location.  This is to 
be achieved through: (a) investing in community selected and managed sub-projects that 
create access to basic socioeconomic infrastructure and services, increase assets, generate 
employment and expand income-generating opportunities in poor villages; (b) enhancing 
the capacity of local bodies, particularly the Village Development Committees (VDCs), 
to provide better services for poor and socially excluded groups; and (c) improving 
government efforts to better coordinate support targeted towards poor and excluded 
groups.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would finance the following activities:  
 
(a)  
Small Scale Village and Community Infrastructure: Examples of sub-projects 
implemented to date under PAF have included footbridges, water supply schemes, 
community meeting halls, schools, health facilities and other small-scale infrastructure  
Page  2
that can be managed by community groups or VDCs. Preference would be given to 
infrastructure in VDC (local government) development plans where they exist and where 
the VDC is willing to contribute a share from its own resources.  Requirements for 
approval would be that the employment created would benefit the poorest populations, 
and that a credible operations and maintenance plan has been prepared.  
 
(b)  
Income Generating Sub-projects: Matching grants would be provided to self-
selected groups of poor and excluded people for income-generation activities, based on 
objective criteria including ethnicity, caste, gender and poverty levels.  Examples under 
PAF have included micro-irrigation, micro enterprises/service sector activities, 
artisanal/crafts, land productivity investments, trading and animal husbandry. Social 
organizations (such as NGOs) would be recruited to work with these community groups 
to help them develop sub-project proposals.  
 
(c)  
 Capacity Building: This would include four sub-components:  
 
(i) Mobilization of Community Groups: This sub-component would support both 
training/skills development of POs themselves and their capacity building of community 
groups. POs would be selected to work in target areas to disseminate information about 
the project, mobilize community groups, work with them in developing subproject 
proposals and develop their skills in project management, financial management (FM), 
procurement, etc. Where local governments are functioning, POs would also liaise with 
them to ensure that the proposed infrastructure projects fit into VDC's plan and priorities.  
 
ii) Capacity Building for Local Governments: This would focus on building capacity in 
financial management, participatory budgeting, social issues, and other relevant topics for 
local development, as well as on the rules of operation of the PAF to enable local 
governments to assist groups and communities to access PAF resources.  
 
(iii) Support to Rural and Community Finance: While PAF II would not finance micro-
lending, it will support training in community-managed finance with a view to 
institutional strengthening and eventual access of the rural poor to broader financial 
services for livelihoods, including available micro-finance.  
 
(iv) Information, Monitoring and Evaluation: This would include: (a) dissemination of 
information about the project and other government programs; (b) a standard 
management information system (MIS); (c) structured field visits to assess impact; (d) 
beneficiary assessments; and (e) impact assessment surveys starting with a baseline 
during the project's early phase.  
 
(d)  
 Administration of the Poverty Alleviation Fund Second Phase (PAF II). The 
project would continue to finance PAF staff and agency operating expenses, including 
financial, procurement and environmental management and audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
During implementation of PAF II, PAF operations will be expanded from the current 25 
districts to cover 55 of Nepal's 75 districts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Ms Natasha Hayward (SASDA) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are expected. Although the project will 
support multiple small investments, cumulative impacts attributable to the project will be 
difficult to distinguish from the effects of other unrelated local development activities. It 
will be ensured that subproject selection and design take into account local environmental 
conditions, and the project will track cumulative impacts and environmental concerns.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The community-driven development approach will ensure that alternatives will be 
considered as part of the process of sub-project selection and design.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
With Bank guidance, the government has already prepared a Vulnerable People?s 
Development Plan (VPDP) that includes a section on Indigenous People (IP). The 
preparation of the VPDP involved an assessment of whether the project might cause any 
adverse impacts on IP groups and if any are discovered, developing ways to mitigate 
these. Nepal is a country of remarkable social diversity, including more than 50 
indigenous ethnic populations.  Given that the objective of the project is to target these 
groups for inclusion and poverty alleviation, the project is not expected to have any 
negative impacts on these groups, rather, it is anticipated that they would receive both 
direct and indirect benefits under the program.  This would be closely monitored and 
supported by provisions such as translation of key documents into major IP languages, 
special communications outreach efforts to IPs (e.g., radio) and requirements that partner 
organizations also include staff who can speak in the IP languages of the area where they 
Page  4
intend to work. The VPDP in the Operational Manual is consistent with OP/BP 4.10. This 
is the same as under PAF I.  
 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared for the first phase of 
support for PAF.  During preparation of PAF II, the efficiency and effectiveness of this 
EMF was reviewed, and based on this review, revisions have been made to (i) reduce the 
administrative burden of the sub-project screening process, and (ii) provide more 
informative guidelines to help Community Organizations better manage the 
environmental impacts of their investments.  
 
Under PAF II, PAF will expand operations into five protected areas.  To ensure that 
these activities do not lead to the significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats, 
community organizations within protected areas will be registered as ?functional groups? 
within the Buffer Zone Program of the Department of National Parks and Wildlife 
Conservation, and their investments will form part of the Buffer Zone Management Plans 
for which environmental assessments have already been approved.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The revisions to the EMF were made following consultations with PAF's beneficiaries 
and Partner Organizations, as well as the Department of National Parks and Wildlife.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/12/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/12/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/06/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/01/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/01/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/03/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Geeta Sethi 
08/31/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
08/31/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Natasha Hayward 
08/31/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/21/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
09/06/2007 
Comments:   
