Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC3125
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P095977 
Project Name:  Road Sector Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Marianne Kilpatrick 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
42.60 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00
8.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDO is for the residents of beneficiary districts to have all-season road access 
thereby reducing travel time. This will help improve the access to economic centers and 
social services. The project targets five hill districts, which currently lack all-season road 
access. The achievement of the project will be monitored by the following outcome 
indicators:  
 
i. 
6 percent increase in the number of people with all-season road access in the 
project districts (20 minutes of walking or 2 km);   
 
ii. 
35 percent decrease in travel time for target population to reach key economic 
centers and social services;  
 
iii. 
DOR to provide effective road infrastructure services to users (measured through 
user satisfaction survey);  
 
iv. 
The Roads Board is fully functional and provides effective and sustainable 
funding for road maintenance (undertaking at least 500kms of periodic maintenance of 
the SRN annually and over 1000 km of backlog periodic maintenance within the project 
period).   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project will have two components: (a) Road Development Component (RDC), and 
(b) Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reform Component.  
 
The Road Development Component comprises of (i) Road Upgrading, (ii) Periodic 
Maintenance, and (iii) Road Safety Physical Works. The Road Upgrading sub-component 
will comprise upgrading of about 297 km of existing dry-season roads/tracks to all-
season standard with low cost sealed gravel (Otta Seal) pavements selected from a pool 
of more than 1000 km of prioritized roads based on the feasibility studies under the 
Priority Investment Plan, (PIP) 2007. These roads will partially connect five districts 
(Darchula, Baitadi, Kalikot, Dailekh and Bajhang). The average per km cost of the 
upgrading works is about US$ 85,000 including design and supervision of works.  
 
Under the Periodic Maintenance sub-component, the project will support about 450 km 
of periodic maintenance of SRN prioritized in the PIP (from 5,300 km of black top 
surfaced highways and feeder roads). About 100 km of the 2 lane highway with high 
traffic will have premix asphalt overlay and 350 km will have surface seal coats. Road 
safety audits will be carried out to identify black spots in the strategic road network. 
Based on the findings and recommendations, the project will support necessary physical 
works to improve the black spots under Road Safety Physical Works sub-component. The 
average per km cost of the periodic maintenance works is about US$ 30,000 including 
design and supervision of works.  
 
A
road safety audit of SRN based on accident prone sections, will be carried out under 
the project. Based on the findings and recommendations of the audit report physical 
works will be supported to improve the black spots.  
 
Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reform Component will provide support to DOR, 
RBN and MOPPW to sustain and deepen previous institutional and policy development 
activities started in RMDP, as well as support new ones that have been identified.  Based 
on the proposed plan, the project will provide assistance for (a) Human Resource 
Development (HRD), (b) Geo-technical, Environment and Social Development, (c) IT 
and MIS development, (d) Road Asset Management, (e) Preparation of a Road Safety 
Action Plan (f) Effective Quality Assurance, (g) Mechanical Training Centre, (h) 
Strengthening of Roads Board operations, (i) Technical Audit,  (j) Equipment and 
Logistics, and (k) Preparation of a follow up project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Far-West and Mid- West hilly regions of Nepal in Darchula, Baitadi, Kalikot, Dailekh 
and Bajhang districts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ishwor Neupane (SASDA) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDN) 
Page  3
Mr Fabio Pittaluga (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The upgrading of RSDP roads involves primarily the improvement of existing roads 
which are expected to cause limited adverse social and environmental impacts. The social 
and environmental concerns of RSDP are mainly related to upgrading five hill roads from 
the existing unsealed fair-weather condition to sealed gravel standard all-weather (Otta 
Seal) roads. Works related to periodic maintenance and improving road safety are 
unlikely to have major and significant adverse environmental impacts, and institutional 
strengthening would contribute in enhancing environmental management capacities of 
the involved institutions.  Although some widening may be necessary, most of the road 
improving/ upgrading works under RSDP are relatively small-scale and likely to be 
confined to the existing fair-weather road right of way (ROW). The extent and severity of 
impacts due to upgrading would be lesser than the impacts of new road construction.  
 
Therefore, RSDP is Category B Project requiring partial environmental assessment 
(Initial Environmental Assessment). The Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) prepared by the DOR/GON serve as environmental assessment at 
the RSDP Project level. And each of the five subprojects/ roads has been subject to 
environmental and social screening separately, and IEE and EMP as well as social 
assessment of each of them are currently on-going. The revised IEE, EMP and RAPs for 
the first-round of contracts are completed subject to some improvement incorporating the 
comments.  
 
Improvement works in the RSDP roads require widening in some narrow sections where 
lands and some structures including residential houses would have to be acquired. In total 
about two ha of lands would be acquired in some sections of the RSDP roads and about 
40 residential houses will need to be relocated/ resettled. In the first year, the losses 
would be limited to one road (Satbanjh-Tripurasundari) where 7 structures and about 0.3 
Page  4
ha of lands would have to be acquired and compensated. Other minor losses expected 
from construction are loss of crops, trees, non residential structures. In addition, some 
community infrastructures and facilities like irrigation channels, drinking water, 
community buildings, school buildings, water mills etc will be impacted adversely due to 
construction of RSDP which need to be restored and rehabilitated fully in consultation 
with local people. The RSDP being an upgrading project there are no issues of significant 
scale of irreversible nature.  
 
The five hill roads proposed for upgrading under RSDP are located in the hill/ mountain 
terrain of Nepal. The terrain in general is vulnerable to slope failures and instability risks. 
The environmental impacts of upgrading vary depending on road, but typically include:   
a) landslides, erosion and slope instabilities due to widening, disposal of excess spoil, 
quarrying, drain-water-discharge; b) loss of limited amount vegetation and forest due to 
widening at forest areas, use of wood for project work and/or for cooking by worker; c) 
disruption or degradation of community infrastructure such as community water supply 
lines, irrigation canals, electricity lines, etc; d) localized air-pollution due to construction 
activities; e) water pollution due to disposal of wastes from labour camp or construction 
wastes.  As the proposed activities are for upgrading the existing fair-weather road to all-
weather, the environmental impacts in general are likely to be small-scale, localized, and 
simple that can be easily managed through site-specific measures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The RSDP would contribute significantly in the social and economic wellbeing of a large 
number of rural people living in the project and adjacent districts of far west region. The 
upgrading roads under RSDP would serve the people of the remote area round the year 
ensuring their access to markets, major service centers including government agencies 
which are located mostly in the district headquarters. Improved and reliable access 
through RSDP would facilitate inputs supply, enhance the productive income generating 
activities in both farm and off-farm sectors and ensures effective marketing of these 
products. In addition, access and use of various social services would enhance; mobility 
of people would intensify; girls and women in particular would benefit more from 
efficient and reliable transport services; migration of people in search of jobs and 
livelihood would decline and more importantly the common most people would be able 
to make increased use of basic services like health and education either within the district 
or outside after road improvement.  
 
Land-use change is a long-term impact likely to be induced by a road in the hills. 
Development of road-side settlements (local markets) in specific areas is a common form 
of land-use change likely to occur along a road. Intensification of agricultural land-uses, 
and change in cropping pattern (shift from subsistence agriculture to production of cash 
crops e.g. vegetables) is another form of road induced impacts.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the fact that the RSDP roads are already in existence and operational for years, the 
upgrading works would not cause any major significant adverse impacts of the extent that 
demands exploring alternatives in the design itself. Since most of the adverse social and 
environmental impacts are of limited, small and local in nature they can be managed 
effectively in a participatory consultative methods involving the locals. However, site-
specific adjustments as well as alternatives, e.g. quarry sites, waste-disposal sites, camp 
sites, etc are required in order to avoid or minimize the adverse impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
DOR/ GON have prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) for use in road sector in Nepal. The ESMF requires that each funding request / 
proposal be subject to environmental and social screening, and appropriate level of 
investigation. Accordingly, DOR has undertaken Initial Environmental Examinations 
(IEEs) of the five RSDP roads, and currently revising/ updating these IEEs as well as 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) to reflect recent changes in the subproject to 
make the EMPs site-specific and relevant to the proposed upgrading.  .  In compliance 
with ESMF, the DOR has also prepared RAP and IPDP for the first year roads to ensure 
that the adversely affected families will be provided due compensation and rehabilitation 
supports to improve their livelihoods. The ESMF recognizes the need for stronger and 
independent monitoring of social and environmental compliance in the field, and 
therefore, besides regular compliance supervision by the supervision consultant, requires 
independent checks for preparedness during initial stage of construction, periodic 
compliance check by GESU on randomly selected sites, annual compliance check by the 
ministry, and bi-annual external monitoring review.  
 
DOR staffs are generally aware of environmental issues and management functions. 
GESU of DOR has basic knowledge and experience in environmental fields gained 
through RMDP and other projects. GESU's knowledge regarding social and 
environmental aspects has been enhanced by their role in preparing ESMF. There are 
some examples of good environmental practices such as bio-engineering and various 
background documents. However, extent of their use is limited. Works of the GESU in 
the past has been hampered by frequent transfer of staff, lack of financial and logistic 
resources, lack of clarity on its mandates, and deficiency in coordination with projects 
and other units. GESU's capacity in social aspects is lower than in the environmental 
aspects but given the past experiences in RMDP and other project it has the potentiality 
to strengthen its knowledge base and capacity and put them together into practice in the 
forthcoming road projects.  
 
RSDP's Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reform component will contribute in 
enhancing environmental and social management capacities of the GESU for geo-
technical, environmental and social  studies, compliance monitoring for EMAP, RAP, 
SAP, social awareness programs and preparing standards and guidelines for those fields.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF makes it mandatory to hold consultations and make disclosure and 
dissemination of the safeguard measures in all the road sector project which will also be 
applied in RSDP. The mechanism involves that all the project affected people and 
communities including local government bodies viz VDCs and DDCs are adequately 
informed of all the identified impacts and their mitigation measures during the 
consultation process both during and implementation. The affected people in particular 
are to be made fully aware of the project impacts and the compensation, resettlement and 
rehabilitation measures through effective a disclosure mechanism. This also involves 
translation of the safeguard policies in local language and posting hard copies at the 
doorstep of the affected people, communities, VDCs and DDCs. The dissemination of 
safeguard policies should also be made through the websites at the central, regional and 
division offices of DOR and other places where public can have their easy access.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/12/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/12/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/12/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Marianne Kilpatrick 
09/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire 
09/19/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
09/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Ishwor Neupane 
09/19/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr G. George Tharakan 
09/20/2007 
Comments:   
