Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
Report No.: 
38587
 
Date ISDS Prepared: December 20, 2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
1.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P103979 
Project Name: GPOBA - Nepal Biogas 
Support Program 
Task Team Leaders: Bilal Rahill & Jeremy 
Levin 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  January 2007 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): N/A 
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
 
Managing Unit: SASSD 
Lending Instrument: Grant from the Global 
Partnership for Output-Based Aid (GPOBA), 
a
Bank-Managed multi-donor trust fund.. 
Sector: Renewable Energy (50%), Micro & 
SME Finance; (20%); sanitation (20%); 
other social service (10 %)  
Theme: Climate Change (P); pollution 
management and environmental health (S); 
other rural services (S); other human 
development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Bilal Rahill, Lead Environmental Specialist 
Financing amounts by source:  
GPOBA 
IBRD 
IDA 
GEF 
Other financing amounts by source: 
GoN 
KfW 
CDCF 
DGIS 
Participant Contribution from equity and loans 
(US $m.) 
 
5.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
5.6 
 
9.1 
 
1.8 
 
4.9 
55.5 
Environmental Category:  B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project?                Yes [ ]                              No [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)Yes [ ]                     No [X] 
Page  2
2
2.  Project Objective:
 
The objective of this grant-supported project is to expand financial support to the Nepal
’s 
ongoing Biogas Support Program (BSP) to increase access to more modern energy sources for 
cooking and lighting purposes in the rural and peri-urban areas of Nepal through the use of an 
Output-Based Aid (OBA) approach. 
 
3.  Project Description:
 
The Biogas Sector Program (BSP) is a national program that has already successfully supported 
the installation of over 112,000 biogas plants between 1992 and December 2003 (Phases I 
through III) in 65 out of Nepal’s 75 districts through the training and mobilization of over 40 
biogas construction companies.  Phase IV (July 2003 – June 2009) will support the installation of 
an additional 135,000- 200,000 biogas plants and this output-based grant will help finance the 
installation of about 37,300 plants during Phase IV and Phase V. 
The overall objective of 
Nepal’s BSP is to further develop and disseminate biogas plants as a mainstream renewable 
energy solution, while better addressing poverty, social inclusion and regional balance issues 
and at the same time ensuring enhanced commercialization and sustainability of the sector. 
 
The particular objective of this GPOBA grant is to increase the number of households using 
biogas plants. GPOBA will make a subsidy payment to G
overnment of Nepal’s (GoN) 
Alternative Energy Promotion Center (AEPC) of about $134 per verified output delivered and in 
use (i.e. number of plants) up to a maximum target of 37,300 plants. AEPC is responsible for 
channeling the capital subsidy to biogas companies which will install the biogas reactors.
 
This 
should result in: 
 
ƒ
Economic savings due to a reduced expenditure on cooking and lighting fuels, particularly 
fuel wood and kerosene; 
ƒ
Improved soil fertility resulting from the use of bio-slurry as a fertilizer, or reduced 
expenditure for commercial fertilizers; 
ƒ
Time savings due to a reduced need for gathering fuel wood, decrease in cooking time and 
other factors; 
ƒ
Improved sanitary conditions and decrease in related illnesses due to the connection of 
latrines to biogas plants; 
ƒ
Improved indoor air quality resulting in reduced respiratory diseases and infant mortality; 
ƒ
Reduction in deforestation, resulting in a better quality of the environment, particularly the 
prevention of increase of soil erosion, inundations and other catastrophic events. 
The target group for the BSP-IV Program is farming households who own at least one bovine, 
own land to build the biogas plant on, have access to a sufficient amount of water to run the 
plant, and have the ability to raise the capital needed to meet the user contribution (estimated to 
be between US$ 197 – US$366 depending on plant size and location). BSP provides subsidy 
support of approximately 30% of the capital cost of the biogas reactor to participants who then 
Page  3
3
contract installation to private sector providers.  The capital cost subsidy is currently funded by a 
combination of GoN budget contribution, bilateral grants from Netherlands DGIS, Germany’s 
KfW, and proceeds from the sale of carbon credits to the World Bank’s Community 
Development Carbon Fund (CDCF).  Credit availability for the farmers’ investment contribution 
is being facilitated through a complementary KfW revolving fund scheme through the 
Agricultural Development Bank of Nepal, and additional outreach by BSP is underway to other 
MFIs active in the target areas to increase rural access to credit. 
 
Success will be measured by the numbers of biogas plants meeting the project’s quality criteria. 
The GPOBA output report also contains indicators measuring the success of attaining the 
additional benefits outlined above. 
 
4.  Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguards analysis: 
 
While the ongoing BSP targets all of Nepal’s districts (with geographical context ranging from 
the mountainous areas to foothills and flood plains of the Terai region), the GPOBA grant will 
aim to target the country’s more remote and less accessible areas, i.e., the hills and remote hills, 
where construction costs are higher and the population is generally gpoorer. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Bilal Rahill, Lead Environmental Specialist 
 
Page  4
4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
The program being supported by the Bank involves installation of 
biogas reactors, which has some generic environmental issues 
(described in the subsequent sections of this document) that require 
mitigation. Therefore, OP4.01 is applicable to the project. 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
Since the program aims to have a nation-wide coverage, it is obvious 
that there would be indigenous people in the project domain. Due to 
the very nature and design of the program, it is expected that such 
communities can benefit from the project provided they meet the 
basic requirements to participate in the program. There are no 
expected adverse impacts on such communities, but additional 
measures are necessary to increase the participation of the 
recognized Indigenous/Tribal Groups and other Minority Ethnic 
Groups in the Biogas Support Program.
 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The Biogas Support Program makes direct positive contributions towards meeting the energy 
needs of rural Nepal. By reducing demand on forest wood for fuel, the program also directly 
contributes to the conservation of local environmental resources, reduction of indoor air 
pollution, and reduction of emissions of greenhouse gasses. No significant large-scale, adverse or 
irreversible environmental impacts are anticipated from program implementation. 
 
The presence of pathogens in the liquid slurry and slurry compost has been studied, confirming 
the absence of any potentially fatal bacteria like Salmonella typhi and Vibrio cholarae -01 in all 
the samples of digested liquid slurry and slurry compost irrespective of whether the biogas plants 
are connected to latrines or not. However, the study confirms the presence of other pathogens.  
BSP is taking specific actions to mitigate this risk as presented in the Environmental 
Management and Mitigation Plan agreed to under the carbon finance project. 
 
Page  5
5
A
review of relevant BSP documents shows that the safeguards measures prescribed under the 
OP 4.10 (Indigenous People) are effectively incorporated in the Annual Plan, Strategy and 
Implementation Procedures adopted by BSP. While no supplemental plan is required, additional 
measures are necessary to increase the participation of the recognized Indigenous/Tribal Groups 
and other Minority Ethnic Groups in BSP.  These measures, such as increased outreach and 
partnering with local organizations are currently included in the BSP Action Plan, and will be 
further developed during the implementation of Phase IV and future phases of the program.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
S
ince it’s possible for households to connect latrines to the biogas reactors, the program may 
lead to improved sanitation/health outcomes. Also, the replacement of commercial fertilizer with 
bio-slurry has taken place in the previous phases of the program and the trend is expected to 
continue as the number of households owning biogas reactors increase; this may potentially lead 
to improved health outcomes over time as well. Indirectly, the program has also been shown to 
reduce the amount of time Nepalese families spend on gathering firewood, thus leading to a time 
savings of as much as 2-3 hours/day during the working hours of households which can be 
invested in other income-generating or social activities. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts: 
 
In light of the significant adverse environmental impacts associated with the present sources and 
cooking habits of rural energy in Nepal (i.e., unsustainable fuel wood use and high levels of 
indoor air pollution), the use of biogas is considered to be among the most appropriate solutions 
in meeting rural energy requirements.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared and is already under 
implementation to address the safeguard and other environmental issues associated with the 
project. The various environmental measures proposed in the EMP have been incorporated into 
the various technical and operational manuals/guidelines and have been disseminated to all the 
user households. Furthermore, several awareness programs and collaboration with existing health 
programs in the country have been proposed to sensitize the biogas households to hygiene and 
health issues.  
 
Institutional capacity of the grant recipient for implementing the environmental management 
measures is not expected to be a significant concern. Under the existing Carbon Offset project, 
the supervisory and implementing agencies, the AEPC and BSP respectively, already have 
experience with the implementation of the EMP. 
 
AEPC is devoted to the development and promotion of renewable and alternative energy 
technologies in Nepal; it has been in existence and managing the wider biogas program since 
Page  6
6
1996. AEPC is also responsible for the overall monitoring of the Program activities, and provides 
yearly reports on the progress of the subsidy disbursement. 
 
BSP is a local NGO which receives advisory assistance from SNV-Nepal (Netherlands 
Development Organization) and performs core implementation functions in the fields of R&D on 
biogas reactor design, subsidy administration, sector coordination, business development support 
to the private sector biogas construction companies, coordination of outreach and social 
marketing through NGOs, quality control and supervision for after sales service support, subsidy 
administration, and follow-up monitoring and verification activities.  BSP is ISO-certified and 
has received significant technical assistance and training from SNV; its institutional capacity is 
quite strong.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
AEPC and BSP currently fully satisfy the reporting requirements of SNV and KfW, and have 
historically been quite responsive in addressing potential environmental and social issues.  The 
Dutch Government, through SNV, holds monthly management meetings to discuss and mitigate 
potential implementation problems.   
 
The environmental studies and other associated studies have been undertaken through extensive 
consultation with different stakeholders, especially with the biogas households.  Additional 
consultations were conducted in May 2005 with 41 households in two communities.  These 
included households currently using biogas and others who are not using biogas but who are 
potential buyers of the biogas plants.  These consultations occurred in one district (Baglung) in 
the Hill region and one district (Dhanusha) in the Terai region.  The purpose of these 
consultations was to assess and document the community perceptions concerning the benefits 
and problems encountered while using the biogas plants and the reasons that some households 
have not yet purchased a biogas plant.  
 
The review and analysis show that the policy, implementation plans and strategy of the Biogas 
Sector Program is 
benefit-neutral
 towards non-participants from the indigenous/Tribal 
Communities and Disadvantaged Community Groups and other marginalized and poor segments 
of the society, and that they are not harmed by its implementation.  The current Biogas Extension 
Strategy of BSP is judged to be caste- and class neutral.  
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
n/a 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
n/a 
Page  7
7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
n/a 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
n/a 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Not required since a review of relevant BSP 
documents shows that the safeguards measures prescribed under OP 4.10 are incorporated in the 
Annual Plan, Strategy and Implementation Procedures adopted by BSP
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
n/a 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
n/a 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
n/a 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
n/a 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
n/a 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
n/a 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
n/a 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report?  A stand-alone EMP exists for the already 
approved and ongoing Carbon Offset project (P090038); 
an updated version of the existing EMP has been 
prepared. 
Yes [ X ]          No [ ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [X]          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
n/a 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues?  
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
Page  8
8
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [ X ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [ X ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Page  9
9
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Bilal Rahill and Jeremy Levin 
Jan 26, 2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Bilal Rahill 
Jan 26, 2007 
Social Development Specialist: 
n/a 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development 
Specialist(s): 
n/a  
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
Feb 1, 2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
Jan 26, 2007 
Comments:   
wb23210 
C:\Documents and Settings\wb23210\My Documents\Nepal\GPOBA 
Biogas\NepalBiogasGPOBA_ISDS.doc 
01/25/2007 5:46:00 PM
 
