Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2991 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P105289 
Project Name: NP Access to Financial Services Project 
Task Team Leader: Aurora Ferrari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 28, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 4, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UN Development Programme 
3.00
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will assist in providing micro and small enterprises (MSEs), especially unbanked 
ones, and low income households with increased access to formal financial services (credit, 
savings, etc.). This will be achieved by ensuring that participating Nepali financial institutions 
(banks and microfinance institutions, etc.) lend profitably to these market segments. The 
proposed project objectives are in line with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Nepal 
(2004-2007), which is intended to ensure broad-based economic growth, social inclusion, 
governance and social sector development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to support a comprehensive reform of access to financial services, a USD 30 million 
multi-donor project is being designed. To date UNCDF and UNDP have committed to support 
the project. The project consists of five closely interrelated components:  
 
(i) 
A technical assistance fund to strengthen the capacity of financial institutions to expand 
access to new underserved market segments and to carry out a financial literacy campaign (USD 
14.3 million)  
Page  2
(ii) 
Technical assistance to support reforms of the legal/regulatory and supervisory 
framework for microfinance, and the implementation of a secured transactions registry (USD 3.2 
million)  
 
(iii) 
A line of credit for financial institutions interested in serving MSE, especially previously 
unbanked ones (USD 10 million)  
 
(iv) 
Technical assistance to reform state-owned microfinance institutions, i.e., the Rural Self-
Reliance Fund and the Regional Rural Development Banks (USD 1.5 million)  
 
(v) 
Technical assistance to fund a public information campaign, project implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation (USD 1 million)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will potentially cover the whole country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed Bank Lending is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). There is no likelihood of any 
adverse environmental impacts in components (i), (ii), (iv) and (v).  The only component with a 
potential for environmental impacts, albeit minor, is component (iii). It is expected that the vast 
majority of sub-projects financed under this component will have minor environmental impacts, 
if at all, because: a) the focus of the component is on financing small and micro enterprises, 
especially in the area of trade and services, b) sub-loans amounts will not exceed Rs. 3 million, 
c) the project will not finance any activities listed in the IFC Exclusion List. Given the very 
limited potential for adverse environmental impacts of the projects financed under the credit line, 
it unlikely that any environmental licenses or approvals are required under the Environmental 
Protection Act (1996) and Environmental Protection Regulations (1997) or the Industrial 
Enterprises Act (1982) and the Local self Governance Act (1999). Therefore, if no 
environmental licenses or approvals are required, there will be no environmental regulatory 
oversight provided for these projects.  
 
However, if during project preparation it is identified that the types of projects financed by the 
Credit Line may have an environmental impact that needs mitigation measures, a project 
screening mechanism will be developed and simple environmental management plans (EMPs) 
will be a pre-requisite for financing. If this situation arises, the project will support 
environmental capacity of the participating financial institutions.  However, since activities listed 
in the IFC Exclusion List will not be eligible for financing under the credit line, it is not 
anticipated that there will be any projects that require screening or EMPs.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
The activities envisaged in the project are not likely to cause any significant environmental 
impacts.  However, the applicability of this safeguard policy will be determined prior to project 
appraisal.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/14/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No significant safeguards related preparation activities are anticipated.  A screening 
mechanism and a template for a simple Environmental Management Plan (a Framework) will 
be prepared prior to Appraisal and by June 15, 2007, if there is a possibility that activities not 
included in the IFC exclusion list and financed under the project have an environmental 
impact that requires mitigation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Aurora Ferrari 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
