Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3179 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/28/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P099296 
Project Name: Irrigation & Water Resources Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Shyam Sundar Ranjitkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 28, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (75%);Agricultural extension and research (15%);Flood 
protection (5%);Roads and highways (5%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to: (i) improve irrigation service delivery; and (ii) 
enhance sustainability and productivity of selected irrigation systems in Nepal. This will be done 
through (a) irrigation infrastructure development and improvement; (b) completion and 
consolidation of irrigation management transfer reforms; and (c) institutional and policy support 
for better water management and productivity. The realization of these objectives will be 
measured by: (1) improvement in indicators of irrigation service delivery; (2) greater collection 
and more effective use of water charges by WUAs; and (3) increase in farm income through 
improvements in crop yield, cropping intensity and diversification into higher value crops.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will consist of the following components:  
 
A. 
Irrigation Infrastructure Development and Improvement (US$38 million )  
 
Page  2
The output of this component will be better irrigation services from existing and/or new 
schemes in the Western regions, both in the Hills and Terai, which are or will be managed by 
farmers (FMIS). The component will involve (i) physical rehabilitation and modernization of 
FMIS in three western regions; (ii) identification, design and construction of new small and 
medium irrigation schemes; (iii) support for complementary, demand-driven local infrastructure 
(e.g., water supply, micro-hydel, rural access) that enhances efficiency and productivity; and (iv) 
on-farm investments in non-conventional irrigation technologies. Detailed selection criteria will 
be developed to guide the choice of schemes, keeping in mind specificities of schemes in the 
Hills and Terai. To exploit synergies, schemes in areas likely to be included in the Agriculture 
Commercialization and Trade Project and Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization 
Project will be given higher priority. Where appropriate, feasibility studies for micro-hydel 
power will be undertaken with the aim of securing investment from a parallel Bank-supported 
Power Development Project.  
 
B.      Irrigation Management Transfer Reform (US$9 million)  
 
The output of this component will be improved arrangements and instruments for O&M of 
public irrigation schemes completing and consolidating water management transfer to user 
groups in the Terai. This process was initiated during NISP. In case of public schemes being 
proposed for transfer during this project    this component will involve (i) a program of minor 
rehabilitation. And for all schemes covered by this component ? whether already transferred or to 
be transferred ? it will involve: (ii) preparing and implementing an Asset Management Plan 
which will set priorities for rehabilitation and maintenance for the relevant irrigation schemes; 
(iii) defining and financially supporting incentive mechanisms including matching grants; (iv) 
improving capacity of DOI regional/field offices to provide assistance during emergencies to 
small and medium schemes (transferred to and being managed by the farmers); (v) developing 
efficient institutional arrangements for investments in rehabilitation and maintenance (e.g., 
contracting and outsourcing) and (vi) developing groundwater irrigation, including through 
support for rural electrification...  
 
C. 
Institutional and Policy Support for Better Water Management and Productivity (US$8 
million)  
 
The output of this component is more streamlined and effective provision of water-management 
and irrigation-related services. It involves three sub-components:  
 
(i)  
Water Resource Management. This would involve multi-tiered interventions to build up 
the relevant institutions. At the national level (i) a study would be undertaken to explore scope 
for developing the Water and Energy Commission (WECS) into an apex normative and 
regulatory body for overseeing planning for integrated development, management and regulation 
of water resources. Next, in the context of multiple water use, in selected river basins the 
component would involve: (ii) conducting legal and institutional studies to implement a system 
of formal access to water; and (iii) preparation of legal and technical instruments to resolve 
multiple water use and allocation issues in selected river basins for medium and long term 
irrigation development including hydropower generation possibilities; and (iv) implementation 
of telemetric systems to provide information about water availability and use at different levels 
for planning and operation purposes. Finally, in selected irrigated schemes, it would involve: (v) 
Page  3
updating of inventory of irrigation systems, census of its users and total water use; (vi) 
formalization and registration of present uses and water allocation arrangements for each user 
group; and (vii) establishment of effective and equitable regulations for water distribution among 
users in each system.  
 
(ii) 
Irrigation Service Improvement.  Covering all irrigation systems/schemes included in the 
project, this sub-component would involve (i) strengthening of fee collection by water user 
groups; (ii) use of contractual arrangements to clearly specify the rights and obligations of DoI as 
the bulk water supplier and the users; (iii) use of benchmarking for all public irrigation services; 
and (iv) installation of water measuring devices for greater transparency and accountability. To 
achieve this, training and capacity building of DoI field staff and members of users groups will 
be undertaken and the DoI will be appropriately restructured for assuming new roles (such as 
inter-sectoral planning, control and legal enforcement, and groundwater management) after 
transferring irrigation services provision to WUAs.  
 
(iii)  
Integrated Crop and Water Management:. Building on the pilot initiative of On-Farm 
Water Management program undertaken under NISP, this sub-component will focus on 
enhancing the efficiency of irrigation water use rather than water supply. It would seek to 
enhance productivity and profitability of agriculture by promoting improved water management 
and agronomic practices and facilitating better linkages with input and output markets. Activities 
under this sub-component are likely to benefit from, and support, the recently launched HMGN 
program for Integrated Crop and Water Management. This a joint undertaking of Department of 
Irrigation (DOI), Department of Agriculture (DOA) and Agriculture Development Bank (ADB) 
supported, as required, by related agencies such as National Agricultural Research Centre 
(NARC), National Seed Company, Agriculture Input Company and National Irrigation Water 
User Association.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component A of the project is located in three western regions of the country in forty districts.  
Component B will be located in eight Terai districts.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has had long history of implementing Bank-funded irrigation projects.  Previous 
Bank operation in the sector, Nepal Irrigation sector Project, is similar to the proposed project 
and was completed successfully in terms of technical as well as safeguard requirements.  The 
Borrower has in-house capacity and can also hire external resourcers to fullfill the requirement of 
safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bilal H. Rahill (CESI2) 
Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDS) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The construction works envisaged under the project is small scale and involve mainly 
rehabilitation of existing structures. The Project, therefore requires only preliminary assessment. 
Therefore, an Integrated Social and Environmnetal Assessment (ISEA) would be undertaken in 
order to develop Social and Environmnetal Management Framework (ESMF) for the project. 
ESMF will define steps and level of environmnetal investigations required in each subprojcet.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The proposed project is not expected to have significant impact on the vulnerable and 
indigenous people. A Vulnerable Community Development Strategy,  will be developed as part 
of ESMF in order to ensure consultation with indigeous, tribal, minority and funerable groups. 
The strategy will also ensure that these groups of people benefit from the project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No major involuntary resettlement and rehabilitation is anticipated under the project. The 
Integrated Social and Environmental Study will however assess this in more depth. As an 
outcome of the ISEA/ ESMF study, Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) will be prepared in 
the event some land acquisition become unavoidable, or if project activities result in loss of 
privately owned assets or displaced people.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/06/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
May 2007   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shyam Sundar Ranjitkar 
09/28/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
 
Comments:   
