Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No: 
38624
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
2/7
/
07
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: NEPAL 
Project ID: P095978 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: VILLAGE MICRO HYDRO CARBON OFFSET PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: MUDASSAR IMRAN 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 03/20/07 
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
Managing Unit: SASSD 
Lending Instrument: CARBON OFFSET  
Sector: Renewable Energy (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and Infrastructure (P), Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.0 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.5 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.0 
CDCF Amount (US$m.): 
2.3 
Other financing amounts by source: 
Government of Nepal                                                   
2.3 
Domestic borrowings/equity investment 
26.9 
UNDP 1.6 
DANIDA/NORAD 14.3 
Financing gap 
4.4 
TOTAL 57.3 
 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [X ] 
B.  Project Objectives: 
 
Project objectives are to: (a) reduce global emissions of carbon dioxide; and (b) increase access to modern 
energy from renewable energy sources. 
 
The Carbon Offset project complements the World Bank Power Development Project, and will provide 
additional support for the achievement of its objectives, in particular the objective of improving access of 
rural areas to electricity services. The overall development objectives of the Power Development project 
are
:
(a) develop Nepal's hydropower potential in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner so 
as to help meet electricity demand, (b) improve access of rural areas to electricity services, and (c) 
Page  2
promote private participation in the power sector as a way to improve sector efficiency and to mobilize 
financing for the sector's investment requirements.   
 
C.  Project Description: 
 
This Carbon Offset project will facilitate greenhouse emission reductions and support the development of 
the international market mechanism for trading Emission Reductions (ERs) developed in the framework 
of the Kyoto Protocol.  The Nepal Village Micro Hydro project consists of sale of ERs to the Community 
Development Carbon Fund (CDCF) which provides carbon finance to small-scale CDM projects in the 
least developed countries and poorer areas of all developing countries.  The CDCF actively seeks to reach 
countries and communities that are neither presently benefiting from development through carbon finance 
nor are likely to benefit greatly from it in the future.  The CDCF also seeks to support projects which 
include, as a measurable output, the provision of goods and services that will lead to improvement in the 
social welfare of the communities involved in the projects. 
 
The sale of ER credits to the CDCF will allow for full implementation of the Nepal Village Micro Hydro 
Program by ensuring that there are sufficient resources available to expand coverage of the program from 
25 districts to 40. 
 
The Project will support the development of micro-hydropower mini-grids to meet the electricity and 
motive power needs of the rural people of Nepal through provision of subsidy assistance and program 
technical support.  The project will build on the successes achieved under the UNDP Rural Energy 
Development Program (REDP) by extending electrification activities to 40 districts, including 15 that 
were not covered under the first phase of that program.  It will also bring together the rural electrification 
activities supported through the micro-hydro component of the World Bank Power Development Project 
and the donor-financed Energy Sector Assistance Program (ESAP II) to expand the total target level of 
new micro-hydro installations by 15 MW by utilizing the CDM revenues to help meet un-financed 
program implementation and subsidy costs.  
 
The project seeks to develop a viable off-grid micro-hydropower market for villages which will not be 
served by the national grid for at least 5 years. It would offer support on both the demand and supply 
sides by providing information and social mobilization support, technical training, and investment 
subsidy (~40% - 70% of initial investment) to communities, and market information and business 
development support services to micro-hydro construction and supply companies. The micro-hydro plants 
will be installed by pre-qualified private sector companies who will receive subsidy payments, technical 
assistance and credit support.  The plants will be managed by the communities themselves or by the 
private sector providers.  Meters will be installed on each unit, and operating costs will be recovered 
through tariffs based upon installed demand for residential users and energy use for larger rural 
enterprises. 
 
The program will scale-up the promotion of off-grid micro-hydropower plants less than 100 kW utilizing 
Peltic systems (up to 3 kW) which are self contained electricity generating units which will be used to 
supply power for domestic and institutional lighting, and larger micro-hydro systems which can power 
agro-processing mills, saw mills and other electric machinery for small cottage industries.  It is 
anticipated that 15,000 kW (142,000 households) from 750 micro-hydropower plants will be installed 
between 2003 and 2010. Thirty four schemes generating 589 kW have already been commissioned under 
this program, although these schemes are not eligible for early start crediting and will thus not claim early 
start emissions reductions under the carbon offset project. 
 
Page  3
This project falls under the small-scale CDM project activity with total electricity generation within the 
limit of 15 MW. The project will lead to reduced GHG emissions by: 
·
Replacement of kerosene for lighting; 
·
Replacement of diesel fuel used for agro-processing units. 
 
Average household electricity consumption post installation of the micro-hydro units is estimated to be 27 
kWh/month, of which 18 kWh will be used for lighting and 9 kWh will be used for productive uses. 
The total project cost is estimated at US$ 57.3 million.  Of this, the Bank will provide IDA funding of 
about US$ 5.5 to finance GoN subsidies for construction of micro hydro schemes, and support 
training/capacity building.  The remainder will be financed by UNDP (US$ 1.6 million), 
DANIDA/NORAD (US$ 14.3 million), Carbon Finance (US$ 2.3 million) and the remainder from 
HMGN (US$ 2.3 million) and domestic borrowings/equity investment (US$26.9 million).  Additional 
financing is being sought from multilateral sources to meet the financing gap of 4.4 million. 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
 
The project area essentially covers Nepal and any rural household in Nepal is a potential beneficiary.  The 
project will not result in resettlement of people, it is anticipated that there will be no segment of the 
population that will be adversely affected.      
 
E.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
Afshan Khawaja (SASES) 
 
II.  KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
F
.
Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The use of renewable energy technology such village hydro projects will yield net positive environmental 
impacts.  Rural consumers from approximately 40 Districts in Nepal will benefit from access to micro 
Page  4
hydro based village electrification.  These consumers, who currently use kerosene and other fuels for 
lighting, will benefit from reduced indoor air pollution levels.  Based on the experience from the micro 
hydro village electrification components of the Nepal Power Development Project and UNDP’s Rural 
Energy Development Program (REDP), it is very unlikely that the adverse environmental impacts due to 
micro hydro village electrification project will be significant and/or irreversible.   
 
The end use activities to be financed under the project will be restricted to agro processing (cereal milling, 
rice husking and oil processing) where electrical power will replace the current use of manual or water 
power as well as small scale carpentry workshops.  These micro enterprises cater to local community 
needs.  The agro processing schemes to be financed will largely reduce the drudgery by replacing manual 
milling by machine grinding, reduce cereal losses and increase yield in the case of oil expellers.   These 
plants will be small with plant capacities in the range of 100 kW.  
 
With regard to the small scale carpentry workshops, the project will result in replacement of manual 
implements that are being presently used in existing carpentry workshops by electrical machines or tools.  
The source of timber will be from community forests
.
The timber required for the carpentry workshops 
will be brought by prospective clients, who are members of community forestry user groups.  These 
groups provide each member with a specified timber allocation based on domestic needs such as 
building/repairing houses and personal furniture requirements.  The community forestry user groups 
closely monitor the use of timber by its membership.  This monitoring mechanism, which is currently in 
existence, has proved to be very effective in ensuring sustainable timber use.  The enforcement of the 
“timber quota’s” by the community forestry user group will be used under this project to ensure 
sustainable use of forestry resources.   Nevertheless, in order to ensure that excess quantities of timber 
will not be used, it has been agreed with AEPC that the carpentry workshops will use only the authorized 
allocation of wood provided to the community by the respective community forest user group.  It has also 
been agreed that their project finances cannot be used for funding saw mills.  
 
The project is not expected to result in any adverse social impacts.  Land acquired for the construction of 
the canal, penstock, powerhouse and distribution line poles, is to be donated voluntarily by each 
participating community.  As is the practice in the ongoing Power Development Project, micro-hydro 
schemes will be development only in those communities where land is voluntarily donated.  Therefore, all 
land required by the project will be on a voluntary basis.  In addition if any loss of income or physical 
displacement is envisaged the community based Micro-Hydro Functional Groups (MHFGs) will verify 
the voluntary acceptance of community-devised mitigation measures by those affected.  The construction 
of micro-hydro schemes in not expected to result in physical or economic displacement.    
 
2.  
Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard 
policy or due to multiple project component: 
 
Considering the types of micro hydro village electrification projects that will be supported under this 
project, it is anticipated that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts.  Multiple safeguard policies 
have been triggered largely as a precautionary measure, to focus attention on potential safeguard issues 
during implementation monitoring.  This is especially with regard to the safeguard policies on Natural 
Habitats and Forestry so that special attention can be paid to ensure that there will be no damage to forest 
resources and natural habitats.  In addition, no cumulative social impacts are expected either.  Regardless, 
all sub-projects will be subject to an environmental analysis according to the Environmental Policy 
Framework and Operations Manual agreed with GoN for the Micro Hydro Village Electrification 
(MHVE) Component of the IDA financed Power Development Project (PDP).  As in the MHVE 
Component of the PDP, Environmental Management Plans will be prepared for each individual sub-
project to mitigate any possible adverse environmental and social impacts. 
Page  5
3. 
Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Overall social impacts are expected to be positive in the long term, especially from the economic and 
social uplift of the project area.  Environmental impacts in small, run of the river type micro hydro village 
electrification projects (MHVEP) are minimal.  The record of AEPC in implementing both the UNDP 
funded Rural Energy Development Project and the IDA financed Power Development Project has been 
exceptionally good.  Excellent, proactive environmental measures are incorporated into all MHVEP and it 
is not anticipated that there will be potential long term impacts from future activities in the area. 
 
4.  
Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts: 
 
A
screening exercise will determine the most appropriate site for the respective MHVEPs.  Therefore, 
alternative sites will naturally be evaluated prior to final site selection. The technology selection will be 
determined based on current experience of the on-going MHVE program.  Therefore, appropriate 
alternatives will be evaluated prior to final decisions are made.     
 
5. 
Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues.  
Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
Although GoN Environmental Regulations do not require micro hydro village electrification projects 
below 1 MW to seek environmental clearance, GoN has decided that all such projects will be required to 
undertake a simple environmental analysis and prepare an Environmental Management Plan on the basis 
of the findings of the environmental analysis.  This will be reviewed, cleared and subsequently monitored 
by AEPC, on behalf of GoN.  In addition, during sub-project approval and supervision, AEPC will ensure 
that carpentry workshops will use timber only from entitled quotas from the respective community user 
groups. AEPC has demonstrated the institutional capability to undertake this task effectively and in 
accordance with IDA requirements, under the on-going Power Development Project, where safeguards 
compliance is being monitored by AEPC and supervised by IDA.  
 
Land acquired for the construction of the micro-hydro schemes, including for canal, penstock, 
powerhouse, and distribution line poles, is to be donated voluntarily by each participating community.  
Micro-hydro schemes will be developed only in those communities where land is voluntarily donated.   
As in the practice under the Power Development Project, Memorandum of Agreements have been 
established by community functional groups as a means of recording the location and size of land being 
donated as well as the written consent and names of local witnesses for those community members 
voluntarily donating land.  In addition to the Memorandum of Agreements, which will continue to record 
and verify the voluntary nature of land donations by each community member, specific provisions will be 
added to current Memorandum of Agreements to record that the land being donated is free of squatters, 
encroachers or other claims or encumbrances.  If any loss of income or physical displacement is 
envisaged, MHFGs will verify the voluntary acceptance of community-devised mitigation measures by 
those impacted.  These will also be recorded in the revised Memorandum of Agreements.  MHFGs will 
identify the land required for the micro-hydro schemes.  However, project authorities will confirm 
whether land identified by MHFGs is suitable for the scheme.  The construction of micro-hydro schemes 
is not expected to result in physical or economic displacement. 
 
Indigenous and ethnic groups may be present in communities were micro-hydro scheme will be 
constructed.  Given the successful social mobilization activities currently being carried out by AEPC, 
Page  6
especially the inclusion of disadvantaged groups in the formation of self-governing community 
organizations (MHFG’s), the policy requirements of OD 4.20 to ensure the participation of these groups 
throughout the planning and implementation phases of the micro-hydro schemes and that these groups are 
provided assistance in accordance to their priorities are addressed by the design of the project.  In 
addition, the small size of these run of river micro-hydro schemes are expected to result in minimal 
adverse social impacts, if any, to vulnerable populations. Therefore, Vulnerable Communities 
Development Plans will not need to be prepared. 
 
5.  
Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
Participatory monitoring will be undertaken by community members for those sub-projects that directly 
affect them.  Since this project is community driven, the participation of local NGOs and civil society 
organizations to support the mobilization and formation of community based organizations is fully 
integrated into its design.  The social mobilization strategy adopted for the program will include 
participatory monitoring involving the community functional groups in assessing the results and impacts 
of the schemes and the inclusion of vulnerable groups in decision making.  The monitoring and evaluation 
program established at the community level will also be reflected in the monitoring and evaluation 
programs being established by AEPC.  The Safeguards Framework used for this project is the 
Environmental Policy Framework and Operations Manual agreed with GoN for the Micro Hydro Village 
Electrification (MHVE) Component of the IDA financed Power Development Project (PDP).  Public 
disclosure of this has already taken place. 
 
A. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable 
B. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  7
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr. Mudassar Imran 
02/07/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr. Sumith Pilapitiya 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms. Afshan Khawaja 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr. Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/08/07 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr. Salman Zaheer 
02/09/07 
Comments:   
