Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:  
38576
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
11/08/06 Updated 01/30/07
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: NEPAL 
Project ID: P095978 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: VILLAGE MICRO HYDRO CARBON OFFSET PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: MUDASSAR IMRAN 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 03/20/07 
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
Managing Unit: SASSD 
Lending Instrument: CARBON OFFSET  
Sector: Renewable Energy (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and Infrastructure (P), Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.0 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.5 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.0 
CDCF Amount (US$m.): 
2.3 
Other financing amounts by source: 
Government of Nepal                                                   
2.3 
Domestic borrowings/equity investment 
26.9 
UNDP 1.6 
DANIDA/NORAD 14.3 
Financing gap 
4.4 
TOTAL 57.3 
 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [X ] 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]: 
 
Project objectives are to: (a) reduce global emissions of carbon dioxide; and (b) increase access to modern 
energy from renewable energy sources. 
 
The Carbon Offset project complements the World Bank Power Development Project, and will provide 
additional support for the achievement of its objectives, 
in particular the objective of improving 
access of rural areas to electricity services. The overall development objectives of the Power 
Development project are:
 (a) develop Nepal's hydropower potential in an environmentally and socially 
sustainable manner so as to help meet electricity demand, (b) improve access of rural areas to electricity 
services, and (c) promote private participation in the power sector as a way to improve sector efficiency 
and to mobilize financing for the sector's investment requirements.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]: 
 
This Carbon Offset project will facilitate greenhouse emission reductions and support the development of 
the international market mechanism for trading Emission Reductions (ERs) developed in the framework 
of the Kyoto Protocol.  The Nepal Village Micro Hydro project consists of sale of ERs to the Community 
Development Carbon Fund (CDCF) which provides carbon finance to small-scale CDM projects in the 
least developed countries and poorer areas of all developing countries.  Operational since July 2003, the 
CDCF actively seeks to reach countries and communities that are neither presently benefiting from 
development through carbon finance nor are likely to benefit greatly from it in the future.  The CDCF also 
seeks to support projects which include, as a measurable output, the provision of goods and services that 
will lead to improvement in the social welfare of the communities involved in the projects. 
 
The sale of ER credits to the CDCF will allow for full implementation of the Nepal Village Micro Hydro 
Program by ensuring that there are sufficient resources available to expand coverage of the program from 
25 districts to 40, and will improve program sustainability by reducing reliance on donor assistance for 
implementation of future phases of the program. 
 
The Project will support the development of micro-hydropower mini-grids to meet the electricity and 
motive power needs of the rural people of Nepal through provision of subsidy assistance and program 
technical support.  The project will build on the successes achieved under the UNDP Rural Energy 
Development Program (REDP) by extending electrification activities to 40 districts, including 15 that 
were not covered under the first phase of that program.  It will also bring together the rural electrification 
activities supported through the micro-hydro component of the World Bank Power Development Project 
and the donor-financed Energy Sector Assistance Program (ESAP II) to expand the total target level of 
new micro-hydro installations by 15 MW by utilizing the CDM revenues to help meet un-financed 
program implementation and subsidy costs.  
 
The project seeks to develop a viable off-grid micro-hydropower market for villages which will not be 
served by the national grid for at least 5 years. It would offer support on both the demand and supply 
sides by providing information and social mobilization support, technical training, and investment 
subsidy (~40% - 70% of initial investment) to communities, and market information and business 
development support services to micro-hydro construction and supply companies. The micro-hydro plants 
will be installed by pre-qualified private sector companies who will receive subsidy payments, technical 
assistance and credit support.  The plants will be managed by the communities themselves or by the 
private sector providers.  Meters will be installed on each unit, and operating costs will be recovered 
through tariffs based upon installed demand for residential users and energy use for larger rural 
enterprises. 
 
The program will scale-up the promotion of off-grid micro-hydropower plants less than 100 kW utilizing 
Peltic systems (up to 3 kW) which are self contained electricity generating units which will be used to 
supply power for domestic and institutional lighting, and larger micro-hydro systems which can power 
agro-processing mills, saw mills and other electric machinery for small cottage industries. It is anticipated 
that 15,000 kW (142,000 households) from 750 micro-hydropower plants will be installed between 2003 
and 2010. Thirty four schemes generating 589 kW have already been commissioned under this program, 
although these schemes are not eligible for early start crediting and will thus not claim early start 
emissions reductions under the carbon offset project. 
 
This project falls under the small-scale CDM project activity with total electricity generation within the 
limit of 15 MW. The project will lead to reduced GHG emissions by: 
Page  3
·
Replacement of kerosene for lighting; 
·
Replacement of diesel fuel used for agro-processing units. 
 
Average household electricity consumption post installation of the micro-hydro units is estimated to be 27 
kWh/month, of which 18 kWh will be used for lighting and 9 kWh will be used for productive uses. 
The total project cost is estimated at US$ 57.3 million.  Of this, the Bank will provide IDA funding of 
about US$ 5.5 to finance GoN subsidies for construction of micro hydro schemes, and support 
training/capacity building.  The remainder will be financed by UNDP (US$ 1.6 million), 
DANIDA/NORAD (US$ 14.3 million), Carbon Finance (US$ 2.3 million) and the remainder from 
HMGN (US$ 2.3 million) and domestic borrowings/equity investment (US$26.9 million).  Additional 
financing is being sought from multilateral sources to meet the financing gap of 4.4 million. 
 
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social 
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or 
sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.) 
 
The project area essentially covers Nepal and any rural household in Nepal is a potential beneficiary.  The 
project will not result in resettlement of people, it is anticipated that there will be no segment of the 
population that will be adversely affected.      
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
 
The project area essentially covers Nepal and any rural household in Nepal is a potential beneficiary.  The 
project will not result in resettlement of people, it is anticipated that there will be no segment of the 
population that will be adversely affected.      
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
Although GoN Environmental Regulations do not require micro hydro village electrification projects 
below 1 MW to seek environmental clearance, GoN has decided that all such projects will be required to 
undertake a simple environmental assessment and prepare an Environmental Management Plan.  This will 
be reviewed, cleared and subsequently monitored by AEPC, on behalf of GoN.  In addition, during sub-
project approval and supervision, AEPC will ensure that carpentry workshops will use timber only from 
entitled quotas from the respective community user groups. 
 
Land acquired for the construction of the micro-hydro schemes, including for canal, penstock, 
powerhouse, and distribution line poles, is to be donated voluntarily by each participating community.  
Micro-hydro schemes will be developed only in those communities where land is voluntarily donated.  
All land required under the component will be on a voluntary basis.  As in the practice under the Power 
Development Project, Memorandum of Agreements have been established by community functional 
groups as a means of recording the location and size of land being donated as well as the written consent 
and names of local witnesses for those community members voluntarily donating land.  In addition to the 
Memorandum of Agreements, which will continue to record and verify the voluntary nature of land 
donations by each community member, specific provisions will be added to current Memorandum of 
Agreements to record that the land being donated is free of squatters, encroachers or other claims or 
encumbrances.  In addition, if any loss of income or physical displacement is envisaged, MHFGs will 
verify the voluntary acceptance of community-devised mitigation measures by those impacted.  These 
Page  4
will also be recorded in the revised Memorandum of Agreements.  MHFGs will identify the land required 
for the micro-hydro schemes.  However, project authorities will confirm whether land identified by 
MHFGs is suitable for the scheme.  The construction of micro-hydro schemes is not expected to result in 
the involuntary resettlement of any people or structures. 
 
The social mobilization process being followed for the micro hydro village electrification component 
under the Power Development Project requires the participation of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups 
in decision-making throughout the design, planning and implementation of micro-hydro schemes.  These 
principles of social mobilization, especially the inclusion of disadvantaged groups in the formation of 
self-
governing community organizations (MHFG’s) will continue under the project.  Based on the 
experience thus far with the Power Development Project, formation of MHFG’s has typically involved 
the participation of over 95 percent of the households in the community.  
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
Afshan Khawaja (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
Based on the experience so far on the Nepal Power Development Project, which has a micro hydro village 
electrification component which have had no significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and/or 
social impacts, it is suggested that this project be classified as Environment Category B and will follow 
the same safeguard requirements already agreed for the micro hydro village electrification component in 
the Power Development Project. Environmental and social analysis of individual sub-projects will be 
based on the Micro Hydro Village Electrification Component in the Environmental Policy Framework 
and Operations Manual agreed between the Government of Nepal and the World Bank under the Nepal 
Power Development Project. 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Considering the types of micro hydro village electrification projects that will be supported under this 
project, it is anticipated that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts.  Natural Habitats policy has 
been triggered largely as a precautionary measure, to focus attention on potential safeguard issues during 
implementation monitoring.
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
With regard to the small scale carpentry workshops, the project will result in replacement of manual 
implements that are being presently used in existing carpentry workshops by electrical machines or tools.  
The source of timber will be from community forests
.
The timber required for the carpentry workshops 
will be brought by prospective clients, who are members of community forestry user groups.  These 
groups provide each member with a specified timber allocation based on domestic needs such as 
building/repairing houses and personal furniture requirements.  The community forestry user groups 
closely monitor the use of timber by its membership.  This monitoring mechanism, which is currently in 
existence, has proved to be very effective in ensuring sustainable timber use.  The enforcement of the 
“timber quota’s” by the community forestry user group will be used under this project to ensure 
sustainable use of forestry resources.   Nevertheless, in order to ensure that excess quantities of timber 
will not be used, it has been agreed with AEPC that the carpentry workshops will use only the authorized 
allocation of wood provided to the community by the respective community forest user group.  It has also 
been agreed that their project finances cannot be used for funding saw mills.  
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(
please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
03/01/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: 03/01/07 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mudassar Imran 
11/01/06 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/02/06 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Salman Zaheer 
01/30/07 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
