Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2098
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nicaragua 
Project ID:  P083952 
Project Name:  Fourth Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Emmanuel A. James 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 11, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.91
9.91 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the project would be to support the Government of Nicaragua’s 
(GON) broad based economic growth and poverty reduction plan by relieving 
transportation bottlenecks that currently hinder economic growth and private sector 
investment. The specific objectives are to support economic growth by (i) expanding and 
complementing the previous focus on trunk roads by improving a connecting network of 
secondary and rural roads which will be selected in a manner that would lead to the 
creation of paved distributor networks (circuitos de distribucion) that can better support 
economic activities of a given productive zone; (ii) helping ensure the sustainability of 
the road improvements, through strengthening of maintenance practices, and (iii) 
institution building and technical development in the Ministry of Transport and 
Infrastructure (MTI) and the Road Maintenance Fund (FOMAV).   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would enhance IDA's ongoing support for a) capacity building and 
institutional strengthening of MTI, b) the design and implementation of routine and 
periodic maintenance programs, and c) full operational establishment of the FOMAV. 
The project would support the improvement of some connector roads between the 
Panamerican highway and the Pacific coast as well as the stabilization of key secondary 
and rural roads. The balanced technical approach would continue along the same lines as 
Page  2
the previous IDA projects, ensuring and emphasizing sustainability of all road 
improvements by capacity building and institutional support, and implementation of 
routine and periodic maintenance programs via microenterpise and private contractors. 
The project would also help the MTI to advance its program of decentralization of the 
road network and to provide the impetus for restoring fines for truck overloading to 
appropriate levels.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All of the road candidates have been identified and analyzed. They are located mainly in 
the western and central areas of the country. The main roads (51 km) will be rehabilitated 
along existing alignments to previous asphalt standards. For the rural roads (320 km) all 
the works will be carried out within the existing road platforms and will not involve 
major earthworks. Based on completed environmental and social analyses, there will not 
in addition be any significant negative impacts produced by this component. Adequate 
technical specifications to help guarantee the adherence to acceptable environmental 
practices during the construction will be included in the civil works contracts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (LCSEN) 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is for road improvements along existing road alignments and does not 
involve major earth works or land acquisition. None of the road candidates involve 
crossing through protected areas or other environmentally sensitive zones. Based on the 
specific environmental and social analyses completed so far and the modest scope of the 
improvements to be carried out, and its similarity to the previous project, the project was 
rated as a category B. The MTI already has acceptable manuals of practice for ensuring 
Page  3
compliance with Bank safeguard requirements that were developed under the previous 
IDA projects.  
 
Based on the analyses completed and the scope of the road improvement, no involuntary 
resettlement is expected. In terms of Cultural Property the MTI Manuals include chance-
find procedures that will be followed even though the earthworks involved are minor. In 
terms of Natural Habitats and Forests policies, based on the assessment carried out and 
the project scope, no adverse impacts are expected. However, in the remote eventuality, 
the screening procedures to be followed under the project would help to ensure that 
appropriate actions are taken to mitigate any negative impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the nature of the works, the rehabilitation of trunk and rural roads in long used and 
well trafficked corridors, and based on the social and environmental assessments that 
were carried out, no negative impacts are expected. Also, there will be no resettlement of 
people nor do roads traverse any indigenous communities. Hence, in this regard, there 
should be no significant adverse effects from project implementation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the nature of the works, the rehabilitation of trunk and rural roads in long used and 
well trafficked corridors, and based on the social and environmental assessments that 
were carried out, no negative impacts are expected. Also, there will be no resettlement of 
people nor do roads traverse any indigenous communities. Hence, in this regard, there 
should be no significant adverse effects from project implementation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The MTI's Division of Environmental Management (DGA) has completed the 
environmental and social assessments required for all the road sections of the proposed 
Fourth Project. These tasks were completed in accordance with the principles established 
in the Environmental Manual (Guia para la Categorizacion y Definicion de 
Requerimientos para la Evaluacion Ambiental y Social de Proyectos) which is based on 
the World Bank Safeguard Policies (June 2003).  
 
This is the fourth IDA-financed Project with MTI.  Under the First Roads Project, the 
Environmental Unit (DGA) was created in MTI and the first Environmental Manual was 
prepared.  MTI prepared social manuals during subsequent IDA-supported projects.  MTI 
now uses these manuals for all its projects (independent of funding source) and applies 
them successfully.  Its track record of environmental and social mitigation for Nicaraguan 
road projects is quite good.  
 
The MTI prepared adequate terms of reference for hiring consulting engineering firms 
to carry out the engineering designs, including the specification of environmental and 
social mitigation measures and rules for contractors that are in keeping with procedures 
Page  4
specified in MTI manuals. During project implementation the DGA will be responsible 
for monitoring consultant firms’ compliance with the contract agreement. The DGA will 
carry out partial and complete evaluations of products delivered by the firms.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation of the project document local authorities were consulted regarding 
development plans and investments carried out in their territory, as well as investment 
priorities in road infrastructure. Other institutions were also consulted including the 
Nicaraguan Institute of Tourism (INTUR), National Ports Company (ENP) and the 
Institute of Rural Development (IDR).  
 
The participation of Nongovernmental Organizations and other civil society 
organizations has taken place since the beginning of the project. Different social sectors 
in the project area such as associations of farmers, livestock producers, transportation 
cooperatives, community leaders, community organizations, etc. were consulted during 
project identification and preparation by the MTI. All documentation was made public 
for civil society organizations review. Subsequently, a public presentation of the project 
including the environmental and social management actions was carried out so as to 
inform stakeholders and obtain their suggestions that will be taken into account in the 
project. The public presentations were supported by MARENA and local Municipalities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  5
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emmanuel A. James 
02/10/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
02/10/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
02/11/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
02/13/2006 
Comments:   
