Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/10/2006 
Report No.:  AC2042
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nicaragua 
Project ID:  P089989 
Project Name:  Nicaragua Rural Telecom 
Task Team Leader:  Eloy Eduardo Vidal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 30, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 16, 2006 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (90%);Postal services (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Regulation and competition policy (S);State 
enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
3.00
3.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
This project has two principal objectives that build on the foundations established by a 
previous Bank project.  
 
The first objective is to increase investments in and access to telecommunications 
infrastructure, including public payphones, increased coverage of cellular telephones and 
the Internet, in rural areas in Nicaragua. A significant percentage of Nicaraguans living in 
rural areas will gain access to telecommunication services for the first time and at lower 
cost as a result of this project. This will enable telecommunications and Information and 
Communications Technologies (ICTs) to become a driver for sustainable economic 
growth and enable the government to use ICTs to provide decentralized government 
services, including education, in rural areas in Nicaragua.  Furthermore this project will 
increase private sector investment in rural areas, increase the economic and social 
integration of Nicaragua and increase the competitiveness of Nicaragua’s economy. This 
project will expand Nicaragua’s telecommunications infrastructure by using international 
best practice output-based-aid (OBA) mechanisms to competitively award funds to 
private sector companies that build the infrastructure targeted by this project.  
Page  2
The second objective is to assist the transition from a monopoly to a competitive market 
by strengthening the sector regulator to enable it to become more effective and 
transparent balancing the needs and interests of suppliers, operators, consumers and the 
state.   This project will accomplish this objective by helping the sector regulator to 
restructure and update the legal and regulatory framework and institutions to take into 
account the end of the incumbent’s exclusivity as well as market and technological 
innovations.   Furthermore, this project will provide technical assistance on key 
regulatory issues and will provide training to the sector regulator.  This project will also 
assist the GON to ensure that the transition to a multi-sector regulatory agency will not 
hinder liberalization, increased competition or implementation of effective universal 
access programs in the telecommunications sector.  
 
Key Performance Indicators  
 
•
Increase in the number of minutes of use of telephone service  
 
•
Increase in the number of hours of use of Internet access.  
 
•
Reduction in the average distance that residents in rural Nicaragua have to travel to the 
nearest public telephone.  
 
•
Reduction in the price of international calls due to increased competition.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project, at a total cost of $10.2 million, will allocate US$7 million of IDA funds to 
the following components:  
 
(a) Component 1: Rural Access  
 
This $7.9 million component (IDA financing $5.3 million) will co-finance the proposed 
FITEL project. This component will use competitive OBA mechanisms, such as those 
used for the first two FITEL rural access projects, to award and allocate funds that will 
enable private sector operators to build, own and operate on a commercially-sustainable 
basis the ICT infrastructure that will be established in rural communities as a result of 
this project.  
 
This component will have two subcomponents that taken together seek to stimulate the 
demand and supply of telephones and broadband Internet services in underserved rural 
communities. The first subcomponent will provide at least one public payphone in 347 
rural communities with populations greater than 400 inhabitants not covered by the first 
two FITEL projects.  The direct beneficiaries of this initiative will be more than 346,934 
people that, according to the 1995 census, live in these unserved rural communities. This 
project will double the number of rural communities with populations greater than 400 
people that have public payphones.  As a result of this component and the prior FITEL 
projects, nearly 70% of Nicaragua’s  rural communities with populations greater than 400 
people will have at least one public payphone.  This subcomponent will also create 
incentives for the private operators to increase the coverage of mobile networks that will 
enable more public entities (including national and municipal government institutions), 
individual consumers and business to become individual phone subscribers.  
 
Page  3
The second subcomponent will establish a pilot telecenter in one secondary school in 
each of the 103 municipal heads that currently lack Internet access and that are covered 
by this project as well as 103 Internet points of presence (Internet POP) in the same 
municipal heads. The 103 Internet POPs and 103 pilot telecenters in schools will enable 
nearly 830,000 people (16% of Nicaraguans) to access the Internet in their rural 
municipalities for the first time.  A recent FITEL study and information provided by the 
Ministry of Hacienda and Credito Publico (MHCP) found that many government 
officials, individuals and business in rural communities travel to other municipalities in 
order to connect to the Internet in order to communicate or carry out transactions.   This 
component will enable Nicaraguans living and working in rural communities to stay in 
their communities in order to use the Internet and carry out online transactions.  
 
The 103 pilot school telecenters that will be established by this project will enable the 
public-at-large, ministries, municipalities, local businesses and NGOs to access the 
Internet on a shared community basis.  The 103 pilot telecenters will be located in public 
secondary schools that will be selected by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports 
(MECD). The MECD and TELCOR will enter into an agreement aimed at ensuring the 
sustainability of the pilot school telecenters and that will define the roles and 
responsibilities of each institution as well as that of the private sector operator that will 
provide the connectivity to the Internet. The private sector operator that wins the OBA 
tender, for example, will be required to provide each pilot telecenter with 10 computers, a 
local area network (LAN) as well as connectivity to the Internet for the pilot telecenter 
for one year without charging any fees.  After the first year, the MECD and school will 
be responsible for paying for Internet connectivity costs at regulated rates that will be far 
lower than the monthly rate of $725 that MECD is currently charged for Internet 
connectivity.  The pilot school telecenters subcomponent is also designed to dovetail and 
complement several ongoing MECD e-education initiatives.  
 
The 103 Internet POPs established by this project will enable approximately 704 public 
entities (including offices of all ministries and municipalities), NGOs, businesses 
(including commercial telecenters/cyber-cafes) and individual consumers in the 103 
municipal heads that currently lack affordable access to the Internet to connect to the 
Internet from their homes or offices at regulated rates far lower than the monthly rates of 
$400 to $725 that they are currently paying for Internet access.  Several ministries have 
indicated an interest and ability to become clients of the Internet POPs given their lower 
connection costs.  
 
(b) Component 2: Regulatory Capacity Strengthening  
 
This US$814,000 component (IDA financing US$664,000) will have three 
subcomponents. The first subcomponent will finance US$464,000 (IDA financing 
US$364,000) to strengthen the institutional capacity of the sector regulator. This 
subcomponent would also provide technical assistance to help re-organize the regulator, 
carry out strategic planning, and to identify hiring needs/profiles in terms of qualified 
economists, financial experts, and attorneys. It will also be used to obtain technical 
assistance and provide TELCOR with resources to enable TELCOR to carry out 
additional detailed pre-feasibility studies to design additional projects and prepare tender 
Page  4
documents for additional projects. The second subcomponent will finance US$150,000 
(IDA financing US$100,000) in a training program for the sector regulator staff.  This 
subcomponent would finance local training, by bringing experts from outside the country 
to Nicaragua to dictate courses to the Regulator staff, and also to send key staff from the 
Regulator to training courses abroad. The third subcomponent will provide US$200,000 
(IDA financing (US$200,000) to finance Internet applications and capacity-building for 
other public institutions (such as the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit) that will take advantage of the fact that rural 
communities will gain access to the Internet as a result of the first component of this 
project.  The Internet applications and capacity-building activities will be chosen by 
TELCOR based on proposals made by the Ministries of Education, Health, Agriculture, 
Finance, NGOs as well as by municipal governments. TELCOR has identified a number 
of existing government educational, health, finance and e-government initiatives that will 
benefit from this program as a result of the improved Internet connectivity in rural and 
low income communities.  
 
(c) Component 3.  Project Management This component will allocate $500,000 for 
Project Management and Implementation (IDA financing $400,000).  
 
Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and 
social characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to 
any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially 
sensitive areas.)  
 
This is a National Project with specific locations for projects to be determined during 
project preparation. Such locations will include rural areas of Nicaragua currently without 
telecommunications service.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This is a National Project with specific locations for projects to be determined during 
project preparation. Such locations will include rural areas of Nicaragua currently without 
telecommunications service.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Roberto Gabriel Aiello (ENVCF) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSEO) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
An environmental screening framework has been completed and has been found 
satisfactory to the Bank.  It includes the potential impacts for both the construction and 
operation phases of rural telecommunications facilities, as well as the mitigation plan and 
guidelines to be followed during construction and operation of the towers.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental impacts of the Nicaragua Rural Telecom Project are expected to be well 
manageable given the type of planned interventions under this project.  The project 
includes provisions to ensure that potential impacts, including induced and cumulative 
impacts are assessed and mitigated in accordance with the Bank’s safeguard policies.  An 
environmental screening framework has been prepared by means of which Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) will be developed and followed for each investment activity 
during implementation.  EMPs will be developed as an inherent part of the preparation of 
each transaction, and its conclusions and recommendations will be integrated into the 
contracts with private sector providers that will be responsible to install, operate and 
maintain the telecommunications systems. Development of EMPs will follow guidelines 
provided in the Guidebooks prepared under the Environmental Assessment.  
 
The GoN has also prepared a Social Assessment (SA) which includes the following: (i) 
executive summary, (ii) methodology, (iii) analysis of regulatory framework with respect 
to indigenous populations, (iv) survey to all communities involved in the Project and field 
trips description, (v) matrix of social impacts (vi) results of social impacts, (vii) 
conclusions and recommendations, and (viii) a Social Framework and Communications 
Manual for Populations near the Installations of Antennas to ensure that any Bank-
supported civil works comply with the safeguard policies.  
 
The study had overall satisfactory results, which include some of the following:  
 
Page  6
a) 
The people surveyed considered that telecommunications services is a real need 
and will reduce significant costs;  
 
b)
Almost all of the people surveyed considered that the installation of antennas 
were harmless (only 1% considered it prejudicial but could not explain why);  
 
c) 
No indigenous communities were identified as potentially been affected by the 
Project;  
 
The social impacts derived from the Project can be managed adequately during the 
phases of design, construction and operation, following the Social Framework and 
Communications Manual developed in the SA.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower in collaboration with the project preparation team (including consultants) 
has prepared the appropriate Action plan/safeguard framework documents, which will be 
revised and finalized during the project appraisal period. The recommended and agreed 
follow-up activities as stated in the Project Operational Manual would be implemented 
during the project life. At each supervision mission stage and mid-term review stage the 
process would be reevaluated and necessary adjustments will also be made as appropriate 
to the prevalent conditions.  
 
The safeguard documents include:  
 
a. Environmental Management Framework (EMF), including a Guidebook for the 
Construction and Installation of antennas; and  
 
b.
Social Framework and Communications Manual.  
 
The project management unit will prepare the Operational Manual that describes in 
detail the approach to implementation of the above mentioned frameworks. The project 
implementation team and the Expert Panel is expected to have the capacity to screen 
subprojects at the calls for proposal stage, mid-term, and post implementation stage in 
line with the safeguard policies of the Bank. In addition, the safeguards budget make 
provisions to use the services of safeguard specialists/thematic specialists as consultants 
to the project.  When needed, the project would draw on additional local and international 
expertise for each of the technical components.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA report has been disclosed at the local level and can be found in TELCOR’s web 
site.  It has also been disclosed at the WB’s Infoshop in Washington DC.  
 
Page  7
To carry out the EA, a multidisciplinary team has been formed, with the support of 
TELCOR’s legal adviser.  Social surveys were carried out with 4 people in each 
municipality determined for the EA (San Juan de Cinco Pinos, El Pellizco Occidental, 
Comunidad el Sol, Santa Lucia–Las Mercedes, San JosÃ© de los Remates, Altagracia). 
Before this, a meeting was held with all team members to coordinate and understand the 
Study’s social and environmental objectives. Much of the baseline information was 
provided by municipal mayors, and the rest was collected in the field. The baseline 
information provided by the mayors was updated.  
 
Interviews were held with mayors, vice-mayors, administrators, and project technicians, 
authorities, and people in urban and rural communities, randomly selected (an average of 
30 people were interviewed in each locality).  Consultation workshops will be carried out 
locally in the areas of influence of each subproject on an individual basis.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/31/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/31/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  8
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Eloy Eduardo Vidal 
01/20/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Roberto Gabriel Aiello 
01/09/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
01/09/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter L. Smith 
01/10/2006 
Comments:   
