Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2006 
Report No.:  AC2132
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nicaragua 
Project ID:  P092949 
Project Name:  NI ENHANCED COMPETITIVENESS FOR INTERNATIONAL 
MARKET INTEGRATION 
Task Team Leader:  Michael J. Goldberg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 8, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 11, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (40%);Central government administration 
(20%);Micro- and SME finance (20%);General finance sector (20%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of the Presidential 
Commission for Competitiveness (CPC) to provide technical leadership and coordinate 
the efforts of government agencies, municipalities, the private sector, civil society and 
donors in the field of competitiveness. Specifically, the CPC will provide analysis and 
support policies and practices to improve (i) the business climate, (ii) strengthen the 
financial sector, and (iii) offer quality and certification services to firms. The main target 
groups are government policymakers, private sector associations, and small and medium 
businesses.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of four components: (i) Business Climate Improvement, (ii) Business 
Services, (iii) Financial Sector Strengthening and (iv) Capacity Building of the CPC. The 
first component supports the Government’s role in supportingprivate sector 
competitiveness, while the second offers services to firms (predominantly SMEs). The 
third component will strengthen SIBOIF’s ability to supervise the financial sector, while 
Page  2
the fourth component will improve the ability of the CPC to manage and coordinate 
competitiveness plans and activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project has been categorized as a "C", with no environmental and other safguard 
issues. This is consistent with several Competitiveness projects in the region over thas 
past seven years.  
 
The project will have the following coverage. The registries improvement work under 
the business climate component will take place in Managua and three secondary cities. 
Other systems related to export, tax, and other activities will be centralized in Managua. 
The matching grants component will be open to firms and groups of firms throughout the 
country. The information campaign and collection of survey data for the National 
Competitiveness Report will have national coverage. The financial sector work will have 
national implications, but most of the technical work will take place in the SIBOIF office 
in Managua, as well as in the headquarters of the banks (also in Managua).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN) 
Mr Marcus James Wishart (YPP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not trigger environmental safeguards and is expected to have a neutral 
or positive environmental impact. There are no potential large scale, significant or 
irreversible impacts from the proejct. The project has followed an established process in 
reviewing possible environmental impacts. The following recent and active Bank projects 
have a similar focus (competitiveness and private sector development) and use a similar 
instrument (matching grants for small and medium sized businesses).  All have been 
Page  3
clas
sified as category “C” for purposes of Bank safeguards. It is noteworthy that one of 
these projects is in Nicaragua (Competitiveness LIL).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are none.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
negative list will be used to eliminate any matching grant proposal that might have 
environmental risks associated with them.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Workers:   Since labor training is included (in special economic zones), workers will be 
better prepared to use new technologies and minimize accidents and environmental 
impacts. Workers will be trained in new technologies and production processes, and will 
receive training in worker safety precautions.  
 
Small and medium enterprises (SMEs):   As recipients of matching grants, they will 
have to meet national and international requirements before expanding. These include 
ISOs, HACCP and CAFTA requirements. SMEs will be involved in consultations 
through the information and dissemination activities, as well as in sectorally specific 
activities supported by the project.  
 
CPC: To maintain its very good reputation, the CPC is eager to insure that the 
appropriate precautions are put in place to eliminate any potential environmental risks, 
and that funds are used transparently and efficiently.  
 
Municipal governments: They will participate in upgrading internal systems related to 
business climate improvement.  
 
Indicative Examples of Matching Grant Uses  
 
A
review of actual and possible matching grants to private firms (predominantly SMEs) 
reveals that there are positive environmental benefits to this activity. The following are 
seven examples of the types of activities and firms that would be assisted by the matching 
grants facility:  
 
•
A
matching grant of US$20,000 could be awarded to a group of small furniture 
producers in (location) for training and technical assistance to change processing 
practices to qualify for Rainforest Alliance Smartwood certification.  
 
•
A
matching grant of US$20,000 is offered to a cheese factory in (location) that 
wants to incorporate new pasteurization techniques, quality control and hazardous 
analysis and critical control point systems (HACCP).  
 
•
A
matching grant of US$ 5,500 is provided to a baker in a town outside Managua 
to make physical improvements to the workplace, including (i) improved floors, (ii) new 
Page  4
trays to transport banked goods within the bakery, (iii) inoxidable wooden tables 
increasing the hygiene and sanitation quality, (iv) a more energy efficient mixer that 
reduces electricity use by 50 percent.  
 
•
A
matching grant of US$15,000 is awarded to a furniture producer in a 
neighborhood of Managua to purchase an extractor fan installed inside the plant. This fan 
reduces sawdust generated by production by 95 percent, dramatically lowering the risks 
of worker safety and health problems.  
 
•
A
matching grant of US$ 5,000 to a baby-clothing manufacturer in (location) for 
machinery purchases, software training and quality certification. This results in an 
increase in production capacity from 4,000 pieces to 20,000 pieces.  
 
•
A
matching grant of US$12,000 to a baker in Managua to purchase packaging 
machinery which stamps bar codes onto the products. This allows the firm to supply 
larger clients such as supermarkets. The bakery also invested in a new truck to deliver 
goods, replacing an old truck that had higher pollution emissions.  
 
•
A
matching grant for US$2,500 to cover 50 percent of the costs of a two-day 
technical training course in ISOs on packaging and labeling for food processors in 
Chinandega.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/24/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/24/2006  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank  02/24/2006  
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/01/2006  
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/15/2006  
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the 
Executive Directors  
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety of 
Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain 
why:   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael J. Goldberg 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Marcus James Wishart 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Marcus James Wishart 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan G. Goldmark 
 
Comments:   
