Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2285 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/12/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Niger 
Project ID: P099121 
Project Name: Water Sector Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Matar Fall 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 13, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (87%);Sanitation (10%);General public administration sector (3%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Regulation and competition policy (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement (S);Access to urban 
services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.04
2.04 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The original project development objective as stated in the Project Appraisal Document, is to 
increase sustainable and efficient access to improved potable water supply and sanitation 
services in urban and rural areas through: (a) improving water production and distribution 
efficiency and providing affordable sanitation services; (b) strengthening the institutional 
capacity in the areas of oversight, policy formulation, monitoring and regulation; and (c) 
rehabilitating rural water facilities, developing on-site sanitation services and implementing 
community-based management of rural water facilities involving private sector participation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project includes five components: (i) the institutional strengthening and capacity building 
component designed to support the urban water institutional reform and capacity building 
activities; (ii) the urban water supply component which finances physical works for the 
rehabilitation and extension of water supply networks in 51 urban cities; (iii) the rural water and 
sanitation component which focuses on the rehabilitation of water systems in 50 small towns and 
the promotion of private sector participation in the management of rural water facilities; (iv) the 
Page  2
sanitation pilot program aimed at developing, testing and implementing appropriate on-site 
sanitation technologies (individual latrines, public and school latrines) to improve sanitary 
conditions in peri-urban areas of Niamey; and (v) the environmental component which supports 
the implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), including a local 
development program in Zinder, compensation of affected people for lost of income from market 
gardening activities due to the or expansion of the Niamey water treatment plant, and capacity 
building and equipment supply to the Bureau of Environmental Studies and Evaluation in the 
Ministry of Environment which is responsible for the implementation of this component.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Niamey, Diffa, Tillabery, Dosso, Zinder, Maradi, Tahoua and Agadez.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The capacity to supervise social and environmental aspects has been satisfactory under the 
original Credit and institutional support and training has been delivered to the staff of 
Environmental Appraisal Office (Bureau d’Evaluation Environnementale et des Etudes d’Impact, 
BEEEI).  A provision has been secured under the Additional financing to support BEEEI in the 
supervision of environmental and social aspects related to additional activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment prepared for the original Credit in 2000 was redisclosed in the 
country and at the Bank's Infoshop in March 2006.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/17/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental assessment mentioned above has been redisclosed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matar Fall 
05/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard Verspyck 
05/12/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
