Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2048 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/01/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Niger 
Project ID: P096198 
Project Name: Multi-Sector Demographic Project 
Task Team Leader: John F. May 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (50%);Other social services (50%) 
Theme: Population and reproductive health (P);Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Multi-sector Demographic Program (PRODEM) will focus on addressing the 
demographic challenge of Niger.  The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to build a 
national response to address the issue of rapid population growth and link this response to 
poverty alleviation and human welfare objectives.  This objective will be achieved by: (a) 
strengthening the capacity of the Borrower to coordinate, monitor, and evaluate a large multi-
sector demographic program including the supply-side interventions; and (b) helping put in place 
the necessary conditions for the onset of the fertility transition, in particular regarding demand-
creation interventions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Nigerien Bureau Central du Recensement has prepared new population projections (Les 
Projections de la population du Niger de 2005 ?? 2050).  Those projections demonstrate that it is 
possible to change demographic trends, even in the short term.  Immediate and concrete action is 
required if the country wants to restore the balance between its population growth and its 
development prospects and eventually reduce poverty levels.  
 
Page  2
With these goals in mind, four objectives must be followed and fulfilled simultaneously in 
order to trigger a fertility transition: (a) expanding access and choice of effective modern 
contraceptive methods; (b) increasing the age at marriage among women; and (c) promoting full 
breast-feeding, child spacing, and better infant/child nutrition.  
 
In order to implement these necessary interventions, the PRODEM will need to address several 
broader systemic issues and major bottlenecks in the Nigerien society, with an emphasis on 
demand-creation activities.  It is proposed that these issues be addressed through four major 
program components, namely: (a) improve maternal, infant and child survival; (b) expand family 
planning services; (c) enhance women???s education and autonomy; and (d) integrate population 
activities with development of basic infrastructures.  It must be stressed that the PRODEM is not 
viewed as a project but as a program involving all sectors as well as all actors and stakeholders.  
The four proposed substantive components of the PRODEM, which are meant to reinforce each 
other interactively and synergistically according to a multi-sector approach, are as follows:  
 
1. Improve maternal, infant and child survival.  The PRODEM will first focus on coordinating 
and expanding the interventions of all stakeholders in order to help children survive.  Four 
different dimensions will be addressed in this respect.  First, the PRODEM will work on 
improving the knowledge of the mothers concerning their child???s health, and especially 
concerning vaccination and nutrition and their benefits.  The PRODEM will also promote full 
and continuous breast-feeding (with colostrum and without water supplements) for the benefit of 
both children and mothers??? health and in order to favor child-spacing.  The improvement 
ofaccess to food and nutritional supplements as well as the food security aspects will also be part 
of the objective of helping children to survive.  Finally, the PRODEM will work to develop and 
reinforce the Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) framework.   
 
2. Expand family planning services.  The second component of the PRODEM will be to expand 
family planning services and particularly to build the necessary conditions to trigger a fertility 
transition, which is a necessary to complete the overall demographic transition.  This will be 
done by addressing four dimensions: the coordination of the development of the offer of 
contraceptive services (especially, the modern methods); the creation of the demand, mostly 
through campaigns on IEC (information, education and communication) and BCC (behavioral 
communication for change); the strengthening of financing mechanisms for family planning 
services; and finally the reinforcement of existing links between family planning and HIV/AIDS 
interventions.  Overall, the goal would be to reach an increase in the contraceptive prevalence 
rate for modern methods of 1 percentage point per year.  
 
3. Enhance women???s education and autonomy.  In order to obtain a more 
conduciveenvironment for fertility reduction, the third component would focus on reinforcing the 
education and autonomy of Nigerien women in order to boost demand for birth spacing services.  
This will be achieved first through the development of their participation to community life and 
the reinforcement of communities.  Moreover, women will need to have access to income 
generating activities that will need to be developed.  This will not be possible without legal 
reforms and without greater implication of men so that women can get a stronger status in 
society. Education for every woman ??? at school and vocational training for young girls, but 
also through continuing education for adult women ??? will also enhance their autonomy.  
Page  3
4. Integrate population activities with development of basic infrastructures.The fourth and last 
objective of the PRODEM will be to integrate population activities with development of basic 
infrastructures.  First, access to water is fundamental, as it is unlikely that any sanitary or even 
economic development could occur in a place where people do not have access to clean water for 
all their needs.  The road network also needs to be improved in order to create a real unity and 
coherence in a vast country, where many regions are still isolated.  There is also a need of new 
health and school infrastructures all over the country, so that basic services are available for all 
in the best conditions.  The PRODEM will also coordinate the development of the electrical 
network, especially in urban zones.  The program will not finance infrastructures but will make 
sure that infrastructures are developed with a reference to broader population considerations.  
 
The PRODEM will focus on the demand-creation interventions, and reinforce them through 
IEC and BCC campaigns.  The PRODEM will also benefit from interventions that are supply-
driven, such as improved survival prospects for infants and children and provision of family 
planning services.  This supply dimension is being addressed mostly through the health sector 
and with a variety of existing mechanisms such as health centers for the supply of services and 
commodities (contraceptives) mobile clinics coverage to five health districts (expansion of the 
Kollo pilot project), and social marketing distribution of contraceptives linked to efforts to 
mitigate the HIV/AIDS epidemic.  
 
The PRODEM will also help coordinate, monitor and evaluate population interventions at large.  
Therefore, the MP/AS and its overarching Committee (see below) that will oversee the 
implementation of the PRODEM will need to position themselves in a higher niche of added 
value and focus essentially on the following functions: advocacy, legal reforms, coordination of 
interventions, training and capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, and resources 
mobilization to secure financial sustainability.  All these functions could be regrouped into one 
fifth program component, i.e. a Coordination, M&E, and Capacity Building component, that will 
provide technical support to the other components.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ministry of Population and Social Action (MP/AS), Niamey, Niger.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The MP/AS institutional capacity for Safeguards Policies is weak and will need to be 
strengthened during project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is a category B, based on the coordination activities of infrastructures in 
Component 4: Integrate population activities with development of basic infrastructures.  The 
Ministry of Population and Social Action (MP/AS) will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Management Framework (ESMF) in compliance with OP 4.01.  The ESMF will be disclosed 
prior to the appraisal mission.  The level of engagement, institutional arrangements, and 
implementation will be identified as project preparation progresses.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/24/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/16/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard-related studies will be launched in February 2006 and completed in June 2006.  
ISDS will be disclosed 120 days before Board date, i.e. on July 31, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John F. May 
12/20/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
