Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/02/2006 
Report No.:  AC1272
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P071340 
Project Name:  Lagos Metropolitan Development and Governance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Deepali Tewari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 18, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (96%);Sub-national 
government administration (4%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.69 
 Financing 
Gap 
34.10
39.79 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve sustainable access to basic urban 
services through investments in critical infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has the following components:  
 
A. Infrastructure: US$160.89 million  
 
A1. Upgrading (US$39.77m); A2. Drainage (US$62.64m); A3. Solid Waste 
(US$58.48m)  
 
B: Public Governance and Capacity Building: US$ 7.9 million  
 
B1. 
Public Finance Management Reforms (US$5.0 million) -  
 
(a)Updating Public Finance Legislation; (b)Consolidating the MTEF Approach; 
(c)Improving Budget Execution and Treasury Management; (d)Consolidating the IFMIS; 
B2. Leadership, Policy Dialogue and Governance (US$1.6 million); B3. Economic 
Intelligence and Service Delivery Monitoring (US$1.3 million)  
 
Page  2
C. M&E; Urban Policy Dialogue; Communications and Coordination: US$3.75 million  
 
A. 
Infrastructure: US$160.89 million  
 
A1. 
Urban Upgrading: US$39.77 million: This component will build the capacity of 
the Lagos State Urban Renewal Authority (LASURA) to assess, develop, plan and 
coordinate the execution of a city-wide upgrading program through the execution of the 
upgrading subprojects in nine of the largest slums identified in 1995: Agege, Ajegunle, 
Amukoko, Badia , Iwaya, Makoko, Ilaje, Bariga, Ijeshatedo/Itire. These slums cover 760 
hectares and are estimated to be home to over 1 million people. The component will also 
(i) support LGs develop O&M systems and activities to strengthen maintenance of 
tertiary infrastructure; (ii) technical assistance (TA) for LASURA to support development 
of a city-wide upgrading program; (iii) TA for Ministry of Physical Planning to develop 
policies for the prevention of future slums; (iv) support to LGs to deliver a HIV/AIDS 
awareness campaign; and (v) Conflict Resolution.  
 
A2. 
Drainage: US$62.64 million: The drainage component will develop a long-term 
technical solution to flooding.  It will support: (i) the highest priority civil works 
investments to mitigate flooding; (ii) the establishment of an efficient GIS database 
management system using satellite imagery with relevant GIS software; (iii) a rational 
reassessment of drain designs to develop a prioritized construction program; (iv) a 
deferred maintenance program to clear the large volumes of solid waste, silt, and 
vegetation which has built up over the years in the absence of adequately funded drainage 
maintenance programs; (v) the development of a routine maintenance program to 
mitigate the extensive flooding that annually plagues the city; (vi) technical assistance 
and training to the ODS; and (vii) Conflict Resolution.  
 
A3. 
Solid Waste Management: US$58.48 million: Solid waste activities will be 
unbundled to segregate collection, transfer, and disposal activities, and initiate private 
sector participation in transfer and disposal activities. The project will finance (i) civil 
works for the upgrading of six transfer stations, and two landfill sites; (ii) communal 
depots; (iii) technical assistance to LAWMA develop appropriate solid waste collection 
routes, contract instruments for private sector collection, and contract instruments for the 
management of transfer stations and landfills with contracts for disposal and transfer 
being financed by IDA; (iv) an Information, Education and Communication to raise 
awareness on solid waste issues in the city; (v) a HIV/AIDS awareness campaign on 
project sites; (vi) technical assistance to support LASEPA and MoE to enable them to 
better discharge their functions; and (vii) evaluations of the overall functioning of the 
solid waste management system in Lagos thrice during implementation.  
 
B. 
Public Governance and Capacity Building: US$7.9 million  
 
This component will support public finance and budget reforms, and the 
institutionalization of information systems and consultative mechanisms to achieve the 
following: the establishment of credible priorities and targets for State interventions; to 
make the State budget an effective management tool that ensures adequate allocation of 
resources to meet targets; and to develop and institutionalize the use of performance 
indicators.  
 
B1. 
Public Finance Management reforms (US$5.0 Million).  To support budget 
preparation and expenditure management reform, the Project will finance: (i) An update 
Page  3
of the Public Finance Legislation; (ii) Consolidation of the MTEF; (iii) Improve Budget 
execution and Treasury Management; (iv) Consolidation of the IFMIS for 
implementation by ministries responsible for the provision of economic infrastructure and 
social services.  
 
B2. 
Leadership and Policy Dialogue (US$1.6 million): The Project will support 
additional institutional reforms and capacity building initiatives some of which are 
already identified, including records management, public expenditure tracking in specific 
sectors, leadership training, city-wide consultative forums around specific metropolitan 
growth and poverty related issues, and enhancement of LG performance.  
 
B3. 
Economic Intelligence and Service Delivery Monitoring (US$1.3 million). The 
project will support the Office of Statistics to undertake data collection and analysis 
growth and poverty reduction in support of MEPB’s role for M&E. Thedatawill help 
agencies plan and prioritize expenditures, monitor outcomes, and measure their 
performance.  
 
C. 
M&E; Urban Policy Dialogue; Communications and Coordination: US$3.75 
million  
 
This component will finance systematic monitoring of processes and intermediate 
results of LMDGP; knowledge management to strengthen metropolitan policy dialogue, 
and communications to inform and educate all stakeholders on the potential benefits of 
LMDGP; and operating costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Lagos metropolis and Eastern Lagos.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project has been classified as falling into environmental category B. The LMDGP 
will not fund activities that would cause an adverse effect on the environment. Incidence 
of flooding is expected to decline with the proposed maintenance investments, coupled 
with the institutional arrangements for managing the drainage network in the future. 
Overall, the infrastructure investments under this project are expected to significantly 
improve the environmental conditions in Lagos. Urban up-grading will improve the 
physical and environmental conditions in slum areas, and result in positive 
socioeconomic impacts for about one million people.  
 
Environmental Assessment: The project is not anticipated to cause any irreversible 
damage to the environment, or to forcibly displace beneficiaries from their land. 
However, critical infrastructure upgrading and small scale civil works like construction or 
repairs of social facilities (such as classrooms, roads or health centers) have the 
propensity to generate potential site specific environmental and social impacts. To this 
end, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been prepared by the 
borrower, and has been disclosed in Lagos metropolis, participating local government 
councils, and the Bank’s InfoShop.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement: Besides solid waste management and drainage, it is stated 
that social and economic infrastructure projects will be supported by this project. These 
planned interventions are not expected to lead to new land acquisition or restriction of 
access to sources of livelihood. Upgrading activities may temporarily affect a limited 
number of households. However, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been 
prepared as due diligence. The RPF has been disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s 
InfoShop.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term or potential negative direct or indirect impacts. It is expected that 
reduced flooding in the Lagos metropolitan area will lead to more effective functioning 
and a reduced maintenance burden of the road network thereby contributing to 
productivity enhancement of the firms and households.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has demonstrated that it has the capacity to adequately address safeguard 
policy issues as evidence from its record of implementation of the Lagos Urban Transport 
Project over the last three years. An environmental and social specialist will be attached 
Page  5
to the project implementation unit and will be responsible for following up on 
environmental and social issues as they arise during project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Ministries of economic planning, environment and physical planning, LASEPA, 
LAWMA, local government officials and inhabitants of the selected slums destined for 
up-grading. A social development specialist and a strategic communication team were 
part of the preparation team to ensure the involvement of key local stakeholders. All 
decisions  
 
related to the Project’s components and implementation arrangements have been taken 
in consultation with community representatives, State Governments and Local 
Governments. The Project's social impact will be monitored through a stakeholder survey 
at the Mid-Term Review and Project's completion.  
 
A
newspaper advertisement informing on where safeguard documents can be found, 
appeared in three prominent Nigerian newspapers, The Punch, New Nigeria, and The 
Guardian on June 20, 2005. Radio announcements also began on June 20, 2005 at 8am 
for the first and the last five days of the display period of twenty one days. Documents 
were made available in the Lagos State Ministry of Environment, and the Local 
Government Offices of the local governments where the nine slums selected for 
upgrading under this project are located: Apapa, Ajeromi Ifelodun, Agege, Mainland, 
Mushin, and Somolu local governments. The documents were also on display at the 
Federal Ministry of Environment's Liason Office in Surulere local government, and the 
Federal Ministry of Environment's Library in Abuja.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/13/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/28/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/13/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/28/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Deepali Tewari 
01/31/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
01/31/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
01/31/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/31/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
01/31/2006 
Comments:   
Page  7
