Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/22/2007 
Report No.:  AC2706
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P096151 
Project Name:  Nigeria State Education Sector Project 
Task Team Leader:  Halil Dundar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (60%);Secondary education (20%);General education sector 
(15%);Tertiary education (5%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the Project are to: (a) to improve the availability and 
quality of education inputs and the learning environment in select LGAs in the three 
participating States focusing particularly on girls' participation; and to (b) strengthen the 
capacity of school committees, LGAs and States to plan and monitor the performance of 
schools.   
 
3. Project Description 
The SESP, financed through a Specific Investment Loan (SIL), will be implemented over 
a
period of three years (2007 - 2009) and will support the implementation of the priority 
areas of the ESPs of Kaduna, Kano, and Kwara States.  Three years will allow time for 
launching and initiating the proposed policy reforms and implementation of specific 
inputs for delivery of education services for potential expansion to other states through a 
follow-on project.  
 
The project will consist of four main components, which are further divided into 
subcomponents: (a) School Development Scheme; (b) Quality Improvement in Basic 
Page  2
Education in targeted LGAs; (c) Institutional Development for Key Functions of the State 
Ministries of Education and LGAs; and (d) Project management and monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
The design of the Project is based on the "school effectiveness model" and will support 
priority investments in targeted LGAs, while strengthening State management, planning, 
and monitoring capacity.   Targeted schools will receive grants to improve the quality of 
teaching and learning, particularly for girls and the poor while strengthening the capacity 
of schools to participate in and manage resources effectively.  A subset of these selected 
schools will be supported under component 2, receiving key quality inputs through 
teacher development, textbooks and teaching materials and major infrastructure 
improvements.  
 
Component 1 - School Development Scheme: The main objectives of this component 
are to provide funds directly to schools to: (a) help improve learning conditions in 
selected LGAs and reduce barriers to access, particularly for girls and the poor; (b) 
encourage and empower parents and communities in improving the quality of education; 
(c) strengthen the capacity of schools and the role of School Based Management 
Committees to plan and manage resources more effectively toward achieving improved 
learning environments; and (d) promote participation in planning and implementation 
among school communities and LGEAs.  School grant awards will be based on a fixed 
allocation plus a per-student allocation and will average about US$5,000 per year.  It is 
expected that approximately 700-1200 schools will benefit from this component. 
Technical assistance and training to schools and LGAs in school development approaches 
and methodologies will also be provided.  
 
Component 2 - Quality Improvement in Basic Education in targeted LGAs: This 
component will support the improvement of the quality of primary and junior secondary 
schools in the selected LGAs.  Schools will be divided into groups that receive support 
under all three sub-components (package A) and those that only receive quality inputs 
support from the first two subcomponents (package B). The project will support the 
following activities: (a) Teacher professional development (US$6.24 million); (b) the 
provision of textbooks and teaching/learning materials (US$7.2 million); and (c) 
infrastructure improvements (US$19.12 million).  The combined activities in this 
component are expected to lead to a more coordinated approach to meeting the minimum 
conditions for a school environment that is conducive to learning.  As a result, schools 
are expected to have (a) adequate classroom space and sufficient furniture for the number 
of children, (b) adequate water and sanitation facilities, (c) sufficient textbooks and 
learning and teaching materials for students and teachers; and (d) teachers that have the 
skills to communicate effectively, and to use the curriculum guides, textbooks and other 
instructional materials effectively.  
 
Component 3 - Institutional Development for Key Functions of the State Ministries of 
Education and LGEAs: This component will strengthen the capacity of State SMOE and 
LGEAs in the participating States to plan, manage, and monitor the delivery of education 
services.  More specifically, the project would support the implementation of key reforms 
Page  3
and capacity development activities, which would include: (a) the design and 
establishment of an effective education management information system (EMIS) in the 
SMOEs and SUBEBs, including the development of the ability of the SMOEs to collect, 
analyze and disseminate information related to inputs, processes, outputs and other 
performance, including management information systems (EMIS);  (b) the development 
of policy and planning capacities at the state and LGA levels; and (c) reform of the 
Inspectorate.  
 
Component 4 - Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation: This component 
will provide all the necessary resources for effective project coordination, financial 
management, procurement, monitoring and reporting.  The SESP will be implemented by 
SMOEs in each State and their subordinated institutions (e.g., SUBEB).  This component 
would finance project coordination, financial management, procurement, monitoring and 
reporting, and the implementation of a communication strategy.  Implementing the 
proposed project, however, will not be possible for these agencies without dedicated 
technical assistance, especially given the additional fiduciary and reporting requirements 
placed on an externally funded project.  Implementation of the SESP will be measured by 
the effective coordination mechanisms; proper financial management and procurement 
practices; and the timely implementation and effective monitoring of project outcomes.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The SESP will support the implementation of the priority activities as detailed in the 
Kaduna, Kano and Kwara States Education Sector Plans (ESP). Locations for the civil 
works would be agreed on with the Bank for each state, on an annual basis and based on 
the presented workplan for the following year.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The rehabilitation and renovation works on existing schools will trigger the 
environmental safeguard, because of the noise and other inconvenience associated with 
the construction. The mitigation measures are well specified in the already disclosed 
ESMF. There are no land acquisition issues or restriction of access to sources of 
livelihood; therefore the involuntary resettlement policy is not triggered.  
 
No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) as the instrument for the triggered environmental assessment policy. It is 
expected that the ESMF will be used as a guide during project implementation; and if 
necessary, project-specific EIAs will be prepared as and when necessary. The ESMP has 
been disclosed in-country (January 10, 2007) and at the Infoshop (January 15, 2007).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include officials and staff of ministries of Education in Kaduna, Kano 
and Kwara States. There were consulted during the preparation of the ESMF. The school 
boards in these three states will have an important role in supervising the rehabilitation 
and limited constructions of the schools, which will include compliance with the EMP of 
the ESMF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Halil Dundar 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
02/22/2007 
Comments:   
