Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1736 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/07/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P090644 
Project Name: Community Social Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Foluso Okunmadewa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (30%);Primary education (20%);Roads and highways 
(20%);General public administration sector (20%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (10%) 
Theme: Other human development (P);Other social protection and risk management 
(P);Decentralization (P);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (P);Participation and 
civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project's key development objective is to support community empowerment and 
strengthen the partnership between communities and LGAs to respond to their own development 
priorities. The specific objectives are to:  
 
(i) 
Empower communities to develop, implement and monitor micro social and economic 
infrastructure projects (public and common pool goods) including natural resource management 
interventions and social risk management interventions (safety nets),  
 
(ii) 
Strengthen the partnerships between communities and local government authorities in 
sectoral and multisectoral interventions and;  
 
(iii) 
Strengthen the skills and capacity of LGAs and sectoral public agencies to support CBOs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed CPRP II is expected to be a scaled-up version of CPRP I- both in scope and in 
magnitude 
–
i.e. a National Community Development Social Project  
 
It is proposed that the project will operate at two levels  
 
(i) 
a Federal level for policy coordination and programme monitoring (possibly at the 
National Planning Commission/ Presidency level)  
 
(ii) 
a State level.  At this level, the proposed project will operate in:  
 
(a) States currently performing well on CPRP I and that are willing to continue in a scaled-up 
model (12 including states currently funded by AfDB),  
 
(b) states currently under LEEMP (9) – these states would automatically joiningthe project after 
exhausting resources under current allocation in the LEEMP and  
 
(c) other States, on a demand-driven basis. One of the eligibility criteria could be that such 
states would be required to set up a project management unit – with clear mandate and authority 
as well as incentive to perform. (about 9).  
 
Activities under the State Components will include:  
 
-
Community-Driven Activities: The major role of the State Agency /PMU’s will be funding 
Community Development Plans or Projects proposals, along with the necessary 
awareness/sensitization, training, and supervision of community subprojects, etc. In addition to 
the socioeconomic infrastructure funded under CPRP I, this project will fund natural resource 
management/environmental initiatives as under LEEMP, as well as safety net activities targeting 
the most vulnerable groups.  
 
-
LGA/Sectoral Ministries Capacity and Partnership building component.  The State 
Agencies/PMUs will also support the process of strengthening the capacity of local government 
and administrations and accountability vis-Ã -vis local communities. Funds will be made 
available for capacity building and skills training as well as essential facilities for specific local 
government officials – communitydevelopment workers – on a demand led basis to enable them 
facilitate the activities of community groups and also manage local government subprojects. 
Participatory planning, Training of Trainers for community capacity building are key elements of 
this components. Funds will also be provided to qualifying LGAs to finance social and natural 
resource infrastructures benefiting more than one community. These sub-projects will be 
identified through a participatory planning process with the communities, and complementary to 
the CDPs. The subproject will be implemented managed and maintained in partnership with the 
communities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
One Federal Unit and about 25 States Agencies in Nigeria: possibly Abia, Adamawa, Bayelsa, 
Bauchi, Benue, Cross River, Ebonyi, Ekiti, Enugu, Gombe, Imo, Kaduna, Katsina, Kebbi, Kogi, 
Kwara, Niger, Ondo, Ogun, Osun, Oyo, Rivers, Sokoto, Yobe and Zamfara.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The Borrower institutional capacity in addressing safeguards issues will be further assessed, and 
the G
overnment team will receive needed guidance from the Bank’s Safeguards specialist on the 
project team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not anticipated to cause any irreversible damage to environment, or to forcibly 
displace beneficiaries from their land.  However, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) that was prepared for CPRP I will be updated to cover the new states and 
will include a screening sheet to ensure that the project is implemented with due attention to 
environmental and social issues   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is stated that social and economic infrastructure projects with will be supported by this 
project, these planned interventions are not expected to lead to new land acquisition or restriction 
of access to sources of livelihood   However, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared 
as due diligence.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/18/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): before project appraisal  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): before project appraisal  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Foluso Okunmadewa 
03/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/08/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
03/07/2006 
Comments:  This project is a follow up/expanded phase of an on-going operation which has been very 
succesful including on the safeguard side. I am confident that good practice will remain in use. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
