Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2206 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/02/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P096151 
Project Name: Nigeria State Education Sector Project 
Task Team Leader: Halil Dundar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (50%);Secondary education (15%);Primary education 
(15%);Vocational training (10%);Tertiary education (10%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objectives of the proposed State Education Sector Program (SESP) are 
to: a) expand access to quality basic and secondary education by initiating highest priority 
investments, focusing on the disadvantaged groups (particularly girls) in selected LGAs; and (b) 
strengthen the capacity of planning, management and monitoring at the State level for more 
effective delivery of education services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed SESP is for a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of three years, and will support the 
implementation of the priority areas of the ESPs of Kaduna, Kano, and Kwara States.  
 
The proposed SESP would focus mainly on basic education, with some support to teacher 
professional development, as it relates to the delivery of quality basic and secondary education; 
and consist of the following components: (a) improve access to quality basic and secondary 
Page  2
education; (b) improve the quality of basic and secondary education; and (c) strengthen 
management, planning, and monitoring capacity.  
 
Project components  
 
Component 1 - Improvement of Basic and Secondary Education Coverage.   This component 
will support the expansion and improvement of the quality of basic and secondary education in 
selected/targeted LGAs through the(a) rehabilitation and upgrading of basic and secondary 
schools (targeted on the most disadvantaged LGAs); b) provision of school furniture and 
equipment; and c)increased access for disadvantaged groups.  
 
Component 2 - Improved Quality of Basic and Secondary Education. The SESP will support 
the improvement of the quality of basic and secondary education in the priority areas of each of 
the three participating States.  The activities currently proposed include: (a) teacher professional 
development; (b) the provision of textbooks and learning materials and equipment; and (c) 
implementation of the Family Life HIV Education (FLHE) program.  This component will also 
support the implementation of existing vernacular language policies in primary grades through 
the provision of relevant textbooks and reading materials and teacher training programs. In 
addition, if the participating States are interested, the SESP will provide support for the 
implementation of a school improvement scheme, on a limited basis, to support school level 
interventions.  This includes the financing of the provision of goods (e.g., textbooks, syllabi, and 
instructional aids), training of respective local experts in the SMOEs and LGAs, and technical 
assistance for improving Headteacher and teacher development.  
 
Component 3 - Strengthened Planning, Management, and Monitoring Capacity.  This 
component will support a) the design and establishment of an effective education management 
information system (EMIS) at the SMOEs and State Universal Basic Education Boards 
(SUBEBs); and b) the development of planning and management capacity in the SMOE and 
LGAs.  
 
Component 4 - Project Management and Institutional Arrangements.  This component would 
provide all the necessary resources for effective project coordination, financial management, 
procurement, monitoring and reporting.  The SESP will be implemented by SMOEs in each State 
and their subordinated institutions (e.g., SUBEB).  This component would finance project 
coordination, financial management, procurement, monitoring and reporting, and the design and 
implementation of a communication strategy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The SESP will support the implementation of the priority areas of Kaduna, Kano and Kwara 
States Education Sector Plans (ESP). Locations for the civil works would be agreed on with the 
Bank for each state, on an annual basis and based on the presented workplan for the following 
year.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has limited safeguares policies capacity, but this will be supplemented during 
preparation with the hiring of local consultants to carry out the safeguard work as necessary. 
During project preparation, the project will further assess the Borrower's current capacity and 
Page  3
identify measures to strengthen it. It will also outline the institutional arrangements, including 
the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders, to implement and monitor environmental 
and social mitigation measures and make appropriate recommendations. The SESP will finance 
the expansion of basic and secondary education through the rehabilitation, expansion and 
upgrading of existing educational facilities in each participating State.  An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF), will be carried out and disclosed before appraisal.  The 
EMSF will describe the environmental issues expected to be encountered under the proposed 
SESP, and consequent mitigation measures and monitoring plans.  A detailed mitigation and 
monitoring plan will be included as an integral part of each civil works contract, to be adapted to 
the specific conditions at each construction site.  An Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP)will also be prepared to outline the institutional arrangements for project implementation, 
including capacity building needs and related cost estimates.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Expanded Basic Education Coverage - This component would support expanded coverage of 
basic and secondary education through the rehabilitation, expansion, upgrading and 
refurbishment of existing basic education schools (targeted to the most marginalized LGAs in the 
State). This rehabilitation, upgrading, and construction of  schools might contribute to soil 
erosion, soil and water pollution or loss of vegetation.  
 
OP4.12 (Involluntary Settlement) is not triggered as no sites for expansion will be selected 
where they require land acquisition or cause any loss in livelihood for any previous users, and 
will be monitored as part of the ESMF.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/15/2006 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Management Framework to be prepared, reviewed, approved and 
disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to Appraisal. The sector unit agrees to 
accept transfer of safeguard responsibility."   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Halil Dundar 
09/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
09/28/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
