Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/15/2006 
Report No.:  AC2195
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P100122 
Project Name:  Avian Influenza Control and Human Pandemic Preparedness and 
Response Project for Nigeria 
Task Team Leader:  Simeon Kacou Ehui 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 28, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS3 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Health (40%);Other social 
services (20%) 
Theme:  Social risk mitigation (P);Other social protection and risk management 
(P);Natural disaster management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective is to minimize the threat posed to humans and the 
poultry industry by Highly Pathogenic Avian Influena (HPAI) infection, and to prepare 
for control and respond to influenza pandemics and other infectious disease emergencies. 
The Project will also assist in preventing the further spread of the HPAI to other parts of 
Nigeria not yet infected by the virus. To achieve these objectives, three areas will be 
considered for support: (i) response and containment, (ii) control and prevention and (iii) 
preparedness and planning.  
 
The proposed project is not included in the Country Partnership Strategy (2005-2009) as 
this is an Emergency Recovery Credit (ERC) being processed under OP 8.50.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has four components:  
 
Component 1: Animal health  
Page  2
This component will support national prevention and control strategies proposed to 
cover the country’s needs over the short, medium or long term, based on detailed 
assessments of the avian influenza epidemiological status, of the capacity of national VS 
to cope with HPAI epidemic and the vulnerability of the poultry industry to new 
emerging infectious diseases. It is pertinent to stress that HPAI outbreaks should be 
addressed at source (i.e. on the animal side), as the threat to human health will persist as 
long as the problem persists in livestock and poultry flocks. It is, therefore, important that 
the primary focus of attention in the prevention of the introduction and perpetuation of 
the virus in the country is initiated from the animal health perspective. The component 
has the following sub-components:  
 
(a).Strengthening HPAI Control Programs and Outbreak Containment Plans  
 
a1:  Targeting virus elimination at the source  
 
a2:  Vaccination  
 
a3:  Human safety component  
 
(b) Strengthening Disease Surveillance, Diagnostic Capacity and Applied Research  
 
As part of the control strategy for a HPAI infected country, like Nigeria, the proposed 
sub-component will support activities to strengthen national VS, including the private and 
related sectors operating under its authority, and enhance animal disease surveillance, 
diagnostic and research capabilities. The sub-component will consist of the following:  
 
b1:
Strengthening of veterinary services  
 
b2:
Strengthening animal disease surveillance (Epidemiological surveysand 
community-based animal disease surveillance  
 
(c) Strengthening of Veterinary Quarantine Services  
 
Early warning and early reaction system: The sub-component will finance the 
establishment at the community level of early warning systems to support a robust 
emergency reporting and feedback system against notifiable diseases.  
 
c1: Upgrading diagnostic capacity  
 
c2: Strengthening human and animal health surveillance system linkages  
 
c3: Enhancing animal diseases information  
 
c4: Strengthening applied veterinary research  
 
(d) Enhancing HPAI Prevention and Preparedness Capability  
 
Adapting national policy framework:  This sub-component will provide support to 
activities related to the improvement in the regulatory framework to address key policy 
issues to ensure that the recommended disease control, prevention and eradication 
measures are implemented in a uniform and effective way and in accordance with OIE 
standards and guidelines.  In addition, this sub-component will support reviews of 
existing regulations and policies, will fund related policy studies and dissemination 
Page  3
workshops and will include a focus on trans-boundary animal diseases.  More specifically 
this sub-component will support key diagnostic and assessment studies, including the 
following:  
 
d1: Assessment of national veterinary  
 
d2:
Updating the National Emergency Contingency Plan for HPAI.  
 
d3:
Capacity Building of Personnel  
 
(e) Improving Bio-security in Poultry Production and Trade  
 
On a longer term basis, improving bio-security in poultry production and trade is not 
only an important strategy to guard against the damaging effects of HPAI, but also a 
complicated intervention requiring understanding of the whole value chain. This 
component will support the restructuring of the poultry industry when needed. 
Restructuring will be a gradual process, affecting the various segments of the sector in 
different ways and at different rates.  In principle, the main activities to be considered 
under this component are: (a) restructuring of production compartmentalization and 
zoning; (b) adjustment to marketing systems and transport; (c) new regulations for 
national/international trade; (d) re-assessing farming systems and practices; (e) 
introducing segregation of species; (f) re-stocking supply of poultry breeding stock from 
virus free populations; and (g) strengthening bio-security at producing and marketing 
sites.  
 
(f) Compensation and Economic Recovery  
 
f1:Establishment of a National Compensation Policy and National Compensation Fund  
 
f2: Support to economically vulnerable groups  
 
f3: Restocking: This Component will support advisory services that will enable farmers 
to adopt output-enhancing techniques and measures for prevention and control of avian 
Influenza-related diseases. The Project will finance:  
 
a) 
advisory services that will accompany new investment and re-stocking activities 
in project areas on request by the thematic associations; and  
 
b)
advisory services that will support ongoing activities on prevention and control of 
the dreaded disease.  
 
Beneficiaries of the Compensation Fund under this Project will receive technical and 
management assistance from notable service providers that will be engaged by the State 
Project Office in order to equip them with the necessary skills to properly utilize the fund. 
The Project will also (i) fund training and learning events to promote sharing of 
knowledge and lessons learned about emerging good and bad practices in the 
implementation of the component's activities (processes and methods, subject matter 
issues); (ii) create and maintain a database of service providers which will be made 
accessible to all concerned actors; (iii) encourage the participation of service providers in 
the learning and experience sharing events that will be arranged by the State Fadama 
Development Office (SFDO); and (iv) fund training on environmentally friendly 
practices for selected service providers.  
 
Page  4
Under the umbrella of the Community Thematic Association (CTA), the affected 
farmers will elaborate their needs for advisory services in the form of a proposal that will 
enhance their know-how and prevention mechanisms for the disease and help to establish 
sustainable linkages between them and other actors involved in complementary activities. 
Suitably qualified service providers will be eligible to provide services funded under the 
component. These include, in addition to the public Agricultural Development Programs 
(ADPs), private enterprises, NGOs, research and educational institutions, other public 
sector departments, and international agencies.  The CC at the SFDO, which coordinates 
the Project at the state level, will provide technical assistance to user groups for the 
evaluation of proposals from service providers.  
 
Component 2: Human health  
 
This component will support the NAIECP to implement HPAI prevention, preparedness, 
response, and containment activities in the human health sector. These activities reflect 
an assessment of the particular risks, conditions, constraints, needs and possibilities in the 
country, which was undertaken by the project team in close collaboration with the 
Ministry of Health, WHO, CDC and bilateral partners. The design of the program will 
take into account the Government’s health policy agenda, promoting integration of the 
avian influenza health strategies in a wider framework of strengthening the capacity of 
the health sector to effectively address infectious diseases.  
 
To prevent an outbreak among humans, short-term emergency strategies will be 
supported while planning for longer-term interventions.  Initial support will focus on 
prevention and reporting of human cases through the protection of farm workers and 
others who are in direct contact with sick birds, social mobilization and raising public 
awareness and strengthening of the surveillance and laboratory capacity in the affected 
states. The emphasis of the longer-term strategy of this component will be on the 
reduction of the impact of a pandemic influenza virus through: (i) year-round 
surveillance;  (ii) effective and accurate methods of diagnosis; (iii) social distance 
interventions; (iv) vaccines (once they become available); (v) anti-viral drugs; and (vi) 
strengthened medical services. Sub-components include the following:  
 
(a) Enhancing Public Health Program Planning and Coordination  
 
(b) Strengthening of National Public Health Surveillance Systems  
 
(c).Strengthening Health System Response Capacity  
 
c1: Social distancing  
 
c2: Vaccination  
 
c3: Procurement and distribution of drugs and other supplies  
 
c4: Medical services  
 
Component 3:  Social mobilization and strategic communication  
 
The main challenges that might face the fight against avian flu are both social and 
cultural which are also aggravated by low risk perception, motivation, trust, and 
Page  5
poverty/traditional livelihood issues. Therefore the project will identify communication 
lines, social beliefs, practices and perceptions which affect behavior and plain habit. This 
component is designed to promote awareness, participation and improved coordination of 
the execution of emergency contingency plans as outlined under the national avian 
influenza strategy. It is designed to safeguard human health, in particular for extension 
staff, animal health workers, poultry producers and their families, by improving public 
awareness and information. Under this component, support will be provided for the 
development of strategies to promote public awareness and improved coordination of the 
execution of the national HPAI responses strategies and plans. Support will be provided 
for information and communication activities to increase the attention and commitment 
of government, private sector, and civil society organizations, and to raise awareness, 
knowledge and understanding among the general population about the risk and potential 
impact of the pandemic. Activities will include:  
 
(a) Information and Communication Services. This is sub-divided into  
 
a1: Communication  
 
a2: Collaboration with Stakeholders  
 
a3: Developing Pilot Models for Community-based Rapid Communication   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
There are confirmed presence of Avian Flu are in the following states: Kaduna, Kano, 
Gombe, Bauchi, Plateau, Katsina and Zamfara. The project will be implemented nation-
wide, despite confirmed presence in the seven states mentioned above.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The two environmental safeguards issues associated with the proposed project are those 
concerning the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for carcass disposal facilities 
and medical waste management plan. Activities under the project are not expected to 
generate any adverse environmental effect, as a large part of the project is geared to 
support prevention activities. The project would overall have positive environmental and 
social impacts. The project would support training of health workers to manage medical 
waste, and if necessary purchase of equipment for proper handling and disposal of 
medical wastes in participating facilities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Since the project supports investments for the safe disposal of carcasses and laboratory 
wastes, an EMP for carcass disposal facilities will be necessary, in addition to a medical 
waste management plan. The EMP will also cover the clean up of animal wastes of culled 
poultry by the public veterinary services supported under the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is assessed as a B-category project, an EMP for the carcass disposal facilities 
and a medical waste management plan will need to prepared and disclosed within six 
months of project effectiveness. While the EMP and MWMP is being prepared, the 
project will follow interim siting and operating procedures to manage and monitor 
potential negative impacts of carcass disposal, formulated by a technical advisor to the 
project’s desks.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders with regards to safeguards issues are:  
 
-
Federal and State Ministries of Agriculture and Rural Development; especially the 
concerned departments like Federal Department of livestock and pest control services; 
Veterinary Services/Veterinary Research Institute;  
 
-
Federal and State Ministries of Health  
 
-
Federal and State Ministries of Environment  
 
-
National Fadama Development Office   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  7
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/30/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Due to the emergency nature of this action, and in conformance with OP 8.50, the 
completion and disclosure of the environmental instruments were not required as a 
condition for appraisal of the project. However, these instruments: The EMP and MWMP 
will be completed and disclosed by June 30, 2006.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
03/15/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
03/15/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
03/15/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joseph Baah-Dwomoh 
03/15/2006 
Comments:   
