Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2522 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/15/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P074132 
Project Name: Nigeria Federal Science & Technical Education at Post-Basic Levels 
(STEPB) 
Task Team Leader: Jacob H. Bregman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (40%);Secondary education (35%);Vocational training (25%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Science and Technology Education at Post-Basic (STEPB) level project will target 
only the federal post-basic education institutes.  The STEPB Project aims to support:  
 
a. 
the Federal Government of Nigeria (FGN) in improving the quality and relevance of S&T 
programs offered at Post-Basic Federal Institutions and increasing access for disadvantaged 
target groups (rural and female students);  
 
b.
the establishment of effective Public-Private Partnerships for S&T related programs 
between Post-Basic Federal Education Institutions and Businesses, in order to become better 
adapted to labor market demands.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed STEPB project is a three-year Specific Investment Loan (SIL) to support capacity 
enhancement in post-basic science and technology education at the federal level in Nigeria. The 
project has four components.  
 
Page  2
Component One:  A Competitive Fund for Innovation and Quality Improvement.  This will be a 
facility to provide competitively-awarded quality improvement grants to tertiary institutions 
through different windows, each dedicated to a specific purpose as follows.  
 
Window A.  Group/joint research projects led by senior researchers to conduct relevant, high-
quality S&T related research, with in-built graduate training.  Grants may include procurement 
of equipment and other inputs needed to conduct quality training and research. Groups may 
comprise researchers from the same institution or from a cluster of institutions.  The component 
will be designed so as to encourage synergy through institutional clusters  
 
Window B.  Supporting the emergence of ?Centers of Excellence? in S&T related disciplines 
and the rehabilitation and upgrading of S&T programs.  Support will be in: (i) teaching, learning 
and research equipment; (ii) library resources; (iii) professional development courses for 
teaching and technical staff; (iv) upgrading of the Science Equipment Development Institutes 
(SEDIs); (v) ?Technology Platforms? or R&D parks through which firms and institutional 
researchers define collaborative agendas for solving problems of direct interest to industry, and 
then pursue solutions collaboratively; and (vi) formal firm-based internships for students in S&T 
related disciplines, allowing interns the opportunity to participate in joint R&D activities and 
also to gain exposure to the ?real life? work-place environment.  
 
Window C.  Improving ICT connectivity and learning environment.  This will include support 
to (i) integrate e-learning in teaching and learning; (ii) strengthening / establishment of a virtual 
library; (iii) improving internet connectivity; including sustainable acquisition of additional 
bandwidth; (v) procurement of infrastructure and its maintenance and (vi) training (human 
capacity building) of teachers in ICT literacy and of technical staff to manage ICT systems.  
 
Component Two:  Technical Assistance to strengthen planning and management of post-basic 
S&T education.  Activities under this component can include:  
 
a. 
Support for the development of a flexible National Vocational Qualification Framework 
(NVQF) to regulate recognition of skills and competencies in cooperation with selected leading 
federal universities and major S&T stakeholders;  
 
b.
Support for the establishment of a National Labor Market Observatory (NLMO) to 
monitor trends in the labor market and facilitate informed decision-making by policy-makers, 
government, institutions, students and the public.  The STEPB project would support capacity 
building for the federal institution selected to host the observatory and support to establish a 
graduate program in labor market studies in one federal university (to be selected by FGN).  
 
c. 
Support for proposals from federal tertiary institutions to promote a public information 
and advocacy program to educate the public about the S&T education and training and to inform 
prospective S&T students;  
 
d.
Support for the reform of S&T related curricula with participation of the major public and 
private S&T stakeholders;  
 
e. 
Support for improved planning and management capacity in S&T related areas in federal 
post-basic institutions ( for example FME, FMST, NUC, NBTE and NCCE).  
 
Component 3.  Seed funds for the Africa Institute of Science and Technology (AIST).  
 
The project will provide financing support for the development of the AIST (Abuja Campus).  
This financial support will be based on approved and reviewed development plans, according to 
Page  3
agreed criteria between the FGN and the Bank.  Support under the STEPB project can be for 
initial development costs of the AIST, including architectural and engineering works, 
procurement of goods and materials as well as consultant costs.  The FGN has already allocated 
available land for the AIST campus and has made all the necessary preparations.  The AIST 
support would be in the form of financial support to the executing Agency of the AIST, as 
designated by the FGN.  
 
Component 4.  Project Management and Institutional Arrangements.  This component supports 
overall project management, monitoring and evaluation; and the design and implementation of a 
communication strategy for S&T education.  Capacity building support for implementation will 
begin during project preparation stage.  
 
Detailed project components will be finalized during the preparation phase following 
consultations with FGN representatives.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The STEPB project will support the development of post-basic science and technology education 
at the federal level throughout Nigeria.  Specific institutions that will participate in the various 
components will be agreed upon during appraisal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has limited safeguard policies capacity, but has taken measures to address some of 
the potential problem areas. Building site preparation for the Nigeria AIST campus in Abuja ? a 
likely trigger of safeguard concerns - was completed by the FGN prior to preparation. During 
project preparation, the World Bank project team will further assess the Borrower's current 
capacity and identify measures to strengthen it.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Borrower has limited safeguard policies capacity, but has taken measures to address 
some of the potential problem areas.  The project will not have major construction or 
rehabilitation.  It will only finance minor rehabilitation (laboratories, research facilities, ICT 
environment, etc.) in the federal post-basic S&T institutions and units.  During project 
preparation, the World Bank project team will further assess the Borrower's current capacity and 
identify measures to strengthen it.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/18/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF will be disclosed to the country on February 19, 2007 and to the infoshop on 
February 22, 2007.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsabilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jacob H. Bregman 
02/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/15/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
02/15/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
