Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2330 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Niger 
Project ID: P095949 
Project Name: Local Urban Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Chantal Reliquet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (20%);Other social services (20%);Sanitation (20%);General 
public administration sector (20%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Decentralization (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to (i) increase access to infrastructure and basic 
services in the underserved urban areas; and (ii) improve local governments' capacity to plan, 
manage, and operate infrastructure services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will include two components:  
 
a) 
Access to basic services: execution of a program of small urban works (primarily roads 
and drainage and small facilities), as identified by the local governments, in close collaboration 
with the beneficiaries, and on the basis of a methodology that would clarify the appropriate and 
affordable level of service likely to increase service accessibility to the highest number of 
inhabitants; this will involve identification of local infrastructure investments as well as small 
community development projects. The component will emphasize the priority of building and 
Page  2
maintaining roads and networks likely to facilitate access to and from poorly integrated 
residential areas in order to facilitate their integration in the urban economy and contribute to its 
growth.  The component will also include municipal operations such as markets, 
slaughterhouses, parking lots, public latrines, and bus stations.  
 
Implementation of works will be carefully monitored throughout the project.  A baseline 
assessment of existing infrastructure and services will be carried out at the beginning of the 
project.  This will be used as benchmarking for follow-up regular progress assessments.  
 
b) 
Capacity building and institutional strengthening: training activities directed to the 
municipalities, local government services, and SMEs; support to the development of 
programming and planning tools as well as appropriate operation and maintenance techniques 
and best practices; development of urban development strategies focusing on the economic role 
of cities and their contribution to growth, within their respective regional context; mobilization 
of local financial resources and preparation of a study on intergovernmental financial transfers.  
The component will also include the preparation of municipal audits (financial and 
organizational) in order to provide a description of the status of urban management, finances, and 
stock of infrastructures, for urban municipalities and urban municipalities, the preparation of city 
development contracts (with an annual work program and municipal counterpart funds).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in the cities of Niamey, Maradi, and Dosso.  During the 
identification mission, Agadez has been added to the list of cities after discussion with the 
Government, in order to support tourism and promote Niger's cultural heritage through the 
project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower's capacity for safeguard policies will be assessed during project identification.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy is being triggered by the project due to potential construction (municipal 
operations such as roads, slaughterhouses, parking lots, public latrines and bus stations) which 
may have temporary environmental and social impacts.  Provisions will be made in the ESMF to 
mitigate these impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
If the project includes investments in cultural sites, this safeguards policy will be triggered.  
This will be decided at appraisal.    
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy is being triggered by the project due to minor and temporary resettlement that 
may occur during rehabilitation works of markets, slaughter houses, parking lots and bus 
stations.  Provisions will be made in the RPF to mitigate these impacts if needed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/05/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Given the sub-projects' size, number, scale and environmental and social characteristics are 
unknown at this time, the Borrower will be required to prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to be 
approved and disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to project appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Chantal Reliquet 
07/20/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/20/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christophe Prevost 
07/20/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
