Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2099 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/07/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P097921 
Project Name: Malaria Control Booster Project 
Task Team Leader: Eva Jarawan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 21, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to ensure that the target population will have improved 
access to, and utilization of, effective preventive and treatment services for malaria control.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Boost access to, and utilization of, a well-defined package of effective preventive measures 
among the target population by:  (a) rapidly scaling-up coverage and utilization of Long-Lasting 
Insecticide-treated Nets (LL ITNs); (b) boosting timely access to large-scale coverage of Indoor 
Residual Spraying (IRS) for the more remote vulnerable communities; (c) increasing pregnant 
women’s access to, and utilization of, Ante-Natal Care and Intermittent Preventive Treatment 
(IPT) services.  These strategies, supported with intensive education and community 
mobilization campaigns, would result in: (a) significant behavioral change at family level to 
ensure that young children and pregnant and breast-feeding mothers sleep under LL ITNs; (b) 
significant reduction in malaria transmission for up to 6 months in high-risk communities 
receiving over 80% coverage with IRS; (c) improved utilization of antenatal services; (d) 
improved contact with family caretakers and decision makers (mothers) to reinforce the effective 
capacity of MoH partners to deliver a comprehensive package; and (e) reduction in rates of 
maternal anemia and low-birth weights, often caused by malaria in pregnancy.  
Page  2
Increase access to effective diagnostic and treatment services among under-5 children by:  (a) 
increasing access to accurate differential diagnosis; (b) increasing access to ACT for 
uncomplicated malaria; and (c) strengthening referral of severe cases to services for appropriate 
case management.  These strategies would result in: (a) identifying true malaria cases among 
under-5 children with generalized 
disease symptoms, in line with the Country Strategic Plan’s 
emphasis on children under-5; (b) identifying febrile cases not caused by malaria and requiring 
other treatment, thereby improving quality of case management treatment services; (c) providing 
accurate prescriptions for ACT treatment for uncomplicated malaria cases; and (d) increasing 
understanding of community and health providers of the importance to provide effective referral 
and case management of suspected severe malaria cases; and (e) improved rational drug 
management of ACT to reduce wastage of expensive drugs.  
 
Evidence-based malaria control (M&E).  As RBM is an outcome-driven program, systematic 
data collection would be necessary to analyze outcome indicators frequently and introduce 
changes as needed.  The Government and the Bank team have agreed on the following key 
outcome indicators:  % of under-5 children who slept under an LL ITN the previous night, % of 
women who received intermittent preventive treatment for malaria during their most recent 
pregnancy, % of under-5 children with fever in the last two weeks who were appropriately 
treated within 24 hours of onset, and % of health facilities with no stocks out of nationally 
recommended anti-malarial drugs during the last three months.  
 
Build capacity at all levels to achieve sustainability of malaria control interventions.   Although 
national capacity at Federal level is relatively high and the National Malaria Control Policy 
sound, capacity at State and LGA level for effective implementation is weak.  The institutional 
strengthening aspect of the proposed Project would enhance Federal and State training partners’ 
capacity to deliver training to all LGA health partners. This component would also build capacity 
at all levels in the areas of procurement, financial, and logistics management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Target States to be determined on the basis of the epidemiology and feasibility of 
implementation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While rapid LL ITN scale-up to 80% population coverage across supported states will be the 
cornerstone of vector management activities, the Project would experiment expanding vector 
management beyond LL ITNs, particularly in urban and peri-urban areas. Given limited 
experience in non-ITN vector management, such as indoor-spraying, larviciding, and drainage, a 
vector management plan would be developed to define a sound system for the use, inventory and 
operational management of insecticides and insecticide-treated materials.  In addition, the 
proposed Project will work with the ongoing HIV/AIDS program to establish areas of common 
concern to be addressed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment is checked as an umbrella policy.  
 
No EA will be required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Insecticide- Treated Nets   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/17/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.  
 
Safeguard documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
02/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
