Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/10/2006 
Report No.:  AC2324
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P099121 
Project Name:  Water Sector Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Matar Fall 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 18, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (87%);Sanitation (10%);General public administration sector (3%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Regulation and competition policy (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement (S);Access to urban 
services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.04
2.04 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original project development objective as stated in the Project Appraisal Document 
and the original Development Credit Agreement, is to increase sustainable and efficient 
access to improved potable water supply and sanitation services in urban and rural areas 
through: (a) improving water production and distribution efficiency and providing 
affordable sanitation services; (b) strengthening the institutional capacity in the areas of 
oversight, policy formulation, monitoring and regulation; and (c) rehabilitating rural 
water facilities, developing on-site sanitation services and implementing community-
based management of rural water facilities involving private sector participation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing would help implement water and sanitation works in urban and 
rural centers most of which have already been identified and evaluated based on their 
socio-economic viability and their positive impact.  These include: (i) rehabilitation of 
twelve (12) water systems in secondary centers including the replacement of 6 boreholes 
and the construction of 7 water treatment facilities (de-ironing systems); (ii) the 
construction of about 5,000 water connections and 70 public standpipes in urban centers; 
(iii) the construction of 1,500 household latrines in Niamey; (iv) securing water 
Page  2
production capacity in three rural towns by the replacement of 3 deep wells; and (v) the 
rehabilitation of internal water distribution installations in 3 selected state agencies? 
buildings.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The urban water component will be implemented in three (3) towns: Niamey, Tahoua and 
Maradi and in five (5) secondary centers: (Konni, Gaya, Mirriah, Kollo and Goure), 
whereas the rural water component concerns three (3) villages: Taza, Affala and Samo.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As was the case under the original project, activities to be supported by this Additional 
Financing operation will not have any significant negative environmental and social 
impacts. Potential impacts such as soil erosion or soil pollution may result from 
construction activities related to the laying of pipes in the right-of-ways along roads.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The planned project activities will not have any long term and/or indirect impacts as they 
are designed to improve current water supply and sanitation conditions in urban, peri-
urban and rural areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since the project is responding to public demand for improved water supply and 
sanitation facilities, the discussion of alternatives was not relevant.   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To mitigate potential negative environmental and social impacts of the original project, 
the Borrower has prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) dated August 
2000, including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the project. The EMP 
included, among others, provisions for Environmental Guidelines for Contractors to 
ensure that construction-related impacts are mitigated appropriately. The Borrower has 
implemented this EMP satisfactorily, and is expected, with additional support to the 
Bureau des Evaluations Environnementales et des Etudes d' Impact (BEEEI) of the 
Ministry of Environment, to continue satisfactory implementation under the Additional 
Financing operation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations with relevant stakeholders (representatives of ministries, water utilities, 
NGOs, potentially affected persons) were carried out during the preparation of the EIA.  
The consultations were carried out in the form of meetings with national stakeholders, 
local officials, and field visits. The results of these consultations are still relevant to the 
proposed Additional Financing operation. Thus, the original EIA report was redisclosed 
for this Additional Financing operation in Niger on March 14, and in the Bank's Infoshop 
on March 24, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2000 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/14/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/24/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  4
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matar Fall 
07/10/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
07/10/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard Verspyck 
07/10/2006 
Comments:   
