Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1857 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P072644 
Project Name: Rural Access and Mobility Project (RAMP) 
Task Team Leader: Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 9, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
FOREIGN SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
0.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to support the improvement of rural access 
and mobility by:  
 
a. 
Providing improved all-weather access road networks to, and, in, selected and prioritized 
rural development areas; and  
 
b. 
Supporting the institutional reform in the transport sector in the State to improve 
management of the State-wide road network.  
 
The final indicators will be agreed on during pre-appraisal, but may include as output indicator 
the number of kilometers of improved access roads and as outcome indicators, amongst others, 
the savings in travel time resulting from the planned interventions, the decrease in rural transport 
cost due to the actual interventions measured as actual cost to farmers and the increase in rural 
population living within 2.5 km of all weather access roads.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The components to be included in the proposed project are the following:  
 
(i) Institutional Reform, Strengthening and Capacity Building: This will focus on (a) 
Strengthening the road management as well as planning, procuring and supervising road 
maintenance contract skills both on State and Local Government levels; (b) Assisting with the 
development and implementation of institutional reform proposals and reporting systems to 
assist with efficient management of rural transport infrastructure; (c) Support with the 
implementation of RTTP1 to empower the local government and communities to participate in 
the management and provision of rural transport infrastructure and services; and (d) capacity 
building in the procurement, supervision and execution of labor based and small scale 
contracting.  
 
(ii) Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Transport Infrastructure: This will support 
the upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance of rural (State, Local Government and access) 
roads and other transport infrastructure in selected, prioritized geographical areas in the State. 
The planned interventions will be a mix of contracts including longer term performance-based 
contracts for complete road networks, standard bridge construction contracts and contracts 
supporting the development of labor based contractors and small scale maintenance contractors.  
 
The project activities will comply with safeguard and fiduciary requirements and will 
accommodate cross-cutting social issues, e.g. , HIV/AIDS, gender and poverty reduction.  
 
Project Management and Implementation:  
 
FMARD set up a Federal Project Management Unit (FPMU) to manage the implementation of 
RTTP1. The FPMU is responsible for initial project start-up activities in individual States (for 
example, information dissemination and setting up the implementation units) and overall project 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation. This will ensure national implementation review and 
amendment of the overall RTTP to enable efficient improvement of rural access and mobility. 
The FPMU comprises of professional staff recruited on a competitive basis from either within or 
outside Government.  
 
FMARD also established a National Technical Steering Committee (NTSC) to provide the 
necessary management oversight for the FPMU. The NTSC will include all stakeholder Federal 
Ministries as well as those State Governments participating in RTTP1.  
 
On State level Government will establish a State Project Implementation Unit (SPIU), anchored 
in the State Ministry responsible for Transport/Roads. The SPIU will be responsible for all 
implementation activities on the State level. An oversight State Project Management Committee 
(SPMC) made up of all stakeholder State Ministries and Local Governments will be appointed to 
guide and monitor the implementation process. As road reform is implemented, the new manager 
of the road network, now called State Road Authority, would take over this responsibility from 
the SPIU.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
State-wide road network in Kaduna State.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower's capacity to manage Bank safeguard concerns within the sector is weak. The 
borrower's institutional capacity in addressing safeguards issues will be further assessed, and the 
Government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank's safeguards specialists on the 
project team. The project will ensure that the relevant environmental assessment instruments in 
the form of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), are prepared, approved and disclosed in-country and the Bank's 
Infoshop prior to appraisal. Specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared if necessary and be disclosed before the 
commencement of civil works, during project implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy will apply to all the works planned under this credit. The project activities 
concern works on existing roads and will include upgrading (to allow for increased traffic 
volume), rehabilitation, periodic maintenance and routine maintenance. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed and disclosed at appraisal. Detailed 
environmental assessments would be done for all project activities during the design stage and 
disclosed before works commences.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
This policy will be marked as TBD pending confirmation from ESMF that that this policy 
will not be triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy may only apply to areas where the upgrading activities will include the 
resettlement of people that either moved onto or use space in the right of way. A Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared and disclosed at appraisal. This will be used to 
manage all resettlement mitigation as they are identified during detailed design of the works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/23/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1.  The resettlement and the environmental and social management frameworks will be 
prepared before project appraisal, currently scheduled for July 2006.  
 
2. These safeguard requirements would be included in the bidding documents for the 
already described long term performance based contracts. The bidding documents would be 
subject to Bank clearance before advertisement.  
 
3. 
The EIA’s/EMP’s and RAP’s for each individual contract will be prepared by the 
contracted consortium after contract award but before implementation of the scheduled 
works. These will be subject to Bank clearance before start of construction.  
 
4.    The ESMF and RPF will be disclosed prior to appraisal.  
 
5.    The Sector Manager has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
01/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
01/10/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
