Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/07/2007 
Report No.:  AC2800
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P096198 
Project Name:  Multi-Sector Demographic Project 
Task Team Leader:  John F. May 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (50%);Other social services (50%) 
Theme:  Population and reproductive health (P);Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Three key objectives will be pursued under the PRODEM, namely: (a) the strengthening 
of the Nigerien capacity, in particular at the Ministry of Population and Social Action 
(MP/AS); (b) the building of a sound nation-wide and multi-sector population program; 
and (c) the launching of nation-wide communication campaigns on population and 
reproductive health issues.  These efforts will be complemented by the strengthening of 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanisms.  
 
The PRODEM is not envisaged as a single project but rather as a program that will help 
coordinate population-related interventions in all sectors, by all actors and stakeholders, 
and with all development partners.  The overall long-term objective of the PRODEM is to 
help the Government of Niger address population issues from a multi-sector perspective 
and increase general awareness on population issues.   
 
3. Project Description 
Rapid population growth in Niger will not abate in the foreseeable future, particularly 
because infant and child mortality are likely to continue to decrease.Therefore, 
population issues will need to be addressed over a long period of time.  For example, the 
Declaration of National Population Policy (D-PNP) adopted recently by the Government 
of Niger covers the period up to 2015.  At this stage, it is envisaged that a program of a 
Page  2
minimum of 10 years will be necessary to trigger a process of demographic 
modernization in Niger, in particular a downward change in fertility levels that are still 
very high.  
 
Such a broad population program may be articulated into three main phases.  First, a 
Capacity Building and Program Approach phase would put into place three fundamental 
pre-requisite that are necessary in order to address population and reproductive health 
(Pop/RH) issues in an effective way.  These are: (a) to strengthen the Nigerien capacity, 
in particular at the Ministry of Population and Social Action (MP/AS); (b) to build a 
sound nation-wide and multi-sector population program (i.e., help establish a ?program 
approach? to population issues); and (c) to increase general awareness on population 
issues (nation-wide communication campaigns).  These efforts would be complemented 
by the strengthening of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) processes.  Provided these 
goals are achieved, a second phase of Gender and Demand Creation would incorporate 
the lessons of the first phase and focus on women empowerment efforts and demand-
creation mechanisms to change reproductive behavior and increase the uptake of 
contraceptives. Finally, based on satisfactory outcomes of the second phase, a third phase 
of Family Planning Scaling Up would incorporate the lessons learned during the second 
phase and focus on supply-side dimensions, including the dissemination of birth spacing 
and family planning services nation-wide.  
 
The Multi-sector Demographic Program (PRODEM) will support the first phase of this 
broader program.  IDA support will come under the form of a Specific Investment Loan 
(SIL) over a period of four years.  A SIL would help ensure viability of the project by 
supporting the reform of policies.  The SIL would also finance consultant services as well 
as management and training programs which are most necessary for institutional 
strengthening and capacity building.  
 
The overall strategy of the Multi-sector Demographic Program (PRODEM) is aligned 
with the key population policy document prepared by the Government of Niger, namely 
the Declaration of National Population Policy (D-PNP).  The D-PNP was approved 
recently (see Annex 1) and is aligned with the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS II) 
document.  The PRODEM will also contribute to implement the three main actions 
recommended in the 2005 Nigerien population projections, namely to increase the age at 
marriage, to increase the contraceptive prevalence rate (modern methods), and to promote 
full breast-feeding.  To achieve these goals, the PRODEM will focus on: (a) advocacy, 
information, education, and communication (IEC), and behavior change communication 
(BCC) campaigns; (b) female empowerment and autonomy interventions; (c) nation-wide 
coordination of population activities; and (d) monitoring & evaluation (M&E) and 
capacity building activities.  These four broad areas coincide with the PRODEM 
components.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will be mainly focused on institutional strengthening (in particular at the 
Ministry of Population and Social Action), capacity building, and advocacy and 
awareness of population issues.  The operation falls under environment Category C."   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no safeguard issues due to the removal of the Infrastructure component on the 
project initial design.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term impacts issues   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not relevant   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not relevant   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John F. May 
03/06/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/06/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/06/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Setareh Razmara 
03/06/2007 
Comments:   
Page  5
