Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/05/2007 
Report No.:  AC2752
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P074132 
Project Name:  Nigeria Federal Science & Technical Education at Post-Basic Levels 
(STEPB) 
Task Team Leader:  Jacob H. Bregman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (40%);Secondary education (35%);Vocational training (25%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's Development Objective (PDO) is for Nigerian federal post-basic education 
and research sub-sector to produce more and better qualified Science & Technology 
graduates, and higher quality and more relevant research.  
 
Increases in amounts of human resources trained would be measured by increases in 
numbers of programs, enrollment, and graduates in science and technology, and labor 
market utilization of these skills.  Improvements in quality would be measured through 
user surveys, in independent review panels, growth in total number of publications, and 
increased collaboration with regional and international research public and private 
partners.  Improvements in teaching and learning of S&T can be measured by 
assessments of knowledge and skills.  These assessment tools for S&T would be 
developed during the first three years of the project life and then be applied to establish a 
baseline at the senior secondary and tertiary levels.  Improved relevance would be 
indicated by increased labor market utilization of S&T skills, greater institutional 
awareness and understanding of science, and greater use of technology-related skills to 
improve labor market products and services in areas of public concern (i.e. education, 
health, agriculture, management services, infrastructure, energy, etc.).  
 
Page  2
If the STEPB project is successful it will also build capacity within the participating 
federal Post-Basic Education Institutions (PBEIs) to manage, monitor and evaluate merit-
based S&T funding according to international best practices.  The project would be a first 
phase (of a longer-term program) of making it possible for Nigeria to produce an 
increasing percentage of Bachelors, Masters, and Ph.Ds in S&T areas with relevant skills 
and qualifications according to international standards.  This will promote increased 
public and private sector absorption of both people and knowledge, creating greater 
competitiveness and new areas of comparative advantage.  
 
The lending instrument for the STEPB project is a specific investment loan (SIL).  The 
SIL is appropriate because this is the first project of its kind in Nigeria; and the 
implementing federal post-basic institutions and the Federal Ministry of Education do not 
have experience implementing competitive funds for the development of S&T capacity.  
The project implementation period will be 4 years.  Supervision of the SIL will provide 
greater guidance and technical assistance than would be the case if the goals of this 
project were to be pursued under budget support.  This is consistent with the FGN's stated 
desire and Bank practice of having budget support be the main form of assistance, with 
projects only in areas bearing on productivity enhancement.  It is also consistent with the 
Strategic Framework for Investment in Africa, which identifies investment lending as 
appropriate for investment in areas in sectors without an established track record.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed STEPB project design benefits from a lengthy and inclusive participatory 
process with formal and informal stakeholder groups and a year's worth of analytic work.  
The proposed STEPB Project has three components.  
 
Component 1: Competitive Fund for Quality Enhancement and Innovation and Quality 
Improvement (US$82 million; 45% of total Credit). Component 1 supports a facility to 
provide peer-reviewed and competitively-awarded quality improvement grants to federal 
Post-Basic Education S&T Institutions (PBEIs).  Fundamental to the orientation of 
Component 1 is the peer-reviewed process through which funds are allocated.  
Competitive allocation of resources based on transparent criteria for quality, relevance, 
and impact represents an important culture shift and innovation in federal post-basic 
education in Nigeria.  Component 1 will consist of two sub-components:   
 
Sub-component A (US$55 million; 31% of total Credit) provides competitive grants for 
improving access to basic and applied research (in collaboration with industry) in S&T to 
improve quality and relevance to local and national S&T needs.  It will provide grants 
financing through three windows:  
 
A. Institutional grants of up to US$250,000 to support S&T research and capacity 
building within individual STEPB institutions. (18% of total Credit; US$33 m)  
 
B. Partnership grants up to US$800,000 to support partnerships between two or more 
STEPB institutions (groups) and industry.  (10% of total credit; US$18 m)  
Page  3
C. Innovator grants of up to US$20,000 to individual S&T graduates (Bachelor, Masters 
and PhD) in their final year to encourage "Nigerian innovators of tomorrow".  (2% of 
total credit; US$4 m)  
 
Sub-component B (US$27 million; 15% of total Credit) provides competitive grants for 
improving S&T teaching and learning development to raise quality and relevance, 
efficiency and equity within participating PBEIs.  Sub-component B will  support 
mechanisms that promote greater access to S&T programs at tertiary level, particularly 
for women.  Eligible institutions will be any federal post-basic S&T training institution in 
the country (federal Polytechnics, Colleges of Education, Colleges of S&T, and federal 
Universities).  Proposals that also aim to improve S&T learning and teaching at the 
secondary level (by working with local secondary schools) will be encouraged.  
 
The maximum period over which grants will be awarded is three years, based upon the 
request submitted within a selected proposal and the timing of submission (in the context 
of the project life).  
 
Component 2: Support for the emergence of Centers of Excellence in post-basic S&T.  
(US$54 million; 30% of total Credit).  The objective of component two is to inject a 
small number (6-8 over the life of the project) of promising STEPB institutions with the 
resources necessary for them to emerge into Centers of Excellence, raising the national 
competence of Nigeria in the specific S&T area addressed by the CoEx and increasing 
the economic benefits derived from it.  This component will support the development of 
Centers of Excellence in S&T in selected tertiary education institutions.  The proposals 
that are submitted will be peer reviewed by panels of distinguished S&T experts from 
Nigeria and abroad scientists.  Grants to 7-10 emerging Centers of Excellence will be 
made a maximum amount of up to US$7 million per selected proposal through a 
competitive selection process.  
 
Selection criteria for funding eligibility of emerging Centers of Excellence would 
include at least the following criteria: (1) their potential for conducting world class 
scientific research and technology development; (2) capacity and willingness to form 
effective partnerships with international S&T research institutions from abroad and 
support this in the proposal; (3) the relevance of its research area to Nigerian industry and 
economic development; (4) potential for teaching graduates and researchers in the 
specialty S&T areas; (5) potential for and interest in conducting multidisciplinary 
research; and (6) potential for outreach activities to other public and private institutions in 
Nigeria.  Based on the peer review by the SIAB and economic growth considerations the 
Technical Review Committee will then select the recipients.  Examples of funding 
activities and items are: (a) purchase of new, modern laboratory equipment; (b) light 
rehabilitation of essential laboratories; (c) ICT and library media and related equipment; 
(d) training of staff for capacity building and management (technical middle- and higher 
level staff and technicians); (e) workshops, conferences, study tours; (f) research 
stipends; (g) cooperative institutional agreements with international leaders in the S&T 
field of the CoEx.  
 
Page  4
Component 3: Strengthening strategic planning, management, and M&E in post-basic 
S&T education (US$27 million; 15% of total Credit).  Component 3 will support 
complementary initiatives that aim to have a sub-sector-wide impact on quality, 
relevance, and access to federal S&T education at the post-basic level and project 
implementation and management.  Component 3 will consist of two sub-components.  
 
Sub-component A: sub-sector-wide improvements of quality, relevance and access to 
S&T education at federal post-basic education level (US$18 million; 10% of totals base 
costs).  This can be support for the development and implementation of S&T policy and 
planning initiatives as well as sub-sector-wide institutional strengthening activities that 
address identified systemic shortcomings.  These activities will provide opportunities 
scale-up innovative developments of national significance in post-basic S&T education.  
Proposals will peer reviewed.  Eligible institutions for support under Component 3 are 
STEPB institutions, including FME or FMST agencies and other institutions.  
 
Examples of activities to be financed include: (a) developing ICT connectivity in 
STEPB institutions at the secondary and tertiary level or initiating the development of a 
nationwide network of e-learning centers shared between institutions; (b) S&T focused 
programs to raise awareness and attract interest in S&T among secondary school students 
and bringing federal secondary schools into partnership with PBEIs; (c) development and 
startup of a National Qualifications Framework for S&T related activities with 
stakeholders and social partners; (d) developing sustainable activities to address current 
information gaps in S&T such as capacity development for data gathering related to R&D 
and innovation; and (e) piloting by one or more of the PBEIs of a Labor Market 
Observatory to undertake measure the relevance of STEPB graduate output; and (f) 
organizing and implementing national awareness campaigns on S&T relevant topics.  
 
Sub-component B: support for project implementation, management, and M&E (US$9 
million; 5% of total base costs).  This includes continuous monitoring the project's 
progress toward its development objective, monitoring and analyzing project 
performance indicators, and measuring overall progress in the federal post-basic 
education S&T sub-sector.  To help improve data collection and analysis, this component 
will also finance specific studies, data collection and analysis.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The STEPB project will support the development of post-basic science and technology 
education at the federal level throughout Nigeria.  Specific institutions that will 
participate in the various components will be agreed upon during appraisal and during 
project implementation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no major new constructions or rehabilitation works.  The project will only 
finance minor rehabilitation (laboratories, research facilities, etc.) in the Federal post-
basic S&T institutions and units.  This minor rehabilitation will trigger the environment 
assessment policy, because of the noise and other inconveniences associated with minor 
rehabilitation works.  The mitigation measures are well specified in the ESMF.  There are 
no land acquisition issues or restriction of access to sources of livelihood; therefore, the 
involuntary resettlement policy OP 4.12 was not triggered.  Finally, no large scale, 
significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) that will be used as a guide to screen sub-projects for potential environmental 
and social impacts.  Project-specific EIAs and ESMPs will be prepared as and when 
necessary; especially if the sub-projects screening process suggests it.  It is expected that 
one of the staff of the STEP-B project secretariat will be responsible for following up the 
applications and recommendations of the ESMF.  This instrument will be disclosed in-
country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are staff and officials of the Federal Ministry of Education, and 
students/teachers of higher Federal Institutions like the universities, 
polytechnics/monotechnics, colleges of educations, and senior secondary schools.  
During stakeholders' consultations, they were informed on the need  and importance of 
the World Bank Safeguards policies.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  7
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jacob H. Bregman 
03/03/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
03/03/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
03/05/2007 
Comments:   
