Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2564 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/25/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P096648 
Project Name: Commercial Agriculture Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Lucas Kolawole Akapa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Other rural development (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to increase agricultural production, processing, and 
marketed outputs among participating small and medium-scale commercial farms and agro-
processors   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project complements investments of other donor-financed operations in the 
participating states including Fadama II, Rural Access and Mobility Project, Power Sector 
Reform Project  and the planned Growth Pole Project (World Bank); Rural Finance 
Development Project, and the Roots and Tuber Expansion Programme (IFAD); Cassava 
Enterprise Development Project in Cross Rivers and Enugu states, Sustainable 
Agriculture/SPACE in Cross River State, Agriculture Enterprise/MARKETS in Kano State 
(USAID); Shared Growth Framework-Investment Climate in Cross Rivers, Enugu, Kaduna, 
Lagos and Kano and the work on promoting pro-poor opportunities through commodity and 
service markets for rice and Soya (DFID). The project differs from those already in operation 
through its integrated focus on small scale commercial agriculture, and its intent to identify and 
address multiple constraints simultaneously.   
Page  2
The project will support small and medium scale commercial agriculture through simultaneous 
attention to adoption of improved techniques, cheaper and faster access to markets, and regular 
supply of energy for production and/or processing of products. The presence of assistance to 
address these constraints may leverage private capital now returning to Nigeria, and attract some 
of it to commercial agriculture.  Accelerated growth in the small and medium scale commercial 
sector will create jobs, thus spreading benefits beyond the immediate group of participants.  
 
The target group will consist of small and medium commercial farms with farm sizes of 
between 5ha to 20ha, agro-processors who are in business for at least three years and are 
registered with annual sales of above N250, 000, aquaculture farms with investment of between 
N500, 000- N5, 000,000, poultry farms with bird population of 5,000 to 10,000 birds, and 
livestock farms with at least 20 heads of cattle. The participating commercial farmers (small and 
medium scale) must be members of the Commercial Agriculture Development Association 
(CADA); an umbrella apex association for their various commodity associations (i.e. crops 
production associations, livestock associations, aquaculture associations, etc.). Participating 
commercial farms and agro-processors should also have a sound business strategy and bank 
accounts. Funding for the CADA would be socially inclusive and based on participatory process 
at the association-level, with special emphasis on gender balance imperative. Project staff would 
be sensitized on gender mainstreaming and social cohesion principles and empowerment of 
previously disadvantaged groups.  
 
Component 1:  Enhancing Agricultural Production and Commercialization (US $ 43 m)  
 
The objective of this component is to improve the adoption of existing agricultural technologies 
by commercial farmers/agro-processors.  The component has three sub-components:  
 
(a) Technology adoption and Advisory Services.  The sub-component will finance: (i) testing 
technologies, (ii) technical and business advisory services, and (iii) one-time capital grants to be 
managed by a Trust Company selected on a competitive basis for investments needed for 
adoption of technology that are linked to markets(i.e. Details will be worked out during 
preparation).  
 
(b) Market Facilitation.  This sub-component will finance development of information and 
knowledge for commercial farmers/agro-processors, establishment of collection centers with 
grading, quality control and packaging facilities.  
 
(c) Capacity.  The sub-component will finance training of commercial farmers, organized 
producer/commodity associations/Apex organization of Commercial Agriculture Development 
Associations (CADAs) that will play a coordinating role in the project. The training will also 
include gender mainstreaming and social impacts.  
 
Component 2: Improving Rural Infrastructure (US $ 80 m)  
 
This consist of two sub-components: (a) Network of Rural Access Roads. This sub-component 
will link feeder roads to State and Federal roads through Outputs and Performance Based Road 
Contracts. Investments will address construction/rehabilitation/maintenance of rural access roads 
Page  3
concentrated in areas where a critical mass of project participants will benefit. This sub-
component will be closely coordinated with RAMP.  
 
(b) Rural Energy.  This sub-component will finance the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural 
energy, including provision of transformers and extension of lines from the main transmission 
lines to commercial farmers and agro-processing facilities in collaboration with the Power Sector 
Reform Project.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation and Studies (US $ 12 m)  
 
The project implementation and management at the state levels will be the responsibility of a 
State Steering Committee (SSC) supported by a Project Management Team (PMT).  The State 
Steering Committee will be chaired by the state Permanent Secretaries for the States Ministries 
of Agriculture and will consist of representatives from both the private and public sectors.  The 
project management team will be responsible for the day to day running of the project and will 
provide technical services to ensure compliance with fiduciary, legal, accounting, and 
supervision of the project.  In addition, the PMT will work with the private sector commercial 
farms in the implementation of the project components. At the National level, there will be an 
oversight National Steering Committee (NSC) to be chaired by the Hon. Minister, Federal 
ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources (FMAWR).  In addition, a National Coordinating 
Desk (NCD) will be housed at the Project Coordinating Unit of the FMAWR and will be 
responsible for coordination of implementation activities among the participating states.  
 
This component would finance Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation, including 
the Management Information System, impact evaluation and beneficiary assessment, Mid Term 
Review, and final evaluation.  
 
The Government has requested resources under this component to develop a strategy for 
development of commercial agriculture. Case studies, such as the recent experience with the 
Kwara State partnership with the Zimbabwe farmers, will be reviewed, along with other lessons, 
including those that emerge from the implementation of the project   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Following recent consultations with government, the project will start with one or two states and 
other states will join later (Potential states include: Cross River, Enugu, Kaduna, Kano and 
Lagos)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Nigeria has developed some institutional capacity for relevant safeguards policies with the 
satisfactory implementation of the safeguards instruments (EIA, ESMF, ESIA and RPF) of the 
ongoing Lagos Urban Transport Project (LUTP), the Local Empowerment and Environmental 
Management Project (LEEMP) and Fadama II project.  
 
The Federal Ministry of Environment is sufficiently knowledgeable on the Bank's safeguards 
policies, and its staff especially those of the impact assessment and mitigation unit have in the 
past benefited from training on the Bank's safeguards policies. In addition, most of the 
participating states especially Lagos, Enugu and Kaduna, have an autonomous Environmental 
Page  4
Protection Agency that exists outside the ministry of environment (LASEPA in Lagos and KEPA 
in Kaduna State). These agencies have well qualified staff and aware of the Bank's 
environmental and social policies having attended some of the Bank safeguards training 
organized by the country office. Thus, the borrower has a satisfactory institutional capacity for 
safeguards management. The Project's Implementing Units (PIUs) at the Federal and States level 
will recruit an Environmental and Social Specialist who will be responsible for following up 
safeguards issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will finance the construction of agriculture related infrastructure, in pursuance of 
its project development objective. These investments will address construction and rehabilitation 
of access/feeder roads. It will also involve provision of transformers and extension of lines from 
the main transmission lines to commercial farmers and agro-processors. The potential impacts 
are likely to be small-scale and site specific, typical of category B projects. To successfully 
identify and manage potential adverse impacts on the environment from project funded activities 
such as those enumerated above, the Government will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF). This will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank?s Info shop 
prior to project appraisal   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
No Comments   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
No Comments   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project will not finance directly or otherwise, the purchase of fertilizers or other inputs. 
However, the development of intensive agriculture through project activities may lead to 
increased use of fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides. Under Fadama II, a Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) was prepared. This PMP will be revised and adapted to the proposed project. The revised 
PMP will disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Info shop before appraisal   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Project beneficiaries will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, land and other 
economic resources and on livelihoods. In situations where this cannot be avoided, the 
Government will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address the needs of 
persons who will be affected by loss of economic activities, land acquisition and/or relocation. 
The RPF will have to be sent to the Bank for review and clearance before it is disclosed publicly 
in Nigeria and the Bank's Info shop prior to project appraisal. In cases where impacts cannot be 
avoided, the Government needs to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan, based on the guidance 
and standards set forth in the RPF. The RAP will then need to be reviewed and cleared by the 
World Bank prior to implementating any compensation actions or civil works.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
All of the borrower's safeguards instruments (ESMF, PMP, and RPF) will be prepared, 
reviewed and approved by the World Bank and disclosed in Nigeria by the Government and 
sent to the Bank for disclosure at the Info Shop by end November 2007.  
 
The Sector Managing Unit has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lucas Kolawole Akapa 
09/25/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/25/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
09/25/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
