Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2454 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/26/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Niger 
Project ID: P101434 
Project Name: Niger Transport Sector Program Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 2, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other public sector 
governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is improving all season and safe access of population to markets and basic 
services through (i) rehabilitation of selected unpaved roads belonging to the national road 
network; (ii) improvement of the effectiveness of the policies of the General Directorate for 
Public Works for road maintenance and rehabilitation, and (iii) supporting the completion of 
Niger's Transport Sector Strategy.  The project will also support the development of construction 
industry (mostly SMEs) in Niger through enabling participation of local contractors in (a) the 
execution of civil works, (b) providing training capacity and and technical assistance in contract 
management, and (c) monitoring and evaluating the quality of civil works done during the 
project implementation phase.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support the update and completion of Niger's Transport Sector Program (TSP) 
and in particular the actions needed for the implementation of the National Roads Strategy 
adopted by the Government in 2004.  The project design takes into account the lack of any 
financing resources for the periodic maintenance and rehabilitation of the unpaved part of the 
Page  2
national road network, and the importance of these roads for the access of population to markets 
and basic social and administrative services.  
 
The project cost is estimated at US$20 million. The following components have been identified:  
 
(A). Periodic Maintenance and Rehabilitation of Main Network of Unpaved Roads (about 
US$16.5 million); it includes (i) execution of civil works for maintenance and rehabilitation; (ii) 
preparation of technical, economic and environmental studies; (iii) preparation of bidding 
documents for civil works; (iv) works supervision and technical audit, and (v) related 
institutional support such as technical assistance for procurement, equipment and other 
assistance.  
 
(B) Support to the Ministry of Transport for the Implementation of Activities under the TSP 
(about US$2.3 million); it includes (i) improvement of road safety through prevention measures, 
information, education, etc; (ii) update and completion of the National Transport Strategy and 
the Transport Sector Program by covering the missing sub-sectors (air, airports, international 
transport corridors); and (iii) update of transport related legislation and regulations.  
 
(C) Capacity Building of Transport Sector Stakeholders (about US$0.7 million); it includes the 
development of a Training Program for the staff of the administration (ministries, road agencies), 
the road transport operators, and the road design and contractors? industries.  
 
(D) Support to the Management and Implementation of the TSP (about US$0.5 million); it 
includes institutional support to the Coordination Office of TSP through financing of expertise 
for the organization, management, and follow-up of indicators and objectives of the TSP.  The 
component will also provide the seed money to support the role of the Coordination Office in 
mobilizing and managing external financing to the sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
About 80% of the IDA grant proceeds will finance civil works for the light rehabilitation and 
periodic maintenance of unpaved roads included in the national road network. The roads to be 
covered under the project have already been pre-identified; they are located throughout the 
national road network. The final selection of roads will be done early during project preparation, 
and an environmental and social impact assessment will be carried out and disclosed before 
appraisal, including an Impact Mitigation Plan acceptable to the Bank. The rest of about 20% of 
grant proceeds will finance technical assistance and training for various transport beneficiaries 
and stakeholders, to be located in the capital city.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
TBD during project preparation. This will be the second roads operation financed by the Bank in 
Niger, and the Borrower through the General Directorate for Public Works has some experience 
in managing projects including safeguard requirements. The Bank will further support the 
Borrower's capacity in dealing with Safeguard related issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
Page  3
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is expected that the periodic maintenance and rehabilitation of unpaved roads as well as the 
support to the MoT for the implementation of activities under the TSP would result in positive 
environmental and social impacts. A successful implementation of the proposed periodic 
maintenance and rehabilitation is likely to improve the quality of passenger and cargo transport, 
create employment opportunities (mostly in the road construction industry), and indirectly 
contribute to the country?s economic development and to improvement in the quality of life of 
the affected population. However, some potential environmental and social impacts may occur in 
the physical works component A.  An environmental and social assessment of each road sub-
project will be carried-out by the Borrower during project preparation, and the TOR for the 
related consultancy are under review by the Bank?s project team.  The objective of the 
assessment will be to identify, qualify and quantify any negative and positive environmental and 
social impacts pertaining to each road, and to propose the required mitigation measures to be 
implemented to avoid potential negative impacts.  Specific ESIAs will be conducted for each 
individual road covered under the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Site impact assessments will determine whether any natural habitats will be affected.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESIA will be completed, approved and disclosed in-country and at Bank Infoshop prior 
to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
09/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
