Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2414 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/11/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P096572 
Project Name: THIRD NATIONAL  FADAMA  DEVELOPMENT  PROJECT  
(FADAMA III) 
Task Team Leader: Simeon Kacou Ehui 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 9, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agro-industry (30%);Agricultural marketing and trade (30%);Irrigation and 
drainage (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Fadama III Project is a follow-on of Fadama II Project.  It is expected that the 
Project will cover the remaining 19 states in Nigeria and the eligible states currently 
implementing the Fadama II Project.  The development objective remains to sustainably increase 
the incomes of farmers and other economic interest groups through a more diversified 
agricultural development program, including fadama users those who derive their livelihood 
through direct or indirect exploitation of the resources in the fadama aquifers found in Nigeria's 
major river systems as well as surface water irrigation perimeters.  This is to be achieved through 
an integrated approach including provision of financial services, and grants for small-scale 
productive/economic infrastructure subprojects, training and skills development and increased 
diversification of agriculture.  A second important objective is reduction of natural resources 
access-based conflict, focusing on scarce land and water resources for fadama development.  
This will be pursued through the Local Development Planning (LDP) tool and other innovations 
to enhance inclusiveness, such as, better integration of individual private sector-oriented 
Page  2
initiatives and social investments within the CDD harmonization policy framework, and 
vulnerable and other disadvantaged groups.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components:  The Project will be implemented over a five-year period, from January 
2008 to December 2012.  It will be completed by June 2012 and closed by December 31, 2012.  
The project is anchored on the Community-Driven Development (CDD) approach, as is being 
implemented under the ongoing Fadama II Project.  The areas in which investments are 
proposed, namely empowering communities (with financial resources, expanding their 
knowledge-base and strengthening their organizations), promoting private enterprise to foster 
growth of the non-oil sector and enhance governance and organizational capacities of local 
governments and coordinated and transparent delivery of public services at the local level are 
priority areas identified in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS). Detailed project components 
will be finalized during the preparation phase, as they depend on further studies still to be 
completed.  However, based on discussions held during the identification and stakeholder 
consultations workshop in Abuja in December 2005, the proposed Project comprises the 
following components.  
 
Component 1.  Capacity Building and Advisory Services (CBAS):  This component will 
include: (i) forming and supporting economic interest groups (EIGs)/Fadama User Groups 
(FUGs) and the apex Fadama Community Associations (FCAs); (ii) developing the technical 
capacity of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups to engage equally in social, economic and 
democratic life; (iii) strengthening and supporting capacity building of facilitators, service 
providers, including ADPs, participating LGCs, NGOs and  community-level organizations both 
to improve their ability to deliver services to the community (including the introduction of 
accountability mechanisms, such as, social audits, participatory budgeting and service delivery 
report/score cards) and to work as change agents; (iv) strengthening the capacity of FUGs/FCAs 
to plan, implement and manage participatory and inclusive LDPs; this will include funds to cover 
the costs of services for developing and managing the implementation of community subprojects; 
(v) providing appropriate organizational development and advisory services support to empower 
beneficiary-organizations to adopt more productive and profitable production systems and 
increase the marketability of their surplus production; (vi) providing information and technical 
assistance to facilitate the export of agro-pastoral products, including those aimed at niche 
markets; (vii) technical assistance support to the Local Fadama Development Committee and the 
Fadama Desk Office to enhance the local review and approval function; and (viii) reorientation 
of state and local government level service providers to work with a client-and demand-driven 
approach.  In addition, the Project will support measures and investments to strengthen the 
institutional infrastructure and enabling environment for diversification and trade facilitation.  
The strategy on advisory services is to make such services more demand-driven and 
client/farmer-responsive, and also to establish partnership between public, private, NGOs and 
farmers / EIGs organizations.  Funding would be on the basis of a 90 percent grant from the 
Project and beneficaries cash or in-kind counterpart contributions equivalent to 10 percent of the 
total costs, and within the framework of the LDP.  
 
Component 2.  Small-Scale Community-owned Infrastructure (SCI):  Grant resources will be 
transferred to the beneficiary-communities to be used to co-finance priority demand-driven 
Page  3
community-owned productive infrastructure investments of the public good type, and 
complimentary services identified in the LDPs, based on cost-sharing principles.  These will 
include: (a) rehabilitation and/or construction of roads, culverts and small bridges; (b) 
infrastructure for sustainable natural resources management, including improved conservation of 
soils and agronomic practices, and water harvesting techniques; and (c) cross-FCA 
infrastructure, particularly stock routes, pastures and watering points.  In addition, funds will be 
provided to cover the costs of the detailed design of the infrastructure subprojects, estimation of 
subproject costs, environmental and social impact analysis and analysis to show technical and 
financial viability of the subproject.  This component would not finance assets which are used in 
profitable income-generating activities and included in the positive list of the Asset Acquisition 
component.  A positive list of infrastructure eligible for funding under this component will be 
developed and agreed during the project preparation process. Funding of the investments under 
this component would be mainly through grants (90 percent) and cash or in-kind counterpart 
contributions (of up to 10 percent) from the FCAs, based on an approach that encourages the 
community organizations to identify, design, share investment cost, execute and maintain both 
social and productive assets at the local level.  A detailed community-based operations and 
maintenance program or credible commitment to cash contributions to an O&M fund will be a 
prerequisite for assistance.  The main instrument to guide the implementation of this component 
would be an Infrastructure Operational Manual (IOM).  This would be prepared during the 
Appraisal Mission.  The IOM would inter alia:  (i) list the activities and type of infrastructure 
eligible to be supported; (ii) define eligibility criteria for an FUG, EIG and FCA participation; 
(iii) specify design criteria, technical specifications, cost/benefit analysis, timeframe for 
implementation and complexity of the infrastructure subproject; (iv) define eligibility criteria and 
level of contributions to funding of cross-LDP/FCA-type infrastructure; (v) specify procurement 
and reporting requirements; (vi) specify criteria to be met for satisfactory social-inclusiveness; 
(vii) guidelines to ensure linkage of eligible investment proposals with state, local and national 
priorities; (viii) specify the communications education and information dissemination program to 
put in place in order to strengthen the democratic and participatory features of the project; (ix) 
specify the operations and maintenance requirements; (x) define the participatory supervision 
and monitoring process/requirements; and (xi) provide guidance on safeguard triggers and 
actions/procedures to be followed.  
 
Component 3.  Asset Acquisition:  Building on the success of the Fadama II Project, this 
component will include a matching grant fund to facilitate access to the assets which the 
beneficiary and economically-active rural poor will require for their various income-generating 
activities.  While the use of matching grants to finance profitable productive investments can be 
considered as a second best approach in facilitating access to financing, it was chosen due to the 
poor performance of rural financial markets in Nigeria and the lack of smallholder-access to 
financial services.  The Project will finance demand-driven investment subprojects for 
production, such as, water lifting and distribution equipment, value-adding activities, such as:  
(a) agro-processing equipment/machinery; (b) equipment for smallholder fishing, livestock, dairy 
production and mixed farming); (c) irrigation and drainage infrastructure (e.g., wells, dams, 
ponds, surface water management systems); (d) improved storage, preservation and conservation 
infrastructure (e.g., improved handling, storage/preservation facilities, collection centers, etc.); 
and (e) other non-farm income-generation activities, through a matching grant system.  Grants 
will be provided to the FCAs based on up-front cash contributions of 20 percent of the total costs 
Page  4
of the subproject, with the proposed project providing the remaining 80 percent. Detailed 
description of this component including specific items to be funded will be finalized at the 
completion of the ongoing project-related study on the value chain process and linkages.  
 
Component 4.  Project Management and Institutional Arrangements:  Overall project 
coordination will be carried out at the Federal level by a strengthened National Fadama 
Development Office (NFDO) of the PCU, as in Fadama II.  The National Fadama Technical 
Committee (NFTC), which is a sub-committee of the Federal Agricultural Development Program 
Executive Committee (FADPEC), will be responsible for project oversight, overall policy 
guidance, strategic direction and review and approval of the annual work program and budget of 
the NFDO.  State-level coordination will be carried out by the State Fadama Development Office 
(SFDO) of the 19 participating states (plus eligible Fadama II states), while the oversight and 
policy and strategic orientation functions will be performed by the State Fadama Technical 
Committee (SFDC), which is a sub-committee of the Agricultural Development Project 
Executive Committee (ADPEC).  The local level structures for review and approval process 
under Fadama II, namely, the Local Fadama Development Committee (LFDC) and its 
Secretariat, and the Local Fadama Desk Office, will remain with the possibility of expansion in 
scope and content as may be required by the design features of the proposed operation.  
Similarly, the financial architecture and the M&E system for Fadama II will be improved and 
adopted for the proposed Project.  This component will include provisions for: (i) at the central 
level, administration activities for overall project implementation coordination by the NFDO and 
local-level implementation coordination by the SFDOs (including incremental operating costs 
and implementation of a financial management system); (ii) monitoring and evaluation and 
learning processes (including establishment and operations of a Management Information 
System-MIS); (iii) quality control and contract management (supervision of Facilitators and 
Desk Officers, TA to the LFDC and monitoring contracts to third parties); (iv) carrying out 
project-related studies; (v) building and strengthening of partnerships with service providers; and 
(vi) communication and information dissemination.  Under Fadama II, it took a longer time than 
envisaged to equip the local implementation agencies and agents to effectively perform the 
above-mentioned implementation coordination functions.  Therefore, the capacity building 
support for implementation readiness would begin during the project preparation phase.  In this 
regard, the existence of an SFDO, with staffing satisfactory to the Bank, would be a State-
eligibility condition to be agreed before appraisal.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Fadama III will cover the remaining 19 States not covered by the ongoing Fadama II Project.  
These states are Abia, Anambra, Ebonyi, Enugu, Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Edo, 
Rivers, Ekiti, Ondo, Osun, Benue, Nasarawa, Yobe, Kano, Sokoto and Zamfara.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Nigeria has developed some institutional capacity for relevant safeguards policies with the 
satisfactory implementation of the safeguards instruments (EIA, ESMP, and RPF) of the ongoing 
Lagos Urban Transport Project (LUTP) and the Local Empowerment and Environmental 
Management Project (LEEMP).  Under the Fadama II project, the environmental officers (at the 
state level) have developed some institutional capacity for relevant safeguards policies with the 
satisfactory implementation of the safeguards instruments in the on-going Fadama II project.  
Page  5
The Environmental Officers (EOs) are actively involved in the screening of Local Development 
Plan (LDPs) and associated subprojects using the ESIA/ESMF, PMP and RPF.  Resettlement 
Action Plans (RAPs) have not been prepared during project implementation, because 
communities tend to avoid subprojects that will involve the taking of land or restriction of access 
to sources of livelihood.  The EOs are also responsible for ensuring that about 20% of subproject 
costs are included in the LDPs as mitigation costs.  
 
The Federal Ministry of Environment is sufficiently knowledgeable on the Bank's safeguards 
policies, and its staff especially those of the impact assessment and mitigation unit have in the 
past benefited from training on the Bank's safeguards policies.  With funds from the LEEMP 
project, the FMEnv is developing some new sectoral guidelines, reviewing old ones and revising 
the 1992 EIA act.  Thus, Nigeria has a substantial institutional capacity for safeguards 
management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Planned activities under Fadama III like rehabilitation or construction of rural roads 
(including culverts and bridges), water harvesting, and other on-farm type smaller scale 
infrastructure, that will be captured through the Community Development Plans (CDPs) will 
likely have potential environmental and social impacts that would trigger OP 4.01.  The likely 
impacts will be mainly site-specific and small-scale, typical of EA category B projects.  Fadama 
III, unlike Fadama II, has a more diverse menu that tilts more to value addition and marketing.  
Thus, the Task Team is recommending Category B is the appropriate EA category.  The EA 
instruments for Fadama II ESIA/EMP and ESMF will be revised and adapted to the new project 
taking into consideration the new states and institutional arrangements.  The revised EA 
instruments will be sent to the Bank for review and subsequent clearance before it is disclosed 
publicly in Nigeria and the Bank's Infoshop.  
 
Fadama III Project, unlike Fadama II Project, has a more diverse menu that tilts more to 
value addition and marketing.  Potential impacts under the Small-Scale Community-owned 
Infrastructure (SCI) are likely to be site-specific and small scale, typical of category B projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Increasing agricultural productivity in Fadama areas and potential small-scale irrigation 
activities along the major rivers (Niger and Benue) could lead to intensification and increased 
use of pesticides or purchase of pesticides or herbicides, even though the project will not finance 
the purchase of these chemicals.Under Fadama II, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) was prepared.  
This PMP will be revised and adapted to Fadama III.  The revised PMP will be disclosed in-
country and at the Bank's Infoshop.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
During implementation of this project, Involuntary Resettlement, especially restriction of 
access to sources of livelihood and loss of assets and/or access to individual or community 
resources cannot be ruled out completely.  As due diligence, the Fadama II Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will have to be revised and adapted to the proposed project.  This adapted 
RPF will have to be sent to the Bank for review and clearance before it is disclosed publicly in 
Nigeria and the Bank's Infoshop.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Nigeria has three main international waterways:  Rivers Niger, Benue and Komadougou-
Yobe.  The use of these waterways will most certainly be required under the project.  The 
riparian notification will be handled in the same manner like Fadama II, i.e., by notifying the 
Niger Basin Authority (the regional institution that is made up of all countries that share Niger 
River) and the Lake Chad Basin Commission (covers countries that share Lake Chad, Benue and 
the Komadougou rivers).   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/14/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
All of the borrower's safeguards instruments (ESIA, ESMF, PMP, and RPF) will be based on 
review and adaptation of Fadama II documents to suit the proposed Fadama III Project taking 
into consideration the new states and institutional arrangements.  The SMU has agreed to 
accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
09/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/07/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francois G. Le Gall 
09/07/2006 
Comments:   
