Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC2431
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P097921 
Project Name:  Malaria Control Booster Project 
Task Team Leader:  Eva Jarawan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives are (i) to ensure that the target population will have 
improved access to, and utilization of, a well-defined set of Malaria Plus Package of 
interventions (MPP); and (ii) to strengthen the ability of the Federal and State 
governments to manage and oversee delivery of Malaria Plus interventions   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has two main components and is further divided into nine subcomponents.  
 
Component 1: Strengthen the capacity of the Federal Government to provide malaria 
control leadership and coordination over the medium and long-term. To support the 
ability of FMOH staff to undertake these essential functions, the project will support:  
 
(a) 
Strengthening procurement and logistics of commodities for accelerated 
implementation of the Malaria Plus interventions;  
 
(b) 
Improving National Monitoring and Evaluation for evidence-based management;  
 
(c) 
Coordinating program activities at the national level and across programs.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening the health system to improve delivery of the Malaria Plus 
interventions in the target states. The Project will expand the capacity of the SMOHs and 
Page  2
the LGAs in the target states, so as to rapidly expand the Malaria Plus services at both the 
facility and the community levels. The project will provide appropriately tailored support 
to the states to help them improve their planning, implementation, coordination and 
supervision capacities. This includes, among other things, the following:  
 
(a) 
Increasing access to, and utilization of, preventive measures;  
 
(b) 
Expanding access to, and utilization of, effective diagnostic and treatment 
services;  
 
(c) 
Strengthening community mobilization and Communication for Behavior 
Change;  
 
(d) 
Improving state-specific M&E for evidence-based management;  
 
(e) 
Strengthening partnerships for resource mobilization and implementation;  
 
(f) 
Enhancing capacity of the states for oversight and project coordination.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will target seven of the thirty-six states allowing for a significant scale-up 
effect in each state. Selected states are:- Northern states:  Kano, Jigawa, Gombe, Bauchi; 
and Southern states:  Akwa Ibom, Rivers, and Anambra.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as category B implying limited adverse environmental and 
social effects. A key important concern here is the potential increased use of insecticides 
for Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) that will be occasioned by the scaling up of malaria 
control by the project. The integrated Vector Management Plan and the addendum to the 
Harmonized Medical Waste Management Plan of the Abidjan - Lagos HIV/AIDS 
Page  3
Corridor Project were disclosed in-country, including in the seven targeted states, as well 
as Bank's Info shop prior to appraisal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only project alternative to avoid the environmental impact is a no project alternative, 
which is NOT acceptable in view of the high morbidity and mortality associated with 
malaria.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an Integrated Vector Management Plan that will be 
implemented by the project. The Plan makes recommendations regarding capacity 
building needs, training and awareness building. An environmental specialist with 
experience in health projects has been assigned by the borrower to follow-up and address 
safeguards policy issues in the project as and when they arise during implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are communities, civil society organizations, private sector and 
Government. The regulatory agency for environmental issues in Nigeria is the Federal 
Ministry of Environment.  The integrated Vector Management Plan and the addendum to 
the Harmonized Medical Waste Management Plan of the Abidjan - Lagos HIV/AIDS 
Corridor Project were disclosed in-country, including in the seven targeted states, as well 
as Bank's Info shop prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/08/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/21/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/08/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/21/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  4
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
08/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
08/21/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
08/21/2006 
Comments:   
