Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2209 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/19/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: World 
Project ID: P100198 
Project Name: Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund 2 
Task Team Leader: Kathleen S. Mackinnon 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.00 
 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
25.00 
 Foundation/s 
(Identified) 
25.00
75.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objective will be to strengthen the involvement of NGOs and other 
sectors of civil society in conservation and management of important ecosystems and habitats in 
recognized global biodiversity hotspots. This objective would be achieved by providing  strategic 
assistance to NGOs, community groups and other civil society partners to support:(a) 
strengthened  protection and management of  biodiversity within selected hotspots and critical 
ecosystems, both within and beyond protected areas; (b) increasing local and national capacity to 
conserve and manage biodiversity, especially among civil society; and (c) expanding and 
improving monitoring and learning to demonstrate biodiversity impact and enable adaptive 
management and replication.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would finance the following components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1. Strengthening protection and management of globally significant biodiversity 
within critical ecosystems.  
 
CEPF-2 would focus on key biodiversity areas and address threats to biodiversity across broad 
landscapes that include a matrix of land uses, including protected areas, biological corridors and 
high value conservation sites in production landscapes. Target areas would not be limited to 
formal designated protected areas and legal entities but would  also include indigenous reserves, 
and community and private lands that are managed for a conservation objective. CEPF-2 will 
contribute to the creation, expansion and strengthened protection and management for more than 
20 million hectares of key biodiversity areas within hotspots, including biological corridors, 
production landscapes, and transboundary collaboration and frameworks to key areas that 
straddle national borders. Specific activities would be selected on a competitive basis at the 
ecosystem level but could support :  (a)  protected areas and other  key biodiversity areas; (b) 
consolidation of biodiversity conservation corridors; including collaboration with the private 
sector  (c) community  and Indigenous Peoples initiatives; (d) and innovative financial 
mechanisms for sustainability.  
 
Component 2:  Increasing local and national capacity to integrate biodiversity conservation into 
development and landscape planning.    
 
Reconciling ecosystem conservation with sustainable development on different scales across 
complex jurisdictional boundaries, often in situations of weak governance, is perhaps the major 
challenge facing the conservation and development community. Mobilizing civil society to play 
a
more effective role in this process is the CEPF niche.  Grantees include individuals, farming 
cooperatives and community organizations, through national NGOs, research institutions and 
private sector organizations, to international NGOs. Many of these groups act as vital multipliers, 
further building local and national capacity for conservation. A key CEPF-2 goal is 
empowerment of civil society actors to take part in, and influence decisions that affect local lives 
and livelihoods and, ultimately, the global environment. This would include steps to further 
devolve responsibilities to locally-based Regional Implementation Teams to manage grant 
programs and to expand the use of local advisory committees and experts to guide decisions. 
During the second phase, CEPF would consolidate support to some current civil society partners 
and expand support to hundreds of others within critical ecosystems. Specific subcomponents 
will include: (a) promoting greater devolution of responsibilities to enable national and local 
groups to play a greater role in key aspects of CEPF planning and implementation; and (b) 
building an effective and aligned civil society sector for advocacy and influence to mainstream 
biodiversity in national and regional planning and development programs.  
 
Component 3: Effective monitoring, knowledge sharing and outreach  
 
This component would build upon the CEPF-1 global communications and hotspot-level 
implementation programs to support improved, monitoring learning, replication and scaling up 
of promising models from components 1 and 2.  A program-wide replication and dissemination 
strategy will be developed and implemented at both the global and hotspot levels. Specific 
subcomponents will include: (a) strengthening monitoring and evaluation, including systematic 
analysis and documentation of CEPF results and experiences; (b) expanding and formalizing 
information sharing and learning opportunities; and (c) outreach and awareness.  
 
Page  3
CEPF-2 would focus on at least 14 critical ecosystems eligible for CEPF investment.  Specific 
criteria will be developed during preparation to guide decisions regarding whether to reinvest or 
exit from hotspots supported during CEFP-1 and new hotspots and ecosystems.  As in the first 
phase, the number of ecosystems approved for new investment will be staggered to ensure 
adequate funding and implementation capacity. Total investment per ecosystem will vary 
depending on needs and local capacity.  
 
In each hotspot, disbursement of grants will be guided by ecosystem profiles based on a 
stakeholder-driven prioritizing process to identify conservation targets, major threats, 
socioeconomic factors, current threats and conservation investments CI and/or partner civil 
society groups will continue to lead this process in a transparent and highly participatory way to 
engage stakeholders from the outset in developing a shared strategy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Global.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under phase 1 the Bank has facilitated several workshops on the safeguard policies for key 
CEPF staff and selected grantees, particularly those involved in overseeing implementation 
within the hotspots. The CEPF Operational Manual gives details on how CEPF implements the 
safeguard policies. The first burden of observing the safeguard policies lies with the grant 
applicant to assess and explain likely impacts. This same screening process would be used under 
phase 2 with cases of concern referred to Bank specialists in the relevant regions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten (EASEN) 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environment Assessment. The CEPF-2 project will address priority conservation objectives.  
Project activities will be selected on a competitive basis according to criteria that will ensure that 
resources are directed to the most important issues while ensuring minimum adverse 
environmental effects.  Current screening criteria appear sufficient to identify projects with 
potential adverse impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Forestry. The Project fully complies with the Bank’s Forest Policy. Project activities will 
focus on conservation and more sustainable management of forests. Beyond the selection criteria 
for identifying project activities, it is not anticipated that any additional measure will be required 
under this policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous 
Peoples. Many of the world’s remaining areas of high biodiversity overlap with 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
lands occupied and utilized by indigenous peoples. Individual project activities would be 
selected at the ecosystem level but it is expected that indigenous peoples, as well as other civil 
society actors, will participate in identifying conservation priorities and have access to CEPF 
grants for conservation activities. There is a possibility that CEPF- funded activities could impact 
indigenous communities.  The impacts could be potentially positive or adverse depending on the 
nature of actions taken on the ground.  Projects proposed for CEPF funding should demonstrate 
that they have made provisions for evaluating the potential impacts on indigenous communities 
and site-specific action plans may be required.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement.  It is possible that sub-projects may either directly displace 
individuals or may restrict access to resources through enforcement of protection measure.  In 
cases where sub-projects could lead to restrictions in access to resources, proponents must 
demonstrate that they have followed an appropriate process framework to establish off-setting 
management or compensation measures.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No specific studies are currently identified, as individual projects will not be determined until 
project implementation. If general studies are required, these will be identified at the 
safeguards review meeting scheduled for the end of April.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kathleen S. Mackinnon 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
04/19/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark D. Wilson 
 
Comments:   
