Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/22/2007 
Report No.:  AC2679
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  OECS Countries 
Project ID:  P094539 
Project Name:  OECS-Catastrophe Insurance 
Task Team Leader:  Francis Ghesquiere 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 8, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Non-compulsory pensions, insurance and contractual savings (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to reduce the country financial vulnerability 
to natural disasters (earthquakes and hurricanes) of Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines.  This will be achieved by supporting the establishment of 
the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) and the financing of 
catastrophe insurance coverage from the Facility.  
 
The project aims to allow participating countries to join the CCRIF and benefit from 
financial protection against catastrophic earthquake and/or hurricane events.  Without this 
credit, it is unlikely that Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines would to join this pilot initiative that represents the first entity created to 
protect small island states from the financial impact of natural disasters.  
 
The key intermediate indicators for the project are:  
 
-
The establishment and effectiveness of the CCRIF;  
 
-
The level of catastrophe insurance coverage provided to the four participating 
countries.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project aims to provide the Borrowers with insurance coverage against 
natural disasters (earthquakes and hurricanes). The project will finance the entrance fee 
and the annual insurance premiums (for three years) necessary to participate in the 
CCRIF.  The coverage provided would help countries face immediate liquidity needs 
emerging from the occurrence of a disaster.  
 
The IDA financing will be provided in four installments issued to CCRIF at the request 
of each country's Ministry of Finance.  The financing will be withdrawn by the borrower 
from their credit account for direct payment into the Facility.The project will include the 
following two components: (a) payment of entrance fee, and (b) payment of annual 
insurance premium for the first three years.  
 
Component 1:  Payment of the entrance fee to the CCRIF (US$5.14 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to assist the borrowers to join the CCRIF through the 
financing of the entrance fee.  This fee is equal to the first year's insurance premium of 
US$1.286 million for each of the four participating countries.  
 
Countries 
Estimated entrance fee  
 
Dominica 
US$ 1.286 million  
 
Grenada 
US$ 1.286 million  
 
St Lucia 
US$ 1.286 million  
 
St Vincent  
US$ 1.286 million  
 
Component 2: Payment of annual insurance premium (US$12.86 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to assist the borrowers to purchase the catastrophe 
insurance coverage offered by the CCRIF during the first three years.  Estimated 
country's insurance premiums are detailed below.  
 
Countries 
Year 1                        Year 2                         Year 3  
 
Dominica 
US$ 1.286 million 
US$ 1.286 million 
US$0.642 million  
 
Grenada 
US$ 1.286 million 
US$ 1.286 million 
US$0.642 million  
 
St Lucia 
US$ 1.286 million 
US$ 1.286 million 
US$0.642 million  
 
St Vincent     US$ 1.286 million 
US$ 1.286 million 
US$0.642 million  
 
Soon after its establishment in March 2007, the Facility will collect the entrance fee and 
first year premium for each participating country.  These payments will thus need to be 
submitted in April 2007, 2008 and 2009.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project contemplates no direct physical investments.  Instead, the project will finance 
payments from the Ministry of Finance of the four participating countries to the CCRIF.  
No safeguards will be triggered.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Positive indirect impacts of the project include the improved ability of governments to 
meet the needs of their most vulnerable citizens in the immediate aftermath of a 
catastrophic event.  An immediate infusion of capital will enable governments to 
jumpstart recovery efforts quickly while not disrupting the budget appropriation process.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project will have no adverse environmental or social impacts.  Therefore, it was not 
necessary to consider alternatives that would help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
While no safeguards are triggered under the project, a project is currently being 
developed to assist CARICOM member states in reforming outdating Emergency 
Legislation.  Improving emergency legislation will strenghten CARICOM government's 
capacity to disburse funds efficiently.  The project will assess current legal frameworks in 
the Caribbean with a goal of improving the legislative and administrative framework 
triggered in a state of emergency.   To revise the institutional framework, current laws 
and administrative procedures will be studied to identify areas for improvement.  Global 
best practice will then be considered and recommendations made that are most suited to 
the Caribbean region.   
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Ghesquiere 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
