Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC2518
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pacific Islands 
Project ID:  P098423 
Project Name:  Sustainable Energy Finance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Antonie De Wilde 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.48 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
19.70 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
20.20 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
1.85 
 
Non-Government Organization (NGO) of Borrowing Country 
2.85
44.60 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective is to improve the living conditions of rural households.  This 
will be achieved by reducing the cost for households, micro and small enterprises located 
in rural areas for their energy needs by switching to renewable energy options   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will (i) improve the living conditions of rural households.; (ii) 
improve the commercial viability of micro/small enterprises by providing more reliable 
and cheaper electricity, and (iii) increase the efficiency of energy use.  
 
The project will mitigate financial and technical barriers that make it difficult for the 
target groups to gain access to sustainable modern energy services.  Other key barriers for 
the introduction of renewable energy in general, such as regulations, renewable resource 
assessment studies, strengthening of Utilities and Energy Offices are being mitigated by 
PIGGAREP.  
Page  2
The renewable energy options to be supported under this project are Solar PV, pico 
hydro, which do not require civil works, and locally produced bio fuels to be used in 
gensets. In exceptional circumstances other solutions might be financed.  
 
Component 1: Financial Innovation. This component will develop innovative financial 
mechanism to facilitate the flow of commercial funds for renewable energy and energy 
efficiency investments.  
 
For households, there will be a scheme to pay for the high initial investment costs of 
renewable energy over a number of years, with the tenor of the loans longer than is 
customary for the region. The scheme will also share some of the perceived repayment 
risk with commercial institutions.  
 
For micro and small enterprises there will also be a similar scheme to pay the high 
initial investment costs over time and share the repayment risks. Further, for pico-hydro 
systems, there will be a scheme to ensure that adequate funds are available for the 
potentially high maintenance and/or repair costs. There will also be financial instruments 
to overcome the relatively large equity and collateral constraints for investments in 
sustainable energy service activities.  
 
For energy efficiency (EE) there will risk sharing and risk abatement measures to 
improve access to commercial finance for small electrical or engineering firms to fund 
energy audits, design and implementation of energy efficiency measures for clients. The 
capital outlay required will be shared between the EE Service provider and the client.  
There will be a focus on cold storage and processing (especially related to fisheries), 
tourism facilities and transport.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance and Training.  The project will provide training for 
local Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) to develop maintain and operate a 
Sustainable Energy portfolio. The project will also provide assistance to suppliers of the 
equipment, in quality control and maintenance of quality standards in the maintenance of 
the equipment, as well as provide international market information for this equipment.  
Participants who buy equipment will be required to follow an interactive computer based 
video training (in the shop of the equipment supplier) informing them on the various 
aspects of using the equipment. This will include information regarding the safe disposal 
of batteries used.  In order to maintain high quality standards and protect potential buyers 
from non functioning products, the project provides for an Approved Product Catalogue.  
Only those products approved in the catalogue are eligible to receive a credit guarantee.  
In Fiji the project provides assistance with the development of a renewable resource 
database, and energy efficiency audits/studies.  As the success of the project will depend 
on the target groups receiving information about the program, the project will provide for 
regular information and communication about the merits of using renewable energy and 
using energy efficiently.  
 
Page  3
Component 3:  Incentive/Output based participant monitoring. For all systems, 
borrowers will be requested to fill out bi-annually a short two page survey regarding their 
experience both technically, economically and socially of having access to modern 
energy services.  Investors will be rewarded for a fully completed survey acceptable to 
the local executive agency by making the equivalent of a monthly repayment of their 
loan. For EE Service providers monitoring will be an integral component of their 
performance based remuneration.  
 
Component 4:  The Executive Agencies (EAs) in the participating countries do not all 
have the specific technical expertise in house to manage this project in their country.  For 
that reason, EAs will procure the services of Management Contractors (MCs) to assist 
them with the execution of the program, including supervising the training of PFIs 
regarding the safeguards issues, ensuring that financing for Solar PV kits includes 
arrangements for a second battery upon the safe disposal of the first battery and ensuring 
that financing for pico hydro in cases were low voltage lines cross the land other than 
owner is only completed if the Bank has verified that the other party has given 
permission for the lines to cross his or her land.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project activities will take place in the rural areas of PNG, Solomon Islands and Fiji. 
Other Island Nations might be added at a later stage.  For the purposes of this project, 
Rural means all areas outside the main capitals of these Pacific States.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (EASHD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts expected from this project. 
The two potential safeguards issues identified are: the unsafe disposal of batteries and the 
potential of low voltage lines from pico hydros crossing adjacent land not belonging to 
the owner:  Both issues have been addressed through an Environmental and Social 
safeguards framework.  The framework requires the Participating Financial Institutions 
(PFIs) before making loans to be covered by a guarantee from this scheme, to verify that 
financing for a second battery is in place, and will be available for the borrower after 
disposing safely of the first battery.  The framework also requires the PFIs to verify that 
in case low voltage wiring from a pico hydro crosses a neighbors land, the neighbor has 
given permission for the line to cross his or her land.  Both the Executive Agencies (EA), 
Management Contractors (MC) and PFIs will receive training and instructions how to 
enforce the above requirements.  
 
The project will be implemented in areas in which the vast majority of the population 
constitutes indigenous populations.  For this reason the IP policy is triggered, but the 
project documentation (the PAD and PIP or associated documents) will constitute the 
Indigenous Peoples Plan.  The Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework includes 
provisions for adequate consultation with affected populations, which are almost 
exclusively IPs, as well as for adequate M&E during project implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In preparation of the PNG Teachers Solar Lighting project, a pilot for this project, a study 
regarding the practice of battery disposal in PNG and other PICs was carried out.  There 
are environmental laws in all participating countries which categorize batteries as low 
hazard waste, but enforcement is patchy or non-existent. Project EAs, using project TA 
funds, will work with the various national environment authorities to develop Codes of 
Conduct for battery disposal. In Fiji and PNG, battery disposal is now available on a 
commercial basis for the recovery of the lead. Solar PV suppliers under SEFP in all target 
countries will be required to use commercial battery disposal points when available and 
adhere to officially mandated procedures when in place.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Institutional Capacity of the Borrower is different for each of the countries. The EA in 
PNG is PNG Sustainable Energy Limited. This company which is executing a GEF- MSP 
on behalf of the GOPNG is well aware of the safeguard policies. Senior personnel 
worked earlier with SMEC and PNG Power which have executed a number of Bank 
Page  5
projects.  The CBSI in Solomon Islands has no safeguards capacity, however the 
management contractor to be hired will be required to have safeguards awareness.  The 
DOE in Fiji, has safeguards experience and works closely with the Department of 
Environment on safeguards issues in rural electrification.  However the implementation 
of the Environmental and Social safeguards framework is delegated to the PFI, which 
before issuing a loan will have to verify that the safeguards requirements are adhered to. 
All three entities, the EA the MC and PFIs will receive training in implementing the 
identified safeguards issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EAs, MC and PFI are the key stakeholders.  The MC will prepare safeguards 
information in a brochure which will be part of the information package provided to 
potential beneficiaries.  The information will also be distributed to Green Peace in Fiji 
and PNG and World Vision in Solomon Islands.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/24/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/23/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
** The Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework is included in the Project Appraisal 
Document (PAD).   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
N/A 
Page  6
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonie De Wilde 
11/30/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
11/30/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bruce M. Harris 
03/07/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
03/09/2007 
Comments:   
