Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/27/2006 
Report No.:  AC2481
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P084302 
Project Name:  Sindh Water Sector Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Masood Ahmad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (80%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (20%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Rural policies and institutions (S);Participation 
and civic engagement (S);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
24.80 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
24.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overarching project objective is to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of 
irrigation water distribution in three AWBs (Ghotki, Nara and Left Bank), particularly 
with respect to measures of reliability, equity and user satisfaction. This would be 
achieved by: (a) deepening and broadening the institutional reforms that are already 
underway in Sindh; (b) improving the irrigation system in a systematic way covering key 
hydraulic infrastructure, main and branch canals, and distributaries and minors; and (c) 
enhancing long-term sustainability of irrigation system through participatory irrigation 
management and developing institutions for improving operation and maintenance of the 
system and cost recovery.The improved water management would lead to increased 
agricultural production, employment and incomes over some about 1.8 million ha or 
more than 30 percent of the irrigated area in Sindh, and one of the poorest regions of the 
country.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component A: Community Development and Capacity Building (US$10 Million): Sindh 
Irrigation and Drainage Authority's (SIDA) capacity would be enhanced to carry out 
functions in accordance with the Sindh Water Management Ordinance of 2002 (SWMO 
2002) in managing water resources in the province and irrigation and drainage services.  
The Project would also provide support in rehabilitation of SIDA offices, developing 
capacity to transform I&D services from traditional system to new structure of FOs and 
AWBs by providing staff with expertise in social mobilization, capacity building of FOs, 
training, legal advisors, and by establishing an Environmental Management Unit (EMU) 
to strengthen its capacity for integrating environmental considerations in planning, 
development, and use of water resources.  
 
The component would help SIDA to acquire an image of a modern service oriented 
organization with clearly defined roles and responsibilities in the irrigation and drainage 
sector. SIDA would establish a water resources management information system to help 
improve management of the water resources and operation of canals, drainage and flood 
management systems.  It would also support development of a website for disseminating 
the information to public about the operation of the canals, flood warning and 
management operations, and make arrangements for broadcasting information on local 
radio using FM bands.  Similarly, the Project would support AWBs in carrying out their 
pivotal role in improving irrigation and drainage service delivery to the FOs.   The FOs 
are the most essential building block of irrigation and drainage institutions providing 
crucial services to the users. Approximately 369 FOs have been formed in three AWBs of 
the project area on about all distributaries/minors under the National Drainage Program 
(NPD), ongoing Sindh OFWM Project, and other national programs.  The project would 
strengthen and enhance capacity of about 269 FOs while the remaining 100 FOs would 
be covered by the Sindh OFWM Project.  
 
Component B: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Irrigation and Drainage System 
(US$137.9 Million): A systematic and holistic approach would be adopted in improving 
the irrigation network starting from the barrage to users in the three AWBs included in 
the project.  The project would cover all main and branch canals and distributries/minors 
while watercourses are being improved under the national program and Sindh OFWM 
Project. The necessary works comprise of four sub-components:  
 
B1. Main and Branch Canals.   This sub-component would include main and branch 
canals of Ghotki canal system, Nara canal system and Fuleli canal system. The Project 
would cover rehabilitation and improvement of some 820 km of main canals and 1,130 
km of branch canals.  In addition to rehabilitation and improvement to canals, a system of 
water measurements and accounting would be introduced throughout the main and 
branch canal systems and at the distributaries and minors.  For that purpose, appropriate 
flow measuring sections would be constructed, if necessary, and water measuring devices 
would be installed throughout the canal system.  A data communication network would 
be installed to gather information and send to central locations at AWBs and SIDA 
offices.  A database and management information system would be developed to collect, 
store and disseminate flow data helping system-wide water management. Modern control 
Page  3
rooms for operation and management of the canals would be established at the AWBs 
and the SIDA. Detailed designs for rehabilitation/improvement of main and branch canals 
systems would be prepared during the project implementation along with environmental 
management plan (EMP) or social management plan (SMP) according to the Bank 
guidelines for each canal system.  
 
B2. Distributaries and Minors. Of 369 distributaries and minors in the project area, 173 
with a length of about 1,500 km would be rehabilitated and improved under the project.  
About 100 distributaries are covered under the ongoing Sindh OFWM and remaining 96 
under the national program. The FOs would be involved in all stages of work on the 
distributary/minor canals including identification, planning, and prioritizing, designing 
and construction of rehabilitation/improvement works.  The FOs also would carry out the 
distributary works under community based contracts (CBCs).  The rehabilitation works 
would be designed in lots of 5 distributaries adjacent to each other or as close as possible.  
As stated above, for FOs strengthening, one Assistant Engineer would be assigned 
covering the 5 distributaries at a time.  The Project Implementation Consultants (PICs) 
would prepare a design report for each group of at least five distributaries outlining the 
major issues, outcome of the joint walk-through of the channels, prioritization of works, 
technical solutions, design parameters, cost estimates, and environment and social impact 
that has to be accounted for in design and construction management, etc.  These design 
reports would form the basis for preparation of construction plans, detailed designs and 
bidding documents, and implementation of environmental and social action plans.  
 
An allocation of Rs. 1,200 per acre (US$50 per ha) is made for distributary canals in 
Ghotki and Nara canal command and 1,680 Rs. per acre (US$70 per ha) for distributaries 
in Fuleli and Akramwah these channels generally having higher discharges. The selection 
of works would be done by the FOs based on their own priorities within the available 
funds.  
 
B3. Improvements of the Drainage System.  Substantial investments have been made in 
improving the drainage system in recent years under various projects.  While the main 
focus of the Water Sector Improvement Phase-I Project (WSIP-I) is irrigation 
infrastructure, some funds are provided to address major bottle necks vis-?-vis safe 
disposal of the drainage effluent in the project area and areas managed by the FOs.  The 
scope and works to be included in this component would be identified by SIDA/AWBs in 
consultation with the FOs.  
 
B4. Design and Construction Supervision.  This sub-component would cover the cost of 
surveys and investigations, consulting services for consultations with the FOs in 
identifying and prioritizing the works, preparation of detailed designs, bidding 
documents, procurement of works, and construction supervision covering all works 
included in components B1 to B3.  
 
Component C: Management Plans for Major I&D infrastructure (US$12 Million).   The 
component would include:  
 
Page  4
C1. Feasibility Studies for Barrages.   This would include feasibility studies and 
preparation of designs for rehabilitation and remedial works for the Gudu barrage 
requiring immediate attention due to its dilapidated state; assistance in reviewing the on-
going feasibility studies for rehabilitation of the Sukhar barrage and in proceeding to the 
detailed design stage; and inspection as well as assessment of the state of the Kotri 
barrage and studies for carrying out remedial works that may be necessary.  
 
C2. Preparation of Master Plan for Left Bank of Indus, Delta and Coastal Zone. The 
component would support detailed studies and preparation of a regional master plan in 
consultation with the stakeholders for addressing the flooding issues and providing 
proper drainage to the area on the left bank of the Indus River considering structural and 
non-structural measures, including remedial measures for any outstanding deficiencies in 
the Left Bank Outfall Drainage (LBOD) system, measures for retention and/or safe 
disposal of storm and flood water.  A plan would be prepared for rehabilitation and 
improvement of delta area, wetlands and the coastal zone considering environmental 
importance of the region and its economic potential drawing upon international 
experience. The detailed design would be prepared and made ready for implementation 
for the priority works identified under the master plan. These plans would be prepared in 
a
holistic way with extensive participation of local populations, NGOs and other 
stakeholders.  
 
Component D: Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project Impact and Environmental 
Management Plan (US$4.2 Million).  
 
The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities would provide continuous feedback to 
the GOSindh, Project Steering Committee (PSC), and implementing agencies on the 
project?s performance and impact of its various components, so that corrective actions 
could be undertaken in a timely manner.  They will also supervise implementation of the 
overall EMP, careful review and monitoring of subproject specific social and 
environmental management plans and supervision of their implementation.  The M&E 
activities are thus likely to cover, but not limited to: (i) the impact of the I&D 
improvements on water use efficiency, reliability and equity in water distribution at 
various levels of the system, irrigation water supply and drainage flows at different levels 
of the system, groundwater levels and quality, and soil salinity; on-farm water use; 
cropping patterns and yields; and livestock population, health and production; (ii) 
performance of the FOs and their activities in O&M of the system, service delivery and 
collection of abiana and availability of budget for management of the system; (iii) 
environmental impact of construction activities in the project area, in particular on any 
wetlands, ecologically import sites, population and livestock; (iv) any acquisition of 
public and private land and assets, agreements reach and arrangement made for 
acquisition of assets on a voluntary basis; (v) socio-economic impact and the impact on 
the level of unemployment and household incomes in the project area; estimation of the 
project?s overall benefits and economic rate of returns etc. M&E would be carried out 
using latest technology such as satellite imagery and GIS systems.  
 
Page  5
Component E: Project Coordination, Monitoring, Technical Assistance and Training 
(US$11 Million).  This component would support the Government in implementing the 
project, coordinating all project related activities and preparing a follow-on project.  It 
would include: (i) support for the operation of the Project Coordination and Monitoring 
Unit (PCMU) within the Planning and Development (P&D) of Sindh; (ii) Project 
Management Consultants/procurement (PMCA) agent for recruitment and management 
of all consulting services and staff under the project, and monitoring of their 
performance; (iii) technical assistance and training in such areas as detailed design, 
contract administration and construction supervision, procurement, financial 
management, legal issues, irrigation and drainage and agricultural development; (iv) 
project preparation for the Phase II; and (v) strategic studies and pilot projects which may 
be identified during the project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is located in the Province of Sindh on the left bank of the Indus River 
covering about 1.8 million hectares of cultivated/irrigated lands.  The Indus River is the 
main source of water for the project area.  The water is diverted to the project area 
through four major canals: Ghotki canal which offtakes from Gudu Barrage (first barrage 
in Sindh on the Indus River), Nara Canal which takes water from the Sukhar barrage 
(second barrage in Sindh) and Akram Wah and Fuleli Canals which take water from the 
Kotri barrage (third and last barrage in Sindh and on the Indus River).  
 
Topographically, Sindh consists of four distinct parts, Kirthar range on the west, a 
central alluvial plan bisected by the Indus River in the middle, a desert belt in the east and 
the Indus delta in the south.  The project area lies in the central alluvial plain.  The 
climate is arid and hot, in the northern parts temperatures are as high as 53C and rainfall 
is very limited less than 120 mm primarily due to summer monsoons. The irrigation 
started in Sindh 5,000 years ago. Without extensive irrigation system, agriculture, 
livelihoods, domestic water supply, civilization and economic development is not 
possible as it exists today.  
 
The surface slope of the Project area is extremely mild and soils are heavy, thus the area 
has very limited natural drainage. The network of canals, roads, and other public 
infrastructure further impede the natural drainage. Due to mismanagement of water 
resources (low water use efficiency) and intensive irrigated agriculture, major portion of 
the project has waterlogging and soil salinity problems. The drainage network 
constructed is inadequate. The project area is also generally underlain by saline 
groundwater, so water seepage from the canals and fields is lost and cannot be reused 
through groundwater tubewells unlike fresh groundwater areas. The project area slopes 
south-eastwards away from the Indus River making disposal of drainage water more a 
complicated problem. To provide drainage to the project area, Government has 
constructed a LBOD system with support of the World Bank and several other 
development partners, such as ADB and Saudi Fund.  The LBOD system, while 
functioning very well to drain and dispose off the agricultural drainage effluent, recently 
has shown several problems in handling the stormwater leading to flooding in the 
Page  6
downstream reaches, and disposal problems (to the Arabian Sea) affecting some of the 
wetlands in the Indus Delta area and coastal zone.  
 
There are several protected areas, games parks and wildlife sanctuaries in Sindh.  
Though construction works are expected to be limited to the areas that are cultivated and 
irrigated already, monitoring is necessary particularly for works adjacent to known 
protected areas.  
 
A
major part of population lives in rural areas and poverty is pervasive in rural Sindh.  
About 37% of the rural population lives below the poverty line, compared to 33% in 
Pakistan on an overall basis. Over 70% of the rural population is landless. The rural poor 
tend to be employed mostly as agriculture wage workers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is rated as category A. An Integrated Social and Environmental Assessment 
(ISEA) was prepared incorporating Environment Management Framework (EMF) and 
Social Impact Management Framework (SIMF) to address environmental and social 
impacts due to the sub-projects, respectively.   The ISEA concluded that the Project 
would have significant positive impact in the long run as it addresses the underlying 
causes of poor water resources management that result in degradation of land and water 
resources and severe waterlogging and salinity problems. However, rehabilitation and 
improvement works considered under the project would generate limited negative 
environmental impact during the construction period that needed to be safeguarded.  The 
ISEA also evaluated the impact related to project design, construction and operation.  
Based on this evaluation, an EMF is proposed for the Project that is designed to mitigate, 
minimize, and compensate any negative effects and in fact to enhance the ecological 
Page  7
benefits of the Project.  A summary of ISEA and EMF is provided in Annex 10 of the 
PAD.  
 
Environmental Assessment. The main issues that have to be addressed during 
construction phase of the project and included in the EMF/EMP are:  
 
(i) 
safe disposal of silt cleared from the canals. Silt has significant fertilizer value and 
would be used for agricultural purpose, and a system of distribution of silt to the farmers 
would be evolved.  Also it would be used for filling borrow pit areas where considered 
acceptable;  
 
(ii) 
washing bays and buffalo wallows would be constructed to avoid water pollution;  
 
(iii) 
cutting of trees and clearance of vegetation would be minimized.  Additional trees 
would be planted along the distributary/minor canals as well as along the main and 
branch canals.  Trees plantation would be done using appropriate species natural to the 
areas that can also provide economic benefits to the people and help in ecological 
drainage and reducing the soil salinity. It is expected that new trees planted would be at 
least three fold more than those cut;  
 
(iv) 
proper management of borrow pits or excavation areas to avoid hazards;  
 
(v) 
archaeological surveys would be carried out during preparation of subproject 
designs and included in the bidding documents along with the procedure to handle the 
?chance find?  
 
(vi) 
proper management of construction sites, control of dust, noise, pollution disposal 
of hazardous or other unused inert material, management of construction traffic, working 
hours, and scheduling acceptable to local communities and affected people in the 
vicinity;  
 
(vii) 
proper construction planning and operation of canals during construction in a 
manner that would not result in changes in flow or canal closure for longer than normal 
canal closure periods and affect water supplies to the water users.  In case scheduling of 
canal operation is to be altered for construction purposes, consultations would be held 
with the affected water users during the planning and design phase, and agreements 
would be reached.  These consultations and agreements reached would be reflected in the 
design report and associated EMPs and SMPs;  
 
(viii)  there are number of known protected areas including  games reserves, wildlife 
sanctuaries,  wetlands and other natural habitats within the irrigated areas of Sindh, and 
could potentially become a part of the project area.  Project interventions will be confined 
to established irrigated areas, and rehabilitation works will categorically be limited to 
land that has already been under cultivation. Construction adjacent to the protected areas 
or of ecological significance would be undertaken after thorough review EA/EMPs for 
such works by the M&E consultants and the Bank;  and  
 
(ix) 
implementation of pest management plan under Sindh OFWM would be 
monitored and if necessary additional assistance would be provided from component E3 
of the project (also see Annex 10.2 of the PAD for more details).  
 
The EMF/EMP actions related to construction works (items i to viii) are already 
included in the Project components (B1-B3) and these would be included in the bidding 
document and separately identified in the schedules for bill of quantities.  
Page  8
Natural Habitat.  There are several protected areas, games parks and wildlife sanctuaries 
in Sindh.  Though construction works are expected to be limited to the areas that are 
already cultivated and irrigated, monitoring is necessary, particularly for works adjacent 
to known protected areas.  Also, works adjacent to such protected areas would be carried 
out after site/contract specific EAs, their review by the M&E consultants and the Bank 
and after incorporating adequate EMPs specific to such sites prepared in line with the 
EMF.  
 
Pest Management.  The pest management plan being implemented under the Sindh 
OFWM Project.  Its current implementation status is assessed and it would be monitored. 
Details are given in the EA section above and Annex 10 of the PAD.  
 
Cultural Property.   The construction would not be carried out in undisturbed areas so 
this policy is not triggered.  However, archeological surveys would be carried out as part 
of the subproject designs and included in the bidding documents along with procedures 
for handling the ?chance find?.  Details are given in Annex 10 of the PAD.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement.  Component B of the Project will cover large scale works for 
improvement of irrigation and drainage system. During construction of these works, there 
may be some adverse impacts, both permanent and temporary, on private assets and these 
may also cause loss of income and livelihood of some households in the vicinity of the 
canals. Therefore, OP 4.12 is triggered. Precise impacts of these works can only be 
determined during the project implementation after detailed designs are prepared. 
Therefore, a SIMF is prepared for management of social impacts that may be caused by 
any of the rehabilitation and civil works activities in the Project. Detailed social 
assessment report and resettlement plans, where necessary, would be prepared as part of 
the detailed design reports.  Further details on this are given in Annex 10.  
 
Indigenous Peoples. Pakistan does not have any separate policy to define indigenous 
peoples or to protect their rights and cultural identities. In Sindh two groups of people 
may be considered as indigenous or, in the context of Pakistan, ethnic minorities for 
purposes of applicability of World Bank?s OP 4.10.  These are the Mohanas (boat 
people) of Mancher Lake and the original Thari people who have a distinct culture and 
lifestyle. Additionally, Hindu scheduled caste tribes in Sindh, such as Bheels, Kolhis and 
Meghwar. Mohanas of Mancher Lake are not found within the Project area. However, 
Thari, Bheels, Kolhis and Meghwars are known to work as seasonal laborers on 
construction sites and agricultural farms within the project area as hari and temporary 
wage laborers. Over the years, these seasonal laborers have fully integrated socially and 
economically in the mainstream society, particularly within the three AWBs. None of the 
ethnic community members, Bheels and Tharis, have any collective attachment to any 
ancestral land within the project area nor have any political, cultural or political 
institutions distinct to those of the mainstream population. Although some of these 
groups still speak their own language, they do not cumulatively satisfy IP criteria 
specified in the World Bank?s policy for their classification as indigenous peoples. 
Therefore, Bank?s OD 4.20 on Indigenous Peoples is not triggered.  
Page  9
International Waterways: The project area is located on the Indus River which is an 
international waterway thus automatically triggering the international waterways 
safeguard. The Project is located at the tail end of the river system, and will not adversely 
affect the quality or quantity of water flows to other riparians, or be adversely affected by 
other riparians' water use. Therefore, no external notification (to other riparians) is 
required under OP 7.50.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The most significant and important positive impact in the long term is improvement in 
management of water resources leading to reduction in degradation of land and water 
resources, and waterlogging and salinity.  The Project would also contribute to addressing 
other long term issues in Sindh by carrying out necessary studies to: (a) make barrages, 
which are most important hydraulic structures in Sindh, safe; (b) prepare a regional plan 
for addressing the drainage and flood management on the left bank of the Indus River. 
This plan would be prepared through a participatory process considering all structural and 
non-structural options; and (c) prepare a development program for the coastal lowland, 
and Indus delta. The detailed designs would be prepared for the priority works and made 
ready for implementation under a future investment project that Sindh may undertake 
with the assistance of its development partners.  
 
Based on lessons learned from implementation of NDP, the provincial project instead of 
national program covering all provinces is selected.  The provincial project can address 
the priorities of the province and accommodate province specific requirements improving 
ownership at the higher level and coordination of activities at the field level.  The 
institutional requirements for project implementation are simpler in case of provincial 
intervention eliminating the needs for units and consultants for coordination among 
provinces and at the federal levels thus reducing the overhead costs considerably.  Also 
direct reporting of all project consultants to provincial authorities improves project 
control, better implementation and ease in making adjustments to implementation 
program in response to changes on the ground.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Project alternatives considered include ?do nothing?, which is not an option given 
the degradation of environment and incomes in the project area;  only institutional 
reforms, which experience shows do not deliver in the absence of good physical 
infrastructure; and rehabilitation works only which do not deliver results in the absence 
of proper institutions with proper incentives.  Therefore an optimal mix of institutional 
reforms and rehabilitation and construction works are included in the Project.  
 
As described above, the possible adverse affects are only during construction phase and 
they are reversible. In fact, the EMF is designed to address and mitigate these affects.  
Further, it proposes the mechanism to undertake detailed environmental assessment when 
designing a project scheme. Mitigation measures specific to a project scheme will be 
Page  10
covered through project-specific EMP, which will become part of the bidding document. 
The works are packaged in a manner that would allow thorough review of overall and 
very site specific EA and issues that can be included in the construction contracts and/or 
addressed under the Project.During the planning and design of the sub-projects, adequate 
measures would be taken to avoid or at least minimize any adverse social impacts by 
looking into possible technical alternatives. These measures would be clearly explained 
in the design reports to be prepared for each sub-project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared detailed ISEA, which is the basis of the environmental and 
social management frameworks.  The Government of Sindh EPA has approved the ISEA 
and environmental and social management frameworks.  To strengthen Borrower?s 
capacity in implementation and monitoring of these plans, several actions are taken and 
incorporated in the Project.  These include: (a) strengthening of SIDA?s environmental 
management and social units; (b) establishment of a small environmental unit in the 
PCMU; (c) preparation of EA, environmental and social management plans for each 
subproject or works contract to be awarded under the project; and (d) independent M&E 
consultants reporting to PCMU under the Planning and Development Department (not to 
the implementing agencies) would review and supervise the implementation of the 
EMF/EMPs and SIMFs.  
 
Regarding preparation of a plan for the left bank of the Indus, delta and coastal zones, a 
holistic and comprehensive integrated approach would be used considering all options 
(structural and non?structural) to address the issues and to implement long term 
sustainable development plans.  Preparation of these plans would be a three stage process 
(that would be outlined in detail in the terms of reference for these studies): (i) 
identification and proper/precise definition of the issues, their underlying cause and 
possible solutions in consultation with the local population, experts and stakeholders.  
Consultations and workshops for prioritizing issues, options, alternative solutions along 
with ranking and identification of options/solutions that would be studied in further detail 
including feasibility studies for structural options; (ii) analysis, and studies of highest 
priority items structural and non-structural measures identified during stage-I.  This 
would form the basis for consultations with the stakeholders in setting priorities, 
sequencing the interventions and identifying the options for which detailed design would 
be prepared for further investments; and (iii) based on the detailed designs have 
consultations with the stakeholders and define the investment program consisting of 
structural and non-structural measures that would be taken up by the Government in first 
phase of the a long term program the Sindh would implement jointly with its 
development partners.  
 
This work would be carried out by competent consulting firms which would be 
supervised by the SIDA EMU and PCMU M&E teams with support from the World 
Bank.  The team would consist of internationally/nationally renowned firms and 
competent local NGOs in order to maximize inclusion of all concerned people and 
Page  11
stakeholders in consultation process thus ensuring that concerns of public/stakeholders 
are incorporated and in all stages of preparation of plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation of the ISEA, consultations and focus group discussions with key 
stakeholders were carried out to get an assessment of their perceptions and seek their 
views and incorporate their feedback into the design of the project. The key stakeholders 
with which consultations and focus group discussions were held included: i) 
representatives of the institutions directly involved in the water management  i.e. 
President / secretary of Area Water Boards (AWBs), Farmers Organizations (FOs), Water 
Course Associations (WCAs), government officials of Irrigation Department, SIDA, 
Agricultural Engineering and Water Management Department, and local government 
officials; ii) Grassroots level stakeholders including beneficiary smallholders, 
sharecroppers, tenants and daily wage earners (haris); iii) women groups; and iv) local 
NGOs. Focus Group discussions were held with selected group of stakeholders in the 
three AWBs. Additionally, consultations were also held with control groups in in Sujwal 
and Mirpurkhas areas, and in Badin with the population affected by the floods in the past  
 
First draft of ISEA was submitted to the Bank?s Infoshop on December 12, 2005. The 
final draft was submitted on November 27th 2006. The summary was translated in Sindhi 
and distributed during the consultation and disclosure sessions.  As mentioned above 
consultations were carried out with the focus groups during project preparation. In 
addition, two rounds of consultations/disclosure were held.  First round was undertaken 
on January 19, 25 and March 29, 2006 in Ghotki, Badin and Mirpurkhas respectively.  
ISEA was updated in September/October 2006 (including the Sindhi version of 
Summary) reflected latest project deigns environmental and social condition in the 
project area triggering additional safeguard polices. The second round was done with 
updated ISEA at Ghotki on October 5, 2006, on October 7 at Badin and October 9 at 
Mirpurkhas in which local NGOs, haris, women, fishermen, farmers etc., participated. 
Special consultations were carried out with the IP who work in the project area as 
laborers and/or haris.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/27/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/27/2006 
 
Page  12
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/27/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  13
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Masood Ahmad 
11/27/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
11/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Pramod Agrawal 
11/27/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/27/2006 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
11/27/2006 
Comments:  cleared on 11/27/06 email in IRIS 
