Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2551 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/16/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P101684 
Project Name: Trade and Transport Facilitation Project - II 
Task Team Leader: Amer Zafar Durrani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 11, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Managing for development results 
(P);Export development and competitiveness (S);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
24.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective of the proposed technical assistance (TA) is to improve the 
performance of the trade and transport logistics system and bring it up to international standards. 
This will help reduce the cost of doing business in Pakistan and ultimately enhance trade 
competitiveness and the country?s industrialization. The Government of Pakistan (GOP) will 
achieve this objective through policy reforms targeted within the framework of National Trade 
Corridor Improvement Program (NTCIP), investment projects relating to railways, road 
transport, ports and shipping, aviation, trade facilitation and capacity building/analytical work 
and increased institutional capacity to develop and implement the changed sector environment.  
 
Direct recipients of the proposed technical assistance project are National Trade Corridor 
Management Unit (NTCMU), Trade and Transport Facilitation Unit (TTFU), National Trade and 
Transport Facilitation Committee (NTTFC), and respective public agencies (ministries, operating 
authorities). The initial beneficiary will be Pakistan?s private sector trading community which 
will have better opportunities to enhance their competitive position in their international markets 
and, under competitive pressures, reduce costs to consumers. This should, in turn, generate 
Page  2
additional employment and growth opportunities. Pakistani consumers should also benefit from 
the resulting reduced costs of imports. Specific targets and their benefits will be set during 
project appraisal.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Based on lessons learned, the GOP and the World Bank have agreed on financing NTCIP 
through programmatic Development Policy Lendings (DPLs), specific project investment 
lending and a technical assistance credit. GOP and the Bank agreed that a multi-sector policy-
oriented operation to support implementation of reforms acting as triggers for specific project 
investment lending would be most effective. The technical assistance loan will help prepare and 
monitor reforms through establishment of coordination units within the Planning Commission 
and Ministry of Commerce and provide additional analytical underpinning and training 
opportunities.  
 
The project is proposed to consist of the following five components: (i) capacity development 
in the entities directly concerned with the implementation of NTCIP during the period of 
program execution (NTCMU), (ii) support for the implementation process of NTCIP through 
analytical work on trade procedures and trade supporting infrastructure and services needs 
(including roads, railways, ports & shipping, aviation and energy sub-sectors), (iii) further 
strengthening of the private sector participation through TTFU and NTTFC aiming to internalize 
public-private collaboration on trade facilitation through a dedicated project component (building 
on the Bank funded ?Trade and Transport Facilitation Project?), (iv) establish sustainable 
monitoring and evaluation system to evaluate impacts of NTCIP?including the coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation of the social and environmental safeguard issues, and (v) manage the 
external communications strategy for the NTCIP. The project?s five components will finance: (i) 
the institutional set up of NTCMU and TTFU, and (ii) national and international consultancy 
services resulting in underlying studies, research, and training. The funds will be proportionately 
divided in both units.  
 
In order to ensure effective implementation of NTCIP with particular emphasis on trade 
facilitation, a five-year stand-alone TA is the most feasible option for maximizing sustainability 
and achieving Pakistan?s development priorities for international competitiveness. Many of the 
technical assistance and capacity building requirements facing the implementation of the NTCIP 
are institutional and technical in nature which is difficult to address in investment operations. 
Stand-alone technical assistance compared to technical assistance components integrated in 
investment operations has proven to be most effective when dealing with multiple sectors and 
agencies. Due to its multimodal nature, ownership and implementation of NTCIP is spread 
across agencies and sectors under the coordination of the Planning Commission and the 
oversight of the Prime Minister?s Office and NTCIP Task Force.  
 
Successful implementation of NTCIP will require strong ownership at the ministry and agency 
level as well as strong leadership at the level of the Planning Commission (acting as the 
designated coordinating and management agency of NTCIP) as well as collaboration from the 
private sector. Trade and Transport Facilitation Project I (TTFPI) has proven that strong 
leadership and true champions of a project/program are essential for successful outcomes. 
Private sector participation has been seen as a prerequisite to trade and transport facilitation 
Page  3
initiatives. Major reforms implemented under the program are seen to reduce the cost of doing 
business in Pakistan. The relatively under-developed private sector in Pakistan has therefore a 
major role to play by adapting itself to the changed environment.  
 
The project loan is proposed to amount to USD24.0 million over a period of five years. During 
project preparation, partnership and collaboration with ADB, JBIC, UNDP and EC will be 
further developed.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Islamabad, Pakistan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
For the NTCMU, a Social & Environmental Safeguard Specialist will be hired as part of the core 
team (as indicated in the GOP PC-1 for the project).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASES) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
Mr Mohammad Imtiaz Akhtar Alvi (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/31/2007 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
By April 9, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amer Zafar Durrani 
10/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/16/2006 
Comments:  ISDS is cleared as Category C, on provision that no changes in components which may 
produce physical impacts are made. Project is transferred to SASEI for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
10/13/2006 
Comments:  This is approved. I have made some minor editing on the project information section, 
consistent with my comments on the PCN. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
