Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2546 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/12/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P103080 
Project Name: KARACHI DOCKERS LABOR BOARD RESTRUCTURING PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Noel Guillossou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (100%) 
Theme: Corporate governance (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization 
(P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed operation will help the Borrower to achieve the objective of reducing the cost of 
trade and transport logistics and bringing services' quality to international standards in order to 
reduce the cost of doing business in Pakistan and ultimately enhance export competitiveness and 
the country's industrialization.  
 
At the end of the program, the following outcomes are expected:  
 
a. 
Overall reduction of transport and transit costs and times for goods using the National 
Trade Corridor; and  
 
b.
Reduced share of domestic transport costs and cost of non-factor services in the total 
value of commodities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will include three components:  
 
a. 
Severance: The objective of this component is to reduce the cost of Pakistan ports for 
port users by reducing related labor costs. This component will finance severance and related 
payments to management and workers retrenched due to closure of KDLB  
Page  2
b. 
Labor Redeployment Services:  The objective of this component is to provide labor 
redeployment services, to KDLB management and workers who have been displaced by closure 
of KDLB, to assist them in reentering the labor force.  This  component will finance: (i) technical 
assistance and minor goods to develop and maintain administrative procedures between KDLB 
and other agencies (to be identified during project preparation) facilitating the assessment and 
planning for delivery of  services to KDLB workers, and (ii) the actual cost of delivering labor 
redeployment services for up to 4,000 displaced staff. Labor redeployment services will be 
demand driven and will include, but not be limited, to those addressing: frictional unemployment 
(i.e., social and career/counseling, job placement)), structural unemployment (i.e., institutional 
and on-job training), and lack of demand for labor (i.e., temporary community employment, 
small/micro business assistance).  
 
c. 
Project Management and Evaluation: The objective of this component is to: (i) ensure 
effective administration and coordination of the overall project including financial management 
and accounts, procurement, and reporting; (ii) ensure effective communication related to the 
decision to close down KDLB and to the implementation of the retrenchment plan; and (iii) to 
monitor the social impact of the closure of KDLB. The component will finance technical 
assistance and minor goods to ensure coordination of project management activities and 
monitoring of the impact of KDLB in displaced workers, their families, the community, and the 
net impact of labor redeployment services provided to retrenched KDLB staff.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The location of the project is the city of Karachi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be assessed   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (SASES) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASES) 
Mr Mohammad Imtiaz Akhtar Alvi (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
social assessment (SA) will be carried out to better characterize the population affected by 
the retrenchment. This includes not only the workers themselves but their families as well as 
possibly the surrounding community. The SA should identify the most vulnerable groups. 
The SA will also provide the information useful to guide in the provision of support after 
retrenchment. The SA is expected to be completed by December 2007.  
 
A
continuous social impact assessment (CSIA) will be conducted on semi-annual basis to 
provide an independent assessment of the social mitigation measures in place, their equitable 
distribution and the targeting of vulnerable groups. It will help monitor the social dimensions 
of the proposed project and in doing so highlight the risks, challenges, opportunities and 
problems in the project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Noel Guillossou 
10/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/11/2006 
Comments:  Project is category "C", but entails social risk aspects. Safeguards Adviser is available to 
review and advise on social impact assessment for retrenchment. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
10/11/2006 
Comments:  This is approved, the board date seems to be ambitious. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
