Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC2815
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P103080 
Project Name:  KARACHI DOCK LABOR PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Noel Guillossou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 3, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Ports, waterways and shipping (100%) 
Theme:  Corporate governance (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization 
(P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
79.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
(a) to increase productivity of the port of Karachi by streamlining labor working practices 
and reducing labor costs related to the Karachi Dock Labor Board (KDLB); and (b) to 
facilitate the reentry of former KDLB registered workers and employees into the labor 
market.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have three components:  
 
a. 
Job Benefits Loss Compensation:  The objective of this component is to provide 
job benefits loss compensation and related payments to up to 4,000 KDLB registered 
dock workers and employees. The component will include the following activities: (a) 
Public Information and Communication : prepare public information materials on the 
project rationale and on the job loss compensation program, provide formal briefing to 
KDLB dock workers, employees and families, and assist workers and employees in 
making informed decisions with respect to job benefits loss compensation payments; (b) 
Administrative Procedures: prepare administrative procedures and materials to process 
job benefits loss compensation payments for individual workers; and (c) Job Loss 
Compensation Payments: make payments to up to 4,000 workers and staff following 
fiduciary procedures agreed with the World Bank.  
Page  2
b. 
Labor Redeployment Program: The objective of this component is to provide 
labor redeployment services to KDLB registered dock workers and employees who have 
received job benefits loss compensation payments, to assist them in reentering the labor 
market quickly, and to their immediate family members with a special focus on 
employability/income generation of women. This component will include the following 
activities: (a) Develop Information and Procedures: develop and maintain information 
and procedures to promote and deliver labor redeployment services to KDLB workers 
and staff; (b) Assess Demand for Labor Services: provide information to KDLB dock 
workers and employees on the availability of labor redeployment services to assess and 
determine the demand for these services based on profile of workers requesting services; 
(c) Deliver Labor Redeployment Services: deliver labor redeployment services to KDLB 
workers, employees and immediate family members, via sub-contracts with service 
providers; and (d) Evaluate Labor Redeployment Services: determine the net impact of 
labor redeployment services.  
 
c. 
Social Assessment and Project Management : The objective of this component is 
to provide support for: (a) Social Assessment: to identify issues related to the socio-
economic impact of discontinuation of KDLB scheme on KDLB workers, employees and 
families, and the status of labor relations and working conditions of similar workers at the 
Karachi Port, especially in the post-KDLB scenario, and develop recommendations to 
provide improved working conditions; (b) Social Monitoring: evaluate the socio-
economic impact of terminating the KDLB scheme on KDLB registered dock workers, 
employees and their immediate families; (c) Project Management Unit (PMU): to 
coordinate project execution, and manage the resources of the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Location : Port of Karachi   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A
review of social characteristics of KDLB staff and registered dock workers was carried 
out during project preparation to assess the number of families and dependents that will 
be impacted by the termination of the KDLB scheme. Information was collected on their 
region of origin to determine whether labor redeployment services need to be offered 
outside of Karachi. Data on age provided an estimate of the number of workers that may 
find a new job more easily, have the potential to learn new skills or may require 
counseling.  
 
Conditions of employment and access to social benefits for dock workers not registered 
with KDLB were reviewed during project preparation. Stevedores have increasingly 
hired dockworkers from the market instead of using the KDLB dock workers. The review 
found that employment conditions do not comply with the relevant labor and social 
security laws.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Licensing agreements between KPT and stevedores are being revised to require 
employment contracts, health insurance and pension coverage for dock workers in 
Karachi Port.  
 
As soon as the social assessment/monitoring specialist is recruited in the PMU, (s)he 
will launch an additional social assessment, in parallel with the pre-layoff briefing of 
KDLB registered workers and employees, aiming at: (a) reassessing issues related to the 
socio-economic impact of job benefits loss on KDLB registered workers and families and 
the status of labor relations and working conditions of similar workers at the Karachi 
Port; and (b) developing recommendations to address these issues and confirm 
institutional mechanisms and instruments so that the dock workers continue to get basic 
benefits. This in-depth social assessment will help better characterize the population 
affected by the retrenchment and identify the most vulnerable groups. It will also help 
identify and incorporate effective social safeguards and demand-driven labor 
redeployment services to help the households find alternative income sources including 
re-employment, small family business, business incubator services and community work . 
This includes not only the workers themselves but their families as well as possibly the 
surrounding community.  
Page  4
Subsequent social monitoring surveys will monitor the demographic and socio-
economic characteristics, employment conditions and access to pension and health 
benefits of KDLB registered workers and employees who have received job benefits loss 
compensation by conducting four cycles of survey every six months starting 3 to 4 
months after the initial group of KDLB workers depart. This continuous social impact 
assessment conducted on semi-annual basis will provide an independent assessment of 
the social mitigation measures in place, their equitable distribution and the targeting of 
vulnerable groups and their re-entering the employment market. It will help monitor the 
social dimensions of the proposed project and in doing so highlight the risks, challenges, 
opportunities and problems in the project.  
 
An evaluation of labor redeployment services will be carried out about 18 months after 
the initial group of KDLB workers and employees depart. The objective is to evaluate the 
net impact of labor redeployment services by implementing a quasi-experimental design 
net impact study of a sample of KDLB workers and employees who have participated in 
the labor redeployment program. The study will identify the usage and impact of services 
for different demographic groups and indicate whether benefits were used by the KDLB 
workers, employees or by other household members since the services are to be available 
to immediate family members as well as the actual KDLB workers themselves.  
 
The Karachi Port Trust (KPT) will be responsible for managing and implementing the 
project through a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) and will coordinate all the 
activities with the Karachi Dock Labor Board. One full-time long-term local job loss 
compensation specialist, as part of PMU, will administer implementation of the Job Loss 
Compensation Program. One full-time long-term local labor redeployment specialist and 
one short-term international labor redeployment specialist will develop, administer and 
evaluate the Labor Redeployment Program. Labor redeployment services will be 
delivered by sub-contractors procured by PMU following procedures agreed with the 
World Bank. The Social Assessment and Project Management Component will be 
supported by one full time local social assessment consultant, and two full time local 
project management consultants (i.e. administration, finance). A 
reporting/communication specialist will manage the communication campaign about the 
project rationale, its content and achievement of its objectives and will advise the other 
specialist in PMU on information and communication activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the general public, political representatives, the federal and 
provincial governments and the municipality of Karachi, the affected workers and their 
families, and the KPT and its clients -- ship owners and agents.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project is not expected to have an environmental impact. No document needs to be 
disclosed.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Noel Guillossou 
04/16/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohammad Imtiaz Akhtar Alvi 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/23/2007 
Comments:  No safeguard policies are triggered. There is significant social risk from labour 
redeployment. SAR Safeguards requests review of documents and plans for management of labour 
redeployment. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon Thomas 
04/16/2007 
Comments:  This is fine with me 
Page  6
