Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2079 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/01/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P098437 
Project Name: COMMUNITY-BASED MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH  
PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Benjamin P. Loevinsohn 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Child health (P);Population and reproductive health (P);Health system 
performance (S);Gender (S);Other communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
125.00 
 
CANADA: CANADIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
(CIDA) 15.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
2.00
142.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective for the proposed project is to contribute to improved maternal and 
child health outcomes through: (i) improved access to promotive, preventive, and curative 
services at the community level particularly to women and children (as measured by, for 
example, a 20% increase in immunization coverage, 10% increase in contraceptive prevalence, 
and 15% increase in skilled birth attendance, etc.); and (ii) dramatically improved delivery of 
these services in poor and underserved areas (as measured by increased coverage and decreased 
variance in the above indicators within and between districts). The results will be measured 
through district-level household surveys and special studies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would use a specific investment loan (SIL) to support implementa
tion of the MOH’s 
well-defined reform agenda for the LHW program described in the draft PC-I. To take advantage 
Page  2
of the existence of such a clear plan, the task team proposes to use a programmatic approach 
employing a single category of expenditures (i.e., LHW salaries). The project would disburse 
semi-annually, over 3 years, against accomplishment of agreed prior actions. Agreed actions by 
approval could include the contracting out of the management of the program in selected districts 
and the recruitment of a monitoring and evaluation firm. Subsequent actions could include 
signing MOUs with district governments regarding devolution of the LHW program and 
implementation of the performance incentive. It is envisaged that upon approval, 10% of the 
funds would be released retroactively (i.e., the maximum allowed) to pay for salaries. During 
preparation, prior actions for approval and reforms for year one will be agreed. Year two and 
three reforms actions would be agreed during semi-annual review missions. The current version 
of the PC-I includes the following areas of reform:   
 
(i) 
Improving the Performance of LHWs Through New Approaches to Management: In 
order to make large improvements in the LHW program at the district level, managerial and 
organizational innovations that emphasize measurable results/outputs rather than inputs will be 
tested on an appropriately large scale (a few districts). The types of approaches envisaged 
include: (i) contracting out to NGOs the management of the whole LHW program in some 
poorly performing districts, including where NGOs are currently managing the BHUs (e.g., 
Rahim Yar Khan and other districts in the Punjab); (ii) “contracting in” individual managers to 
run the LHW program in other districts on performance-based contracts awarded on a 
competitive basis; (iii) providing performance-based bonuses to government staff who manage 
the district LHW program; and (iv) devolving the management of the program to district 
governments in some poorly and well performing districts (about four of each). This will involve 
building the capacity of district managers before the program funds are provided to the district 
government. The outcome of each innovation will be evaluated rigorously by third parties and 
decisions would then be made about which should be expanded.  
 
(ii) 
Broadening the Scope of Services Provided by LHWs: The in-depth evaluation of the 
LHW program found that LHWs were not overworked (they worked about 20 hours per week on 
average) and that they could, in fact, provide more services to their communities. The PC-I calls 
for the careful introduction of effective, scientifically proven, low cost, and appropriate 
interventions that could have a large health impact. New interventions could include: (i) 
expanding use of iodized salt; (ii) promotion of hand-washing to reduce diarrhea and pneumonia; 
(iii) more effective forms of health education and other demand side innovations; and (iv) 
directly involving LHWs in tuberculosis control. These innovations will generally be introduced 
on a pilot basis and their feasibility tested before implementation is expanded.  
 
(iii) 
Strengthening Support Functions for LHWs: The PC-I also calls for improving the 
efficiency of procurement and distribution of drugs, contraceptives, and other supplies that the 
LHWs need in the field through contracts with private firms. In addition, there will also be 
efforts to improve pre-service and in-service training of LHWs through mechanisms that link 
actual knowledge and skills of the trainees to payment of the trainers. The LHW program will 
also explore means for improving the efficiency of field supervision through the introduction of 
job-aids and improved training of supervisors.  
 
Page  3
(iv) 
Strengthening Monitoring and Evaluation: In order to effectively monitor and evaluate 
the various approaches being tested and to measure the achievement of program objectives, the 
PC-I describes further strengthening of the monitoring and evaluation capacity of the LHW 
program either directly or through a third party evaluation firm. Special studies will also be 
financed aimed at rigorously evaluating the new approaches being tested.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be undertaken all over Pakistan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Because the project is focused on software and organizational changes, it should be classified as 
environmental category C. No other safeguards will be triggered, except for OP7.60, projects in 
disputed areas, because the project will support activities in AJK. Seeing as the social setting of 
the LHW program has been studied in detail both quantitatively and qualitatively, it is felt that 
the program has a well developed capacity to understand and deal with the social aspects of the 
project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It is not expected that safeguard related studies will be required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Benjamin P. Loevinsohn 
01/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/04/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michele Gragnolati 
02/01/2006 
Comments:  The ISDS is approved by Michele Gragnolati as Acting Sector Manager on behalf of 
Anabela Abreu 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
