Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/07/2007 
Report No.:  AC3024
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P100681 
Project Name:  Rural Telecommunications and e-Services Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ritin Singh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2007 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (80%);General public administration sector (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(S);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.10 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
19.76 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
19.76 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The projects development objectives are to: a) increase access to information 
communication infrastructure and services through a market driven approach to rural and 
unserved areas, b) ensure that the regulatory and policy environment can continue to 
sustain market competitiveness in the future. The project development objectives will be 
achieved through the following steps:  
 
-
leveraging private investments to extend access to information and communication 
infrastructure and services;  
 
-
implementation of the USF policy to provide competitively based capital subsidies to 
extend access to modern telecommunication services in rural areas;  
 
-
development and implementation of a new ICT policy and regulations that deals with 
next generation technological innovations in the sector;  
 
-
development and implementation of a credible national e-government policy that will 
help improve public service delivery; and  
Page  2
-
implementation of an improved modern automated spectrum management and 
monitoring system.  
 
This project is at the core of the Banks agenda of poverty reduction and economic 
growth. The project is consistent with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) FY06-09 
strategic objective of removing infrastructure bottlenecks to support sustained and rapid 
economic growth. CAS objectives that are pertinent to the project include: (i) supporting 
reform processes, including privatization and private sector participation in public 
utilities, technical assistance and capacity building to strengthen institutions in specific 
sectors, (ii) developing legal and institutional framework to encourage private-public 
partnerships, and (iii) undertaking IBRD investment operations where reforms have 
advanced sufficiently to make public investment effective.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project has three main interrelated components aimed at achieving the 
aforementioned project development objective. The first component will provide 
Technical Assistance (TA) to strengthen institutional capacity of the MOIT/EGD to 
develop an adequate policy and regulatory framework to address the next generation 
telecommunication issues, and establish a credible e-government policy. The second 
component, and primary focus of the project, will expand access and increase utilization 
of ICTs in rural and remote areas through the implementation of the USF Policy. The 
third component will provide TA to PTA/FAB for strengthening the regulatory function 
and supporting the radio frequency monitoring and management functions to improve 
spectrum allocation efficiency and subsequently sector performance.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Policy Functions of MOIT/EGD  
 
This component will finance TA to strengthen institutional capacity to enable the GOP 
to effectively address issues arising from an increasingly complex and competitive sector. 
TA will be provided to MOIT in the following policy areas: convergence and policy 
review, new legislation, and training of staff. The second part of this component includes 
TA for Electronic Government Directorate (EGD), which will provide support to two 
activities, (i) establishing a robust policy framework to meet national e-Government 
objectives, and (ii) developing innovative PPP models to be piloted in select areas of the 
country.  
 
Component 2: Accelerated Rural Connectivity  
 
In this component, World Bank funding will support Phase I of the GOPs program to 
extend ICT services into unserved, rural and remote areas. This project will aim to bring 
teledensity from 0 to 10 percent in the uncovered rural areas. This component will 
specifically provide investment to the USF which will be put towards providing 
incentives for private investment through output-based aid (OBA) type mechanisms. This 
component will further provide TA and training to assist in the capacity building and 
strengthening of the Universal Service Fund Company (USFC) and to support the Phase I 
and II preparation, implementation, and management and monitoring functions.  
 
Page  3
Component 3: Strengthening Regulatory and Spectrum Management Functions of 
PTA/FAB  
 
This component will provide TA and investments for strengthening the regulatory 
framework, which includes spectrum policy, pricing and management, sector reviews, 
and training to PTA/FAB.  This component will also include technical assistance to help 
PTA in addressing outstanding regulatory concerns with regards to increasing broadband 
penetration, promoting infrastructure sharing and licensing and other regulatory topics 
that may arise over the course of the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is located in rural areas of the four provinces in Pakistan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project activities which are likely to interact with the environment include 
construction of buildings for telecenters, exchanges and monitoring stations, laying of 
cables, and erection of pylons.  Operation of these facilities can also cause some limited 
environmental degradation.  
 
Following is the description of adverse environmental impacts of the proposed project 
activities:  
 
Concerns associated with Siting of Telecentres/Exchanges and Pylons  
 
1.
Loss of asset due to land-take for the facility.  
 
2.
Limited loss of natural vegetation and habitat.  
 
3.
Damage or threat to any site of archeological, historical, cultural or religious 
significance.  
 
4.
Safety hazard for the nearby population.  
 
Environmental Concerns during Construction Activities  
Page  4
Following low negative environmental impacts are expected to occur during the 
construction of the proposed facilities:  
 
1.
Dust and noise pollution caused by the construction activities.  
 
2.
Soil and water contamination caused by improper waste   disposal.  
 
3.
Water scarcity due to water consumption during construction (in water scarce 
areas).  
 
4.
Limited damage to agriculture in the adjacent areas.  
 
However, all of the above issues are temporary in nature and will disappear as soon as 
the construction is over.  Furthermore, due to the smallness of the individual building the 
magnitude of these impacts will be small --characterized as low negative impacts.  
 
Environmental Concerns during Laying Underground Cable  
 
Some low negative environmental impacts are expected to be experienced during laying 
of the underground cables both for connecting the exchanges and telecentres with the 
existing telecom network in the country, as well as for providing connections to the 
residential and commercial users.  These potential impacts may include:  
 
1.
Dust and noise pollution caused by the excavation and backfilling activities.  
 
2.
Soil and water contamination caused by improper waste disposal.  
 
3.
Water scarcity due to water consumption during construction (in water scarce 
areas).  
 
4.
Limited damage to agriculture during excavation and cable laying.  
 
5.
Damage to topsoil during excavation.  
 
6.
Blocked access.  
 
However, all of the above issues are temporary in nature and will disappear as soon as 
the cabling laying is over. Concerns during Operation of Proposed Facilities Potential 
environmental and social concerns likely to occur during operation of the proposed 
telecenters and exchanges may include health concerns associated with electromagnetic 
radiation, inadequate sanitation facilities; and gender issues   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed project interventions are in the rural areas of the country, which at large, 
represent the agricultural settings as the baseline environmental conditions. Any future 
activities in the project area will mainly be oriented towards improvement in the 
agricultural production. Such future project will therefore result in enhanced benefits 
when considered in conjunction with the Rural Telecom & e-Services project   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only other available alternative was no project option. Considering poor accessibility 
to modern telecommunication facilities by the majority rural population of the country 
this option was not viable as expansion of these modern facilities to these rural areas will 
accelerate the economic growth and contribute in reducing the poverty. Further, almost 
all the environmental impacts likely to arise due to the project interventions are low 
negative, temporary and reversible in nature therefore good house-keeping practices, as 
outlined in the EMF, will ensure good environmental management on the project.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The USFC is a newly created company under MoIT with little capacity to ensure 
environmental safeguards. It has therefore been proposed in the EA done by the USFC to 
designate its General Manager-Projects & Technology as the environmental coordinator 
(EC) for the project. EC will provide the essential oversight for the implementation of 
EMF. EC will also arrange to implement the proposed training component/awareness 
seminars for the key project players. Field implementation of EMF will be the 
responsibility of the contractor through the designated staff environmental monitors(EM).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
MoIT, the contractors, civil society organizations and the communities are key 
stakeholders of this project and the USFC will implement training/awareness program to 
bring them on-board. The USFC will also implement RPF with due consultation with the 
communities. Further, the USFC will place a copy of the EA report for public 
consultation at all its regional offices as well as at all the construction sites.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/18/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/06/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/18/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/06/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas 
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ritin Singh 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
 
Comments:   
Page  7
