Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:  
38582
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  
16 January 2007 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P101640 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: Pakistan Community-Based Renewable Energy Development in Northern 
Areas and Chitral  
Task Team Leader: Jeremy Levin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: TBD 
Estimated Board Date: NA 
Managing Unit: Environment 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset 
Sector: SASSD 
Theme: Climate Change 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
PCF Amount (US$m.): TBD 
 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Local equity, in-kind and land contribution 
2.99 
PPAF IDA grant 
6.67 
Government of Pakistan (Northern Areas) 
2.54 
Domestic Borrowing 
1.13 
Royal Norwegian Embassy  
1.64 
Total 14.97 
Environmental Category: B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [ x] 
B.  Project Objectives: 
 
The proposed development objectives of the Carbon Offset Project are: 
·
Reduce global emissions of carbon dioxide.  
·
Increase access to modern energy from renewable energy sources. 
 
The Carbon Offset project will provide additional support for the achievement of the following 
objectives, namely: (a) develop hydropower potential in an environmentally and socially 
sustainable manner so as to help meet local electricity demand, (b) improve access of rural areas 
to modern electricity services, and (c) improve standards of living for the poor through provision 
of community level infrastructure.   
 
Page  2
The project will reduce infrastructure bottlenecks and will allow for increased use of modern 
energy sources by generating electricity at different locations in rural areas of NAs & Chitral 
through mini and small capacity hydroelectric projects (ranging from 0.05 MW to 0.5 MW).  The 
project will increase opportunity for 
income generating activities in Pakistan’s remote and 
underprivileged Northern Areas and Chitral through better and improved access to reliable and 
renewable sources of energy. The increased use of hydroelectric power will also produce local 
environmental and health benefits such as reduced exposure to indoor air pollution and reduced 
pressure on forestry resources used to meet household heating and cooking needs, reduced local 
air pollution from diesel-fired gensets, and economic benefits from the reduced need to transport 
and store fossil fuels in remote areas for power, heating and cooking.  The project will also 
produce global environmental benefits by annually reducing GHG emissions through the 
substitution of hydropower for diesel and kerosene usage at the village level. 
 
C.  Project Description: 
 
The electricity supply in the Federally-administered Northern Areas of Pakistan currently does 
not meet even half of the local demand.  As a result, use of diesel-run generators is common 
practice, a practice which is further encouraged by government subsidies on fuel prices.  With 
both national and regional electricity demand increasing rapidly, the likelihood of significant 
additional diesel-generation being installed in the area is high. This will result in additional fossil 
fuel consumption and increased GHG emissions, besides imposing significant additional local 
costs from fuel import, transportation and storage expenses.  
 
This Carbon Offset project will produce greenhouse gas emission reductions and support the 
development of the international market mechanism for trading Emission Reductions (ERs) 
developed in the framework of the Kyoto Protocol.
 
The project will reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions that would otherwise be produced from the use of diesel-based generators, as these are 
the most ready means of meeting the current power deficit, especially during winters, in the 
region which is not connected to the national electricity grid due to its remoteness and 
mountainous terrain. The project consists of purchase of ERs generated from at least 51 run-of-
river hydroelectric plants ranging in size from .05 MW to 0.5 MW, with combined capacity of 
~10 MW in different locations in Pakistan’s remote Northern Areas and Chitral by the World 
Bank-managed Community Development Carbon Fund (CDCF).    
 
The hydroelectric plants would be managed on a community basis, with program implementation 
support from the Aga Khan Rural Support Program, and would include active community 
involvement at the identification, design, implementation and operation stages. The operation of 
these renewable energy systems will provide increased access to modern energy services to an 
estimated 150,000 people (with associated social benefits) currently depending on traditional 
fuels, kerosene, and diesel-fired gen-sets to meet their energy needs.  Operational costs will be 
recovered from users through tariffs whose level shall be determined by the operator of the plant, 
a
“Maintenance Committee” formed by the beneficiary community, and other stakeholders at a 
level which shall be sufficient to cover all maintenance, repair and depreciation expenses. 
 
Page  3
The project has a number of financiers, including; Government of Norway, Pakistan Poverty 
Alleviation Fund (PPAF), the Government of Pakistan, and local banks.   
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known):  
The remote mountain valleys of the Northern Areas and Chitral form Pakistan’s northern borders 
with Afghanistan, the People’s Republic of China, and Indian-controlled Kashmir.  The area is 
rugged and mountainous, located at the confluence of four of the world’s highest mountain 
ranges, including the Himalayas, the Karakoram, the Pamirs, and the Hindukush. The region’s 
ecology is characterized by a fragile, high mountain environment and extreme climatic 
conditions. The region supports over a million people, mostly living in extreme poverty in 
approximately 850 villages.  
 
The use of renewable energy technology through proposed hydropower project will yield net 
positive environmental impacts and will relieve the burden on
 f
orest in the area threatened by 
cutting of wood for cooking and heating in winters.  
 
E. 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
AKRSP has supported the installation of about 240 microhydel schemes in six districts of 
northern areas of Pakistan since 1991. The organization has recently also installed a few larger 
mini hydel power plants, which are operating successfully.  To date, AKRSP has implemented a 
total of about 10 MW of micro-hydel projects in the region. These projects have been executed 
and maintained by the local communities, while AKRSP has provided technical and financial 
support and trained plant operators from within the communities.  AKRSP has developed a series 
of environmental assessment forms starting from screening of projects to scoping of issues and 
their management, and environmental review form 
–
evaluating projects’ environmental 
performance.  Their overall institutional capacity for safeguards review is satisfactory.
 
AKRSP will undertake an environmental assessment using the existing environmental 
assessment forms and will follow the procedures laid down in the Manuel for Environmental 
Assessment under the environmental management framework developed for PPAF supported 
projects.  This EMF developed by PPAF has already received clearance by the World Bank. It is 
understood that AKRSP will enter into MoUs with the potential benefiting communities to 
acquire land on voluntary basis and there will therefore be no involuntary resettlement and/or 
land acquisition issues. 
 
AKRSP in the past has screened and assessed a number of their community projects on 
environmental aspects. Some of such projects were financed by PPAF which required a complete 
environmental assessment of community driven schemes before the actual implementation of 
such schemes. The World Bank review of PPAF’s environmental procedures as well as those 
developed by AKRSP’s themselves indicate that generally these are adequate and cover a 
majority of the environmental issues likely to arise out of such projects. AKRSP also has the 
experience in using environmental assessment procedures and in ensuring environmental 
safeguards. Examples of such projects include micro-hydel power generation units, small 
irrigation channels, and other community physical infrastructure projects.  
Page  4
The project is not expected to result in any significant, long term, irreversible adverse 
environmental or social impacts. Since some of the power generated through these micro-hydel 
stations may be used for commercial purposes including running saw mills, there is a possibility 
of consequent increased wood cutting from the forests in the area. This aspect, along with other 
potential site specific environmental and Indigenous Peoples (IP) issues, specifically if the IP 
policy is triggered, will be further examined during project preparation.  
 
Finally, AKRSP has also won the prestigious Ashden award (Green Oscars) in 2004 for its 
micro-hydel projects in the area. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Javaid Afzal, Environment Specialist 
TBD, Social Development Specialist 
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N.A 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS: March 2007  
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: May 2007. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jeremy Levin 
January 16 
2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Afshan H. Khawaja 
January 25 
2007 
Comments:  The Task Team will look into Indigenous Peoples (IP) issues and provide a documented 
explanation if the IP policy is not triggered (i.e. there are no groups in the project area which fit OP 
4.10 policy criteria). 
Sector Manager: 
Adriana Jordanova Damianova  
January 29 
2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
