Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/03/2006 
Report No.:  AC2081
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P090501 
Project Name:  Land Records Management and Information Systems Program (LRMIS-
P) Province of Punjab 
Task Team Leader:  Edward C. Cook 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The higher level objective of the Project is to improve the land records service delivery of 
the Province of Punjab, contributing to long-lasting tenure security and more efficiently 
operating markets for land.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will upgrade the land records management system for Punjab Province by 
revising current business processes and associated legisltation and regulations, 
establishing Service Centers where land records will be maintained and available to the 
public in digital form, and establishing linkages between the land records system and the 
system for registration of deeds.  The Project will be implemented by the Board of 
Revenue of Punjab Province and will have four components.  The first component will 
address improvements in business processes and increased institutional capacity at the 
provincial, district, and lower administrative levels.  The second component will be 
putting in place the automated land record system, including the applied software.  The 
third component will focus on improved service delivery to the population, and include a 
Page  2
set of public outreach activities.  The fourth component will be deal with project 
management, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented throughout Punjab Province.  Existing offices of the 
BOR system at the district and tehsil level, as well as premises located at the kanungo 
level, will be the physical location of project activity -- where the automated systems will 
be installed.  Some rehabilitation work will be required to meet operating requirements of 
the computer equipment and to provide adequate client reception areas.  Very little new 
construction work is anticipated.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Since the program is expected to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts it is 
classified as Category C requiring no further EA action. This classification is the result of 
the environmental screening based on consultations with the regional environment sector 
unit (SASES). In accordance with OP 4.01, the screening examined the type, location, 
sensitivity, and location of the proposed program as well as the nature and magnitude of 
its potential impacts.  
 
The screening found only minimal potential environmental impacts caused by the 
program which 
–
on
balance – are expected to be positive from an environmental 
standpoint. The program seeks to establish an improved land records service delivery 
system in order to reduce litigation and bring about lasting land tenure security. Hence, 
the proposed program does not directly affect the management of natural resources. 
However, the improved tenure security would induce behavioral changes among 
Page  3
landholders by providing increased incentives for sustainable management of natural 
resources.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
By increasing tenure security and making land records readily accessible by the 
population, the Project is expected to have beneficial long-term impacts on management 
of natural resources.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
N/A 
Page  4
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Edward C. Cook 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
 
Comments:   
