Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2447 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/25/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P100681 
Project Name: Rural Telecommunications and e-Services Project 
Task Team Leader: Ritin Singh 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (80%);General public administration sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Regulation and competition policy (S);Other 
public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
124.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project?s long-term development objective would be to foster private sector led growth 
within a competitive market environment, and promoting and accelerating widespread access to 
ICT services, particularly in rural areas. The project will focus primarily on accelerating access 
by using targeted subsidies for rural expansion, strengthening the legal, policy, regulatory and 
spectrum management and monitoring functions, and expansion of e-services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would have three main interrelated components aimed at achieving the 
above project development objectives. The first component will increase access in rural areas, by 
expanding rural communications through assistance in setting up the Universal Service Fund 
(USF) as a Company, making the USF operational, and delivery of targeted subsidies to private 
operators on a competitive basis. The second component will strengthen MoITT in policy 
making, legal issues, and capacity building of PTA and Frequency Allocation Board (FAB), 
including enhancement of radio frequency monitoring and management, which will result in 
further sector improvements. The third component will accelerate e-services development, 
including support for expanding and deployment of e-services under the USF Policy.   
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 1 will target the rural areas of Pakistan. Specific locations and villages will be 
identified during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
USF funds may support construction or modification of infrastructure needed to expand 
coverage. The Task Team will work with the USF Company to ensure that contracts with the 
borrowers include covenants which preclude involuntary land acquisition and assure 
environmental good practice for infrastructure construction (such as towers, access roads).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Task Team's proposal of EA category B is endorsed with the caveat that this issue may 
be revisited should the scope of the project change significantly. 
 
There will be a need for environmental codes of practice for construction activities. These 
codes should be reviewed by SASES / Safeguards prior to appraisal. Environmental and social 
safeguards risks associated with this project are limited in scope and manageable, safeguards 
management oversight will be transferred to CITPO, following review of the codes of practice to 
be used in construction contracts.  The regional safeguards team is available to advise as 
necessary.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/14/2007 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ritin Singh 
07/25/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/24/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
07/21/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
