Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2516 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/25/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P099375 
Project Name: Pakistan:  Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources - TAL 
Task Team Leader: Michael C. Stanley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 4, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 24, 2007 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Decentralization (P);Environmental policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The core objective is to assist the government of Pakistan in implementing its strategy to 
accelerate sustainable mineral sector development by (i) strengthening governance, transparency, 
and capacity in the management of mineral resources, with particular emphasis on community 
development, environmental compliance, and equitable sharing of mineral resource benefits, and 
(ii) attracting private sector mining investment.  The provincial level reforms will be 
implemented in Balochistan as a pilot case, and will aim to provide a demonstrative effect so that 
other provinces follow with similar reforms.  
 
The project is expected to yield the following outcomes: (i) increased private-sector investment 
in the mineral sector as a result of: (a) collection and dissemination of basic geodata, and (b) 
improved investment enabling climate through enhanced legal and fiscal frameworks in line with 
international practices; (ii) improved institutional capacity at the federal and provincial levels to 
manage the mineral sector; (iii) increased taxes/royalties revenues at federal and local levels; (iv) 
formulated policies on mitigation of potential impacts of mining on associated communities and 
Page  2
on increased benefit sharing at the community level; and (v) improved efficiency and 
transparency of licensing process through a harmonized mineral licensing system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A. Provincial Level (approximately US$40-45 million)  
 
(i) Production and Management of Geo-Data - includes establishment of a mineral resource 
information center for the management and dissemination of mineral resource information; 
compilation of existing and collection of new basic geo-data; and activities to support sector 
promotion.  
 
(ii) A Provincial Regulatory Framework and Institutional Strengthening - includes restructuring 
of provincial regulatory and fiscal frameworks relating but not limited to licensing, cadastral 
services, environmental compliance, mine health and safety, inspection and training; and 
institutional modernization and strengthening.  
 
(iii) Mining and Community Development ? includes development and implementation of 
overarching policies for improved sharing of resource benefit streams, mining & community 
development programs, improved environmental and social performance, and community well-
being pilot projects.  
 
B. Federal Level (approximately US$8-10 million)  
 
(i) Improvement of the Federal Legal / Regulatory Framework, Fiscal / Taxation Regimes, and 
Institutional Framework ?includes modernization and strengthening legal and fiscal frameworks, 
monitoring of industry activities, enforcing regulatory and environmental compliance, and 
institutional modernization and strengthening as well as technical and non-technical capacity 
building  
 
(ii) Development of a Template for Provincial Mineral Concession Rules and Regulations - 
includes development of standardized rules and regulations for the award, renewal, cancellation 
and administration of mineral rights, and coordination of standardized mineral cadastre system at 
the provincial level.  
 
(iii) Formulation of National Sector Policies for Sustainable Development ? includes 
modernization and strengthening of existing policies using international best practice duly 
adjusted to local conditions and formulation of consultation and planning frameworks to ensure 
community well-being for both large and small-scale mining.  
 
(iv) Coordination and Promotion of Mineral Sector Development and Dissemination of Basic 
Geo-Data - includes establishment of a national mineral resource information center; and 
institutional strengthening and capacity building of the Geological Survey of Pakistan.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in both urban and local areas.  The federal level components 
will be implemented in Islamabad, provincial level - in Quetta and other locations in Balochistan, 
which will be selected during the project implementation based on criteria established for these 
purposes.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While the institutional capacity of the Borrower is considered weak at this stage, the project will 
assist building up the capacity needed for adequate implementation. Specifically, the project will 
help prepare environmental frameworks, and formulate policies for community development, 
including on environmental impacts.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Richard Damania (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Proposed category B - Partial Assessment since it is a technical assistance project and will 
not include physical works and will not directly support mining activities. The project is 
expected to yield positive environmental impact through the development of regulations and 
guidelines for responsible mining; it will provide capacity building for environmental monitoring 
and compliance with enforcement.  
 
However, given that mining is expected to increase as a result of the project, a strategic 
environmental and social assessment (SESA) will be carried out.  The SESA will focus on 
institutional, regulatory and fiscal aspects ? both direct and induced impacts of the proposed 
technical assistance project.  Accordingly, the project specific part of the assessment will be 
carried out specifically for Balochistan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of ESA would be completed prior to appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael C. Stanley 
10/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/17/2006 
Comments:  Safeguards oversight is transferred to COCPO for this category "B" project. Please copy 
SAR Safeguards adviser on environmental and social assessments. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
10/25/2006 
Comments:  Transfer of safeguards oversight accepted,ISDS approved 
