Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3019 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P102332 
Project Name: Avian and human Influenza Preparedness and Control Project 
Task Team Leader: Kevin John Crockford 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 5, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Animal production (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Natural 
disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
19.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective would be to minimize the threat posed to humans by HPAI infection 
and other zoonoses and to prepare for, control, and respond to influenza pandemics and other 
infectious disease emergencies in humans. To achieve this, three areas will be considered for 
support: (i) prevention, (ii) preparedness and planning, and (iii) response and containment.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would finance activities under four components: (i) animal health, (ii) human health, 
(iii) public awareness and information, and (iv) implementation support, monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
(i) Animal Health: The project would support four areas of activity outlined below:  
 
a)  
Policy Framework and HPAI Prevention and Control Planning:  This will include a 
review and improvement of the regulatory and legislative framework, a review of the current 
national compensation policy and strategy development (coordination structures, procedures, 
contingency planning, and the development of operational manuals).  
Page  2
b)  
Strengthening of Veterinary Services and Disease Surveillance and Diagnosis. Training 
more staff and providing adequate operational funding to improve veterinary services and 
laboratory facilities at all levels. This would also include support for epidemiological studies and 
disease information.  
 
c) 
Outbreak Containment/Virus Eradication at Source, vaccination Campaigns and 
Veterinary Staff Safety: There is a need to strengthen provincial veterinary departments by 
providing regular update training and adequate operational funding to cover the direct costs 
associated with any culling etc., and to provide funds to pay compensation. Limited funding will 
also be provided for vaccines for ring campaigns and for appropriate protective clothing, training 
and equipment for workers at risk.  
 
d)
Modernisation of Poultry Sector, especially with regards to Bio-Safety. The proposed 
program would aim at providing incentives for level 3 (low cost intensive) producers to improve 
their bio-security measures.  
 
(ii) Human Health  
 
The human health component will fill in gaps in financing for human health related activities.  
 
(iii)  Public Awareness and Coordination Support  
 
This component would be cross cutting in so far as it would provide support for both the 
MINFAL and MoH to develop and disseminate information to the public about HPAI. The 
project would provide funds to supplement those already available (GOP/UNICEF) to expand 
and continue media campaigns.  
 
The component is designed to safeguard human health, in particular for extension staff, animal 
health workers, poultry producers and their families, by improving public awareness and 
information. It would have two sub-components: (i) capacity building; and (ii) information and 
communication services. Support would be provided to improve existing communication 
material so as to distinguish between AI and pandemic influenza, to be better technically 
informed, and to involve all stakeholders in public and the private sector.  
 
(iv) Implementation Support and Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
This sub-component would support costs associated with project coordination, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation. The National and Provincial Coordinating Committees for Avian 
Influenza Control would be supported together with the costs associated with a small Project 
Management Unit within MINFAL, located at the National Reference Laboratory for Poultry 
Diseases. This would be strengthened by the recruitment of additional staff/consultants 
responsible for overall administration, procurement, and financial management. In addition an 
inter-ministerial ?Joint Co-ordination Committee? would be established to ensure integration 
between MINFAL and the Federal Ministry of Health (MoH) programmes. MINFAL would also 
constitute Project Steering and Advisory Committees, which would be responsible for 
supervising overall progress and monitoring technical aspects of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All provinces of Pakistan, AJK, Northern Areas and the FATA. Poultry industry in Pakistan is 
large and growing annually at a rate of 7-10 per cent. More than 26,500 poultry farms are spread 
across the country. Majority of the past AI outbreaks have however been observed in the North-
Page  3
West Frontier Province, which together with AJK, in terms of environmental resources is quite 
rich in biodiversity, abundant natural resources, number of protected areas and large watershed 
areas. Punjab and Sindh provinces predominantly are the food basket for the country and are 
dependent on irrigated agriculture. Dhands, wetlands and swamps mainly in Sindh province and 
some in Punjab as well are the resting places for the migratory birds. Punjab is also the most 
populous and urbanized of the four provinces of the country. Balochistan has rugged 
mountainous terrain and is rich in mineral resources.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Currently, the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock does not have dedicated staff to take 
care of environmental and social management aspects of the project. However, considering the 
low to medium level adverse environmental impacts with short to medium term duration, 
MINFAL can designate one of its technical staff to provide oversight for the implementation of 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP) ?to offset the envisaged adverse 
environmental and social impacts.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDN) 
Mr Mohammad Imtiaz Akhtar Alvi (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project is assessed as a Category B project based on the type of interventions proposed 
under the project and the nature and magnitude of potential environmental impacts.  The project 
is likely to have limited adverse environmental impacts as the interventions are largely on public 
sector capacity building and improved readiness for dealing with outbreaks of AI in domestic 
poultry.  These prevention focused activities are expected to have positive environmental 
impacts because project investments in facilities, equipment, laboratories and training will 
improve the effectiveness and safety of existing AI handling and testing procedures by meeting 
international standards. This would be reinforced by the mainstreaming of environmental 
safeguards into the protocols and procedures for culling and disposal of animals in the event of 
an AI outbreak, decontamination of production facilities and laboratory biosafety.  However, 
adverse environmental health impacts, mainly inadvertent spread of HPAI, could occur when an 
emergency operation involves containment of HPAI outbreaks through quarantine, isolation and 
stamping out actions and when relevant mitigation measures are not in place.Therefore, 
precautions have been taken under the Project to avoid or minimize such impacts by integrating 
environmental and public health safety aspects in the preparation/design and implementation of 
the project.  
 
The Project will have significant positive social impact by protection of human lives 
through HPAI early warning, prevention and containment, improved poultry farming practices, 
increased public awareness of HPAI and improved hygiene and food preparation practices and 
waste management.  
 
Among the potential safeguard issues are: a) mass disposal of dead birds in case of  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
outbreak and whether it involves the use of private land leading to issues of temporary loss of 
income and land acquisition; b) Loss of income/livelihood in the poultry sector and 
compensation policy; c) Stakeholder identification and consultation; d) inadvertent human 
exposure, especially poultry staff/workers and spread of the virus; e)  inadvertent release of 
chemicals into the environment from unsatisfactory decontamination procedures and ineffective 
bio-medical waste management and disposal in health facilities and laboratories; and g) public 
awareness and education, especially for rural population and backyard poultry producers, 
especially women and children.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
The project will operate in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (a disputed area) in addition to the four 
provinces and federally administered areas of Pakistan. By supporting the proposed project, the 
Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed 
areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/10/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An environmental and social asesssment is due to be undertaken during August 2007.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kevin John Crockford 
06/06/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/06/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
06/07/2007 
Comments:   
