Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2548 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/17/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P101685 
Project Name: Pakistan National Expressways Project-1 
Task Team Leader: Zafar Iqbal Raja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
360.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
90.00
90.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1.      The proposed project development objective is to improve trade flows and lower transit 
costs and times along the NTC by providing a high-speed, safe and reliable access-controlled 
expressway system. Development impact will be judged on the basis of the following indicators 
on the Project road sections:  
 
a. 
Impact Indicators: (i) 33% reduction in commercial traffic travel times, (ii) 10% decrease 
in vehicle operating costs, and (iii) 50% reduction in road fatalities/100 km of road normalized 
for traffic levels;  
 
b.
Output Indicators: (i) About 200 km of expressway constructed, (ii) Overloading reduced 
by 50%.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
2. 
The proposed Project comprises of development of two access-controlled, 4-lane, 75 
miles/hour design speed expressway facilities along new alignments adjacent to two existing 2-
lane provincial highways between Wazirabad-Pindi Bhattian and Khanewal-Lodhran. The civil 
works involve construction of 4 new lanes, fence, grade-separated interchanges, over/under 
passes, toll plazas, rest/service areas, and truck parks. A preliminary economic analysis indicates 
Page  2
economic Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of about 12%. The policy support and institutional 
strengthening component will be defined during project preparation based on the needs for 
support to implement sector reforms in the DPL matrix that will be agreed during the preparation 
of the DPLs (technical assistance is likely to include support for axle load control, e-tolling, road 
safety and performance-based maintenance).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
3. 
The two proposed expressways are located in the province of Punjab. E-3 corridor 
(Wazirabad-Pindi Bhattian expressway) runs parallel to Chenab River, and E-5 corridor 
(Khanewal-Lodhran expressway) falls within Ravi and Sutlej Rivers. The area is also drained by 
an extensive contiguous irrigation system. The area is generally characterized by heavily eroded 
topography and level alluvial plains. Much of this region has been cleared for cultivation, and 
biological diversity is very low. Apart from the cities and towns located in the vicinity of the 
project corridors where economic diversity is relatively high, the rural communities here are 
essentially involved in agriculture or associated occupations. Resettlement due to land 
acquisition is anticipated on this Project. The land shall be acquired following the process of 
willing seller-willing buyer, after reaching consensus on the price, and in accordance with the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) to be agreed with the Bank during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
4. 
National Highway Authority (NHA) is the implementing agency. A high-level NHA 
steering committee to be formed to oversee the project will have the ultimate responsibility for 
environmental management and compliance with the project?s Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF).  NHA?s in-house ?environmental section? headed by a General Manager will assist the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) in environmental and social monitoring, and liaise between the 
NHA, environmental protection agencies, and World Bank in the context of compliance. An 
international supervision consultant to be appointed by the NHA will assist the organization in 
supervising the construction contractors and ensuring that all contractual obligations related to 
environmental and social compliance are met (the supervision consultant shall have an 
international senior environmental specialist on its team). NHA will also engage a local 
consultant firm for conducting periodic air, water and noise monitoring program on both contract 
sites. In addition, NHA will ensure a third party validation to assure the transparency of the 
environmental and social compliance process carried out by the NHA.  
 
5. 
The Borrower will prepare and provide the Bank a Sectoral Environmental Assessment 
(SEA), Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plans (EA/EMPs), and 
Social Assessment and a Resettlement Policy Framework (SA/RPFs) for the 2 civil works 
contract?s under the expressway development component. The EAs will detail the measures to 
mitigate the impacts on land resources in the corridor of impact during the construction phase, 
define the responsibilities for implementation and supervision, and arrangements for monitoring 
of impacts. The SA will identify the impacts of the project along with the severity of impacts on 
different social groups, define roles and responsibilities for supervision, and a consultation and 
monitoring framework. The EMPs will define frameworks for monitoring along the project 
corridor, and arrangements for institutional and policy support to NHA and other stakeholders. 
The EMPs will also define the responsibilities of project proponent, contractors and other role 
players; identify training requirements at various levels; define supervision and monitoring 
Page  3
mechanisms and parameters; and specify the budgetary requirements for implementation to 
ensure that all mitigation measures are effectively implemented. A series of consultation sessions 
will be held with the stakeholder and the project affected persons (PAPs) during the preparation 
of the EA/SA and the EMPs. The EAs and EMPs will undergo a regulatory review and a public 
hearing process as mandated by the legislation in the country. In addition, NHA will actively 
disseminate the key features of these documents among local stakeholders.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASES) 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy is triggered because project is likely to have potential (adverse) environmental 
risks and impacts in its area of influence.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy is triggered because project is likely to relocate people due to land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
6-months, by March 31, 2007   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Zafar Iqbal Raja 
10/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/16/2006 
Comments:  ISDS is cleared. Project is retained for safeguards oversight by Safeguards Adviser. 
Category to be revisited at QER; E&S management documents to be reviewed by Safeguards Adviser. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
10/16/2006 
Comments:  This is approved. Given the perceived capacity constraint in NHA and in carrying out 
social and evnironmental safeguard functions, the TT needs to plan to provide subtantial support to 
avoid delays. 
