Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2092 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Panama 
Project ID: P082419 
Project Name: Water Supply and Sanitation in Low-Income Communities 
Task Team Leader: Manuel Schiffler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 9, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (80%);Sanitation (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
32.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.30 
 Local 
Communities 
2.20
7.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Development Objective: Increase effective access of water supply and sanitation services in 
participating communities.  
 
Specific Objectives:  
 
??? 
Enable participating households and communities in rural and poor urban areasto access 
water and sanitation services through innovative approaches geared at providing services on a 
sustainable basis;  
 
??? 
Improve sanitation and hygiene practices;  
 
??? 
Implement sector and institutional reforms aimed at improving sustainability in the 
provision of services   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to reach the above objectives in the institutional context described above, it is suggested 
that the scope of intervention of the project should be broad. Despite its relatively limited 
amount, the loan has the potential to leverage interventions by other stakeholders and donors. 
Page  2
This would capitalize on the opportunity presented by the new government, its focus on poverty 
alleviation, as well as the Minister of Health???s stated willingness to reinvigorate his leadership 
in the sector with the Bank???s assistance. It is therefore proposed that theproject would have 
three components listed below. Coordination between the entities carrying out the various project 
components would be ensured by a newly created high-level unit within MINSA, presiding over 
an inter-institutional committee including relevant units and departments within MINSA, 
IDAAN, MEF and FIS.  
 
Component 1: Policy Strengthening and sector modernization(US$ 2m)  
 
This component would aim at strengthening sector policies through a series of workshops, 
targeted key studies, capacity building and support for selected reforms. In particular, the 
component would aim at improving the coherence in the approaches by MINSA, IDAAN and 
FIS. In addition, it will prepare the ground for a possible stronger role of municipalities in the 
sector as part of the envisaged decentralization process. The strengthening of the current 
rudimentary rural sector information system in MINSA would also be supported, as well as 
regional exchange of information on good practices in water supply and sanitation. In the case of 
IDAAN, the component would support the institutional strengthening of the sectors of the 
agency dealing with services in small communities and urban marginal areas. Communications 
aiming at disseminating the government???s policy in the sector to communities would be an 
integral part of this component. The component is expected to be executed by a newly created 
unit within MINSA in close collaboration with the Unidad T??cnica de Politicas P??blicas 
(UTPP) in the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and with close involvement by the 
office of the President of the Republic.  
 
Component 2: Rural Water Supply , Sanitation and Hygiene (US$ 33m)  
 
Given the concentration of poverty in rural areas and among indigenous people, the bulk of 
investments under the project are proposed to be allocated to this component. It is suggested that 
it includes intensive social outreach for disseminating the project and selecting communities 
building on their revealed preference; investments in both rehabilitation and construction of new 
water systems (using mainly gravity systems, but also pumped systems, including those using 
solar energy) in localities up to 1,500 inhabitants; assistance in the construction of latrines; 
hygiene promotion; and assistance in operation, maintenance and financial management in the 
post-construction phase. Given the fact that un-served communities are often located in very 
remote areas, have dispersed settlement patterns and are predominantly indigenous, it is expected 
that serving them will involve more difficult financial, economic, technical and social challenges 
than under previous projects. For example, unit costs are likely to be higher than historically in 
Panama or than the regional average. Furthermore, decision-making processes and institutional 
arrangements for operation and maintenance have to be tailored to take into account the 
preferences and customs of diverse indigenous populations. Given these challenges, the project 
team will pay particular attention during the project preparation process to the development of 
MINSA???s capacity to undertake social analyses and cost-benefit-analyses of sub-projects. The 
question to what extent and how dispersed populations (remote localities with less than 50 
inhabitants, including island populations) should be served will also be analyzed. MINSA???s 
proposal to cover all the country???s provinces will be assessed in light of limited resources and 
Page  3
the need to be selective. Furthermore, especially for larger localities where water committees 
already exist and rehabilitations are envisaged, the introduction of innovative management 
approaches will be sought, including the professionalization of water committees, the 
introduction of metering and volumetric tariffs, as well as a national system of local-level 
technicians on operation and maintenance that would assist water committees.  
 
The component is expected to be executed primarily by MINSA???s rural water and sanitation 
unit (the former PCU of the rural health project) with significant contracting out of particular 
services to NGOs depending on their thematic and regional areas of expertise. The possibility of 
having certain activities under this component to be executed by FIS, subject to certain 
requirements related to community participation and other key aspects, will be assessed.  
 
Component 3: Small Town Sanitation and Water Supply (US$15m)  
 
A
significant portion of the poor lives in urban areas served by IDAAN. While water coverage 
is relatively high in urban areas, sanitation is severely deficient, reflecting an institutional bias 
within IDAAN towards water supply. The only major initiative in terms of sanitation currently is 
The Bahia de Panama project which is focused on the construction of large collectors, 
interceptors and a wastewater treatment plant in Panama City East of the Canal. It does not pilot 
innovative approaches to extend both water and sanitation services to the poor, including those 
who do not hold land titles. It also does not address the issue of the lack of regulation of septic 
tanks, which are often malfunctioning and discharge their effluents into open watercourses, 
entailing to public health and environmental risks. Concerning existing sanitation systems, there 
is hardly any maintenance of sewer systems or of the very few existing wastewater treatment 
plants, leading to sewer overflows and inadequate treatment, both of which are a public health 
and environmental risk.  
 
Since the available amount is small compared to IDAAN???s five-year investment program of 
US$311m (2004-2009), it is proposed that the available resources should be strategically used to 
promote IDAAN???s use of innovative low-cost technologies (such as condominial sewers); to 
strengthen its capacity in sanitation planning, operation and maintenance; and to possibly pilot 
the envisaged deconcentration of IDAAN in one region of the country where investments under 
this component would be executed. Water supply investments would also be considered, if they 
are poverty-targeted and make a contribution to improve current management models. The 
location of the investments still remains to be determined based on poverty, environmental and 
technical criteria. One area considered is the area of Chilibri in the Panama Canal Watershed, a 
formerly rural area that is increasingly polluted due to urban expansion without any planned 
sanitation system.  
 
This component would be executed by MINSA in close cooperation with IDAAN. The unit in 
charge of that component within MINSA still remains to be determined.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in rural and urban areas in Panama. The exact project locations will 
be determined during project preparation.   
 
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency's institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be strengthened 
under the project. In particular, staff will be advised and trained in how to ensure contractors' 
compliance with safeguard policies related to the environment, natural habitats and cultural 
property. Capacity building related to safeguards will be initiated during preparation and 
continued during project implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental assessment will be carried out by the borrower using a project preparation 
facility (PPF). The implementing agency's capacity will be stregthened to analyze the 
environmental impact of project activities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
An indigenous people's framework will be established using PPF resources.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/29/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguard-related studies will be launched as soon as the PPF has become effective, 
which is expected to be in March 2005.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Schiffler 
 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
