Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/18/2007 
Report No.:  AC2928
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Panama 
Project ID:  P105526 
Project Name:  Public Policy Reform Technical Assistance Additional Financing Loan 
Task Team Leader:  Josef S. Trommer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 10, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSPS 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(P);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (P);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (P);Other economic management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.10 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1.10 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Consistent with the original project (Loan 4635-OA), the development objectives remain 
unchanged: consolidate and deepen the reforms needed to accelerate growth and reduce 
poverty in Panama.  In particular, the additional financing will enable the provision of 
technical assistance to: (i) expand the Government?s capacity to monitor economic data 
and improve macroeconomic policy formulation and implementation and improving the 
investment climate through legal reform; (ii) institutionalize the relevance, efficiency, 
and targeting of social programs by continuing to improve the quality of poverty data; 
and (iii) scale-up the impact of reforms affecting efficiency in public management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing Loan would comprise four of the five existing components 
identified  
 
Under the ongoing Public Policy Reform Technical Assistance Project, these include: (i) 
contributing to fiscal sustainability and public sector efficiency by expanding the 
Government?s capacity to monitor economic data and improve macroeconomic policy 
formulation and implementation and improving the investment climate through legal 
Page  2
reform; (ii) improving social spending and reducing poverty by institutionalizing the 
relevance, efficiency, and targeting of social programs by continuing to improve the 
quality of poverty data; (iii) strengthening the public procurement system by scaling-up 
the impact of reforms affecting efficiency and transparency in public management; and 
(iv) project management.  
 
At the request of the Government the current project administration arrangements will 
be reassessed with a view to providing more autonomy and accountability to the CGR 
and DGCP (with whom we have longstanding relation through the ongoing Public Policy 
Reform Technical Assistance Project) under the additional financing loan.  We believe 
that such arrangement would improve the efficiency of project implementation and 
provide capacity-building benefits to these institutions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Ministry of Economy and Finance  
 
Via Espana y Calle 52 Este  
 
Edificio Ogawa, Piso 4  
 
Apartado 0816-02886  
 
Panama, Republica de Panama   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Reidar Kvam (LCSSA) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Josef S. Trommer 
04/16/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/12/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Fernando Rojas 
04/13/2007 
Comments:   
