Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/18/2007 
Report No.:  AC2163
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Panama 
Project ID:  P064918 
Project Name:  Rural Productivity Project 
Task Team Leader:  Matthew A. McMahon 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P083045 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (75%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (15%);Agro-industry (10%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (P);Export development and competitiveness (P);Technology 
diffusion (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
42.70 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 LOCAL 
FARMER 
ORGANIZATIONS 
5.70 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
0.90 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - ASSOCIATED IBRD FUND 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
22.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective of the proposed Rural Productivity Project 
(PRORURAL) is to contribute to increased incomes and employment among organized 
rural small-scale producers through their participation in productive alliances, while 
ensuring the sustainable use of natural resources and the conservation of globally 
important biodiversity.  
 
The Project Global Environmental Objective of the partially-blended Rural Productivity 
and Consolidation of the Atlantic Mesoamerican Biological Corridor Project is to 
conserve biodiversity of global importance and protect important forest and mountain 
ecosystems in Panama.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1 -- Support for Productive Alliances (US$8.2 million) -- would finance 
preparatory activities that contribute to the presentation of viable business plans for 
proposed productive alliances.   Such activities include: (i) a communication strategy 
designed to raise awareness of and stimulate participation in PRORURAL; (ii) business 
skills and organizational training for small-scale producers; (iii) training of trainers to 
qualify technical service providers for work with RPAs; (iv) the preparation of productive 
alliance proposals (perfiles de negocio), business plans (planes de negocio) and 
subprojects, all presented by RPAs; and (v) specific technical studies and consultancies 
that would contribute to the implementation of PRORURAL and the execution of 
approved business plans.  
 
Component 2 -- Productive Alliances (US$30.7 million)-- would finance approximately 
seventy subprojects (up to a maximum of US$500,000 each), implemented by RPAs in 
the targeted provinces of Herrera, Los Santos and Veraguas.  Subprojects would be 
financed in the context of business plans for productive alliances between RPAs and at 
least one agroprocessor, wholesaler or other commercial partner.Subprojects would 
include: fixed capital (e.g., plant and equipment, minor infrastructure), working capital 
and technical assistance.   Subproject finance -- limited to the first two years of the 
approved business plan -- would be subject to partial reimbursement, under procedures 
outlined in the Project Operational Manual.  RPAs would contribute a minimum of 10 
percent toward subproject cost (either in cash or in-kind).  The proposed project would 
reach some 6,000 small-scale producers (i.e., farm holdings of 0.5 to 20 hectares) or 
about 16 percent of total small-scale producers in these three provinces.  
 
Component 3 -- Environmental Subprojects and Strengthening of NPAS (US$11.4 
million) -- executed by ANAM under the partially-blended PAMBC project, would 
provide matching grants for about 450 small-scale investments in natural resource 
management and productive opportunities that contribute to the conservation of 
biodiversity of global significance and represent viable and sustainable alternatives to 
improve their livelihoods. Subproject investments would be proposed and implemented 
by community and producer associations in the fourteen targeted protected areas and 
associated buffer zones. The component would also finance support services to these 
associations (e.g., mobilization, training, technical assistance) to facilitate their subproject 
preparation. Community and producer associations would contribute at least 10 percent 
of total subproject cost (in cash or in-kind).  Subproject agreements governing the use of 
project resources would be signed between the beneficiary associations and ANAM.  
 
Component 4 -- Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.9million) -- 
would include incremental operational costs of MIDA in the execution of PRORURAL, 
including goods and services required for the establishment of a monitoring and 
evaluation system.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area emcompasses three provinces of Panama:  Herrera, Los Santos and 
Veraguas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).  The project's category B rating requires an 
environmental assessment to evaluate potential positive and negative environmental 
impacts and to make recommendations for measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate 
adverse impacts.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Forests (OP 4.36). The proposed project would promote 
the conservation of natural habitats and biodiversity through (a) improved natural 
resources and Protected Areas management via subprojects financed under Components 2 
and 3, respectively, and (b) promotion of sustainable productive activities that could 
enhance, preserve or, at least, not degrade, the biodiversity value of such habitats. The 
project EA used a range of existing sources of information and in situ analysis to 
determine the location of natural habitats in the project area, their ecological functions, 
relative importance, threats, and management issues. The EA, combined with possible 
subproject activities, determines potential negative impacts, screening procedures, and 
mitigation policies. Productive, natural resources and biodiversity subprojects that are 
explicitly intended to benefit natural habitats will be assessed through screening to 
determine what level of environmental analysis is required in each case.  
 
The EA report identifies potential negative impacts in activities such as agroforestry, 
aquaculture, captive breeding of native species, and other types of subprojects and sets 
Page  4
out prevention and mitigation measures such as biodiversity inventories, careful site 
selection, evaluation of indirect and cumulative impacts, prevention of water 
contamination, and use of construction practices that minimize disruption to plant and 
animal populations.  
 
The project triggers the Forests safeguard policy because it is expected to have a 
positively impact the health and quality of forests, affect the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of interaction with forests, and bring about changes in the management, 
protection, and utilization of natural forests. These impacts are expected to be positive, 
and are one of the essential goals of the proposed project, particularly in concert with the 
partially-blended GEF operation. The project does not involve significant conversion or 
degradation of forest areas, but rather would seek to integrate forests into sustainable 
rural economic development and protect the vital local and global environmental services 
and values of forests through community-based natural resources and protected areas 
management and development.  
 
Subprojects directly affecting forests (under Component 3) may include nurseries, 
reforestation, ecotourism, improved woodstoves to reduce fuelwood needs, community 
management of forests and protected areas, soil stabilization programs, microwatershed 
management, environmental services pilot programs, and small-scale integrated, 
biodiversity-friendly agroforestry systems.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09).  The MIDA-PCU would screen all productive alliance 
proposals for any intended pesticide use. The Project Operational Manual would include 
a
negative list of compounds not eligible for use (e.g., WHO Category IA, IB, and II; 
Persistent Organic Pollutants [POPs]; and ?Dirty Dozen?). Any pesticides procured under 
the project would require prior review and approval by the Bank during project 
implementation. Furthermore, as part of the technical assistance and extension services 
under Component 2, the project would incorporate training for RPAs in integrated pest 
management and the safe handling (use, storage, transport, and disposal) of pesticides.  
Although the project triggers the Bank?s Pest Management Policy, a stand-alone Pest 
Management Plan is not required because the (i) quantities of pesticides to be procured 
under the project are expected to be relatively small and (ii) most productive alliances are 
not expected to face major pest management issues.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). There is a potential albeit low risk to 
physical cultural property. The Project Operational Manual will include procedures -- in 
the case of civil works -- to ensure that the contractors, individuals, or organizations 
carrying out such activities understand the steps required to assess and, if necessary, 
protect any chance finds of cultural significance that they encounter.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  New restrictions of access to natural resources 
within protected areas are not expected under the project.   Assessment of Business Plans 
and associated subproject proposals would be guided by criteria set forth in the Project 
Operational Manual and monitored during implementation through the project 
Management Information System. Such criteria will include the potential for project 
Page  5
activities (including management plan implementation) to result in restriction of access to 
resources within Protected Areas.  In the unlikely event that the policy may be triggered 
in the course of project implementation, a Process Framework would be adopted for use 
in the project.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10).  A detailed Social Assessment was conducted during 
project preparation to: (i)  identify and characterize project beneficiaries; (ii) identify 
general needs of technical assistance and training to strengthen social and human capital 
of community institutions for self-management of natural resources; (iii) identify 
potential negative impacts associated with the proposed project activities focusing on 
indigenous and other vulnerable groups and design prevention and mitigation measures; 
(iv) incorporate lessons learned from the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan of the PAMBC project into the proposed Project; (v) prepare the 
Project?s Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to ensure that socio-cultural norms and 
preferences of the indigenous populations are adequately considered and respected in the 
project design and during its implementation; and (vi) develop a participation plan to 
ensure the beneficiaries' involvement in design, execution and evaluation of the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse indirect or long-term impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment:  The EMP identifies the requirements for subproject compliance with the 
national environmental impact assessment (EIA) regulations contained in Executive 
Decree No. 59, based on the following four categories: (a) no environmental assessment 
or analysis is required; (b) no environmental assessment but environmental analysis is 
required; (c) specific environmental assessment required; and (d) full environmental 
assessment required.  These regulations are consistent with the Bank's environmental 
safeguards.  
 
The main contents of the EA include: (i) a description of the environmental 
characteristics of the project area; (ii) expected positive and potential negative 
environmental impacts of project activities; (iii) a detailed review of national 
environmental regulations, namely the General Environmental Law (Law 41) and the 
EIA regulations (Decreto Ejecutivo No. 59), and the Bank's Operational Policies that 
would be applicable to all project activities; (iv) an EMP; and (v) a strategy to monitor 
and evaluate the environmental aspects of the project.  
 
The EA discusses the normative role of ANAM as the governmental entity responsible 
for the implementation of the National Environmental Strategy, which includes a 
Page  6
Strategic Participatory Plan, and an Inter-institutional Environmental System that 
promotes coordination among government agencies to integrate environmental policies 
across sectors.  Strategies for the decentralization of environmental management 
responsibilities by ANAM to municipal governments are also discussed.  
 
The EMP presents a detailed screening process with specific criteria and procedures that 
the MIDA-PCU would follow to evaluate proposed subprojects and Business Plans and 
assign them to a specific EIA category.   The screening process will be included in the 
Project Operational Manual; all subprojects proposed by participating RPAs will be 
carefully reviewed during the feasibility phase and, where appropriate, mitigating 
measures will be designed and implemented.  To aid the screening process, the EMP also 
includes a series of matrices that show potential impacts and mitigation measures for 
indicative subproject categories and a corresponding matrix showing the costs, 
timetables, institutional responsibilities, indicators of success, and capacity-building 
requirements for each mitigation measure.  Screening procedures would further insure 
that subprojects would not be located in critical natural habitats or contribute to their 
conversion.  Also, for those community subprojects financed under Component 3, only 
those which are consistent with the corresponding protected areas management plan 
would be approved for financing.  
 
Subprojects that might include small civil works or production support would include a 
detailed description of specific environmental risks, potential negative impacts and 
mitigation measures that proponents would have to comply with during subproject 
execution.  To aid this process, the Project Operational Manual would include a section 
that describes standard Environmental Rules for Contractors that identify best practices to 
prevent or mitigate negative environmental impacts. Subproject agreements will be 
signed between MIDA-PCU and beneficiary associations (e.g., community associations, 
RPAs) to would incorporate adequate prevention and mitigation actions are conducted 
during subproject execution.  
 
MIDA-PCU will supervise the subproject execution to ensure that these actions are 
properly implemented and, when necessary, suggest additional corrective measures.  
These supervision activities will be part of the monitoring and evaluation of the Project 
and detailed in the Project Operational Manual.  
 
Social: A detailed Social Assessment was conducted during project preparation to: (i)  
identify and characterize project beneficiaries; (ii) identify general needs of technical 
assistance and training to strengthen social and human capital of community institutions 
for self-management of natural resources; (iii) identify potential negative impacts 
associated with the proposed project activities focusing on indigenous and other 
vulnerable groups and design prevention and mitigation measures; (iv) incorporate 
lessons learned from the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan of 
the PAMBC project into the proposed Project; (v) prepare the Project's Indigenous 
Peoples Plan (IPP) to ensure that socio-cultural norms and preferences of the indigenous 
populations are adequately considered and respected in the project design and during its 
Page  7
implementation; and (vi) develop a participation plan to ensure the beneficiaries? 
involvement in design, execution and evaluation of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA was carried out by MIDA-PCU and DBC/ANAM, based on extensive reviews of 
relevant information, field visits and initial public consultations to discuss the project 
concept.  A seven-day field mission was also conducted to examine more than thirty-five 
small-scale subprojects financed under the both the Rural Poverty and Natural Resource 
Management Project and the Panama Atlantic Mesoamerican Biological Corridor Project 
to assess their environmental impacts. Additional public consultations were also 
conducted in February 2005 with 54 participants from environmental NGOs, producer 
groups, grassroots organizations, indigenous communities, and others to present and 
discuss the results of the EA and get their feedback and observations. The EA is available 
in the World Bank InfoShop and on the website of MIDA.  
 
Social:  The Social Assessment consisted of (i) an extensive review of existing socio-
economic information and PAMBC project documents; and (ii) a wide process of 
consultations to different potential project beneficiaries and stakeholders in the project 
area.  Consultation included 49 events with 350 participants including 8 workshops, 78 
interviews with individuals, twenty group interviews with communities that participated 
in the PAMBC project, communities that did not, municipal, corregimiento leaders, 
ANAM and MIDA regional and national staff, the Agricultural Development Bank 
(BDA), Indigenous leaders, rural producers associations, local staff of Health and 
Education Ministries, and representatives of NGOs (e.g., FUDIS, Fundeprove, Aprosac, 
Prodeso, Ideas, FOCIV).  
 
For the preparation of the IPP, additional participatory workshops and group and 
individual interviews of qualified informants from indigenous communities were 
conducted in Kuna-Yala, Bocas del Toro and Panama.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/19/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/16/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/19/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/16/2007 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Page  8
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
N/A 
Page  9
constraints? 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matthew A. McMahon 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Juan Martinez 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
 
Comments:   
