Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2006 
Report No.:  AC1467
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Panama 
Project ID:  P083045 
Project Name:  Rural Productivity Project (GEF) 
Task Team Leader:  Matthew A. McMahon 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 6, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (75%);Other social services 
(15%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Administrative and civil service reform (P);Participation and 
civic engagement (P);Rural non-farm income generation (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective of the partially-blended Rural Productivity and 
Sustainable Development Project is to contribute to increased income and employment of 
small-scale rural producers in Panama.  
 
The Project Global Environmental Objective is to conserve biodiversity of global 
importance and protect important forest and mountain ecosystems in Panama.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 
–
Community Investments in Environmental Resources (US$12.1 
milliontotal cost with US$7.9 million of IBRD and US$2.7 million of GEF) – would 
support small-scale investments in natural resource management and productive 
opportunities proposed by rural community and producer associations residing in 
fourteen Protected Areas and associated buffer zones. The component would provide 
matching grants to these associations to implement subprojects that contribute to 
conservation of biodiversity of global significance and represent viable and sustainable 
alternatives to improve their livelihoods.  The component would also finance support 
services to these associations (e.g., mobilization, training, technical assistance) to 
Page  2
facilitate their subproject preparation.  Community and producer associations would 
contribute at least 10 percent of total subproject cost (in cash or in-kind).  Subproject 
agreements would be signed between the beneficiary associations and ANAM.  Key 
outcomes of this component include: (i) by EOP, community and rural producer 
associations implement at least 500 natural resource, sustainable agriculture and 
conservation subprojects; (ii)  % change in vegetative cover in the areas of subproject 
intervention; and (iii) % change in population of selected indicator species in areas of 
subproject intervention.  
 
Component 2 
–
Management of Natural Resources and Strengthening of SINAP 
(US$5.0 million total cost with US$2.1 million of IBRD and US$2.4 million of GEF) – 
would improve the management of SINAP at the national, provincial, comarcal and 
district levels by (i) fortifying the co-management arrangements under existing land 
management plans in targeted Protected Areas; (ii) improving information and 
monitoring systems and support conservation of at-risk ecosystems; (iii)  financing local 
environmental education programs and promote the formation of Consultative 
Environmental Commissions (CCAs), Municipal Environmental Units (UAMs) to 
increase civic participation in decentralized co-management of Protected Areas; and (iv) 
developing pilot schemes of payment for environmental services (PES) and explore 
opportunities for self-financing by ANAM to maintain and sustain Protected Areas.  Key 
outputs would include:  (i) mean GEF Biodiversity Tracking Tool for the fourteen 
targeted Protected Areas increases from 45 to 60 by project completion; (ii) 28 district-
level CCAs and UAMs established, trained and operating; and (iii) PES program for 
improved land use piloted in two project sites and a replication strategy is developed.  
 
Component 3 – Monitoring and Evaluation, Supervision and Administration 
(US$1.3million total cost, with US$0.9 million of GEF) – would improve ANAM’s 
national capacity for monitoring the SINAP and evaluating biodiversity conservation 
interventions through: (i)  the purchase of needed hardware and software for the 
Protected Areas Monitoring System (SMAP) and the national monitoring system for 
biodiversity (SNMDB) and (ii) training to build technical capacity for both the SMAP 
and the SNMDB and integrate them with the National Environmental Information 
System (SINIA).  The component would also support the integration of SINIA with the 
Interamerican Biodiversity Information Network (IABIN), the Operations Secretariat of 
which will be located in Panama.  Finally, incremental costs of the Department of 
Biological Corridors of ANAM (DBC/ANAM), including field supervision would be 
supported.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project specifically targets (i) 14 of the 63 Protected Areas that comprise 
the SINAP; (ii) designated corridors between these Protected Areas that are deemed 
critical to achieving conservation of globally important biodiversity; and (iii) productive 
landscapes, within a strategy focused on relieving identified pressures affecting globally 
important biodiversity in these Protected Areas and designated corridors.  
 
The proposed project would concentrate interventions in 28 districts and two indigenous 
comarcas, namely: (i) eighteen districts and one comarca in the Pacific region (i.e., 
Herrera, Los Santos, Veraguas, comarca Ngobe-Bugle); (ii) ten districts and 2 comarcas 
Page  3
in the Atlantic region (i.e., Bocas del Toro, Chiriqui, Veraguas, Cocle, Colon, and 
comarcas Ngobe-Bugle and Kuna Yala). SINAP Management priorities already identified 
by ANAM were also applied in the determination of the targeted districts and comarcas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Juan Martinez (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).  The project’s category B rating requires an 
environmental assessment to evaluate potential positive and negative environmental 
impacts and to make recommendations for measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate 
adverse impacts.  
 
This project builds on the experience and lessons learned from the Panama Atlantic 
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor Project, PAMBC (1998-2005) and is expected to have 
a
strong overall positive environmental impact and advance global biodiversity goals by 
(a) improving the effective management of protected areas and natural habitats and (b) 
fostering environmentally sustainable productive activities in rural areas that encourage 
preservation of biodiversity of global significance.  
 
Important overall environmental benefits of the project include reduction of 
deforestation and depletion rates of biodiversity, increase in self-financing in Protected 
Areas, improvements to degraded lands and slowing of agricultural intervention in 
strategic areas for biodiversity conservation, reduced soil erosion, improved habitat 
conditions for biodiversity and improved water quality in pilot watersheds.  
 
The main potential for negative environmental impacts arises from the subprojects 
designed and financed through Component 1. Eligible investments for these subprojects 
would comprise three indicative categories: (a)  environmentally-oriented agribusiness to 
add value to primary production; (b) management of natural resources for alternative 
products in response to emerging ecomarkets (e.g. non-timber forest products (NTFP), 
ecotourism, handicrafts, wildlife breeding, environmental services); and (c) investments 
Page  4
to restore and maintain environmental assets (e.g reforestation, agroforestry, soil 
conservation).  Subproject grants would range between US$10,000 and US$30,000 for 
which beneficiaries would contribute at least 10 percent of total subproject cost (in cash 
or in-kind).  Subprojects involving involuntary resettlement will not be financed under 
the project.  
 
Potential impacts that these investments could have on the local environment are diverse 
and include: (i) potential release of domesticated or exotic animal species from captive 
breeding; (ii) overexploitation of NTFP; (iii) deforestation and erosion in agriculture 
activities; and (iv) sustainability or habitat impacts of agroforestry.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Forests (OP 4.36). The project seeks to conserve natural 
habitats and biodiversity through (a) natural resources and Protected Areas management 
and (b) promotion of sustainable productive activities that could enhance, preserve or, at 
least, not degrade, the biodiversity value of such habitats. The project EA used a range of 
existing sources of information and in situ analysis to determine the location of natural 
habitats in the project area, their ecological functions, relative importance, threats, and 
management issues. This information has been combined with the analysis of possible 
project activities to determine potential negative impacts, screening procedures, and 
mitigation policies. Productive, natural resources and biodiversity subprojects that are 
explicitly intended to benefit natural habitats will be assessed through screening to 
determine what level of environmental analysis is required in each case.  
 
The EA report identifies potential negative impacts in activities such as agroforestry, 
aquaculture, captive breeding of native species, and other types of subprojects and sets 
out prevention and mitigation measures such as biodiversity inventories, careful site 
selection, evaluation of indirect and cumulative impacts, prevention of water 
contamination, and use of construction practices that minimize disruption to plant and 
animal populations.  
 
The project triggers the Forests safeguard policy because it is expected to have an 
impact on the health and quality of forests, affect the rights and welfare of people and 
their level of interaction with forests, and bring about changes in the management, 
protection, and utilization of natural forests. These impacts are expected to be positive, 
and are one of the essential goals of the project. The project does not involve significant 
conversion or degradation of forest areas, but rather would seek to integrate forests into 
sustainable rural economic development and protect the vital local and global 
environmental services and values of forests through community-based natural resources 
and Protected Areas management and development.  
 
Subprojects directly affecting forests may include nurseries, reforestation, ecotourism, 
improved woodstoves to reduce fuelwood needs, community management of forests and 
protected areas, soil stabilization programs, microwatershed management, environmental 
services pilot programs, and small-scale integrated, biodiversity-friendly agroforestry 
systems. The project’s forest activities aim to maintain or enhance biodiversity and 
ecosystem functionality, and in many cases also provide environmentally appropriate, 
socially beneficial, and economically viable productive activities for rural and indigenous 
communities. Potential negative impacts will be addressed in the same way described for 
the Natural Habitats safeguard, including both environmental and social risks and 
benefits, and particularly including impacts on indigenous communities where applicable.  
Page  5
Pest Management (OP 4.09
).  This project does not trigger the Bank’s Pest Management 
Policy because it would not: (i) procure any pesticides (nor pesticide application 
equipment); (ii) lead to increase pesticide use; nor (iii) support pest management 
practices that are risky or unsustainable from an environmental or health standpoint.  
 
Cultural Property (OP 11.03). There is a potential, but low risk to physical cultural 
property. Eco- or ethnotourism subprojects would seek to conserve rather than damage 
historic or cultural sites, and indigenous communities will have an active interest in 
preventing any damage to cultural property in the project areas within their lands. The 
Project Operational Manual will include procedures for all small works subprojects to 
ensure that the contractors, individuals, or organizations carrying out such activities 
understand the steps required to assess and if necessary protect any chance finds of 
cultural significance that they encounter.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  Restriction to access is unlikely to occur under 
the proposed project.  Screening of subproject proposals would be guided by criteria set 
forth in the Operational Manual and monitored during implementation through the 
existing MIS used by ANAM under the PAMBC. Such criteria will include the potential 
for project activities (including management plan implementation) to result in restriction 
of access to resources within protected areas.  In the unlikely event that the policy may be 
triggered in the course of project implementation, a Process Framework would be 
adopted for use in the project. An existing Process Framework which covers similar 
activities to those in the proposed project, is already in place with ANAM for use under 
the Panama Land Administration Project (Ln. 7045-PA).  During project appraisal, the 
Bank and ANAM will proactively review the existing Framework and update it as needed 
for its inclusion in the Operational Manual for the proposed project, it the event it would 
be required in the future.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.20).  A detailed Social Assessment was conducted by ANAM 
during project preparation to: (i)  identify and characterize project beneficiaries; (ii) 
identify general needs of technical assistance and training to strengthen social and human 
capital of community institutions for self-management of natural resources; (iii) identify 
potential negative impacts associated with the proposed project activities focusing on 
indigenous and other vulnerable groups and design prevention and mitigation measures; 
(iv) incorporate lessons learned from the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan of the PAMBC project into the proposed Project; (v) prepare the 
Project’s Indigenous PeoplesPlan (IPP) to ensure that socio-cultural norms and 
preferences of the indigenous populations are adequately considered and respected in the 
project design and during its implementation; and (vi) develop a participation plan to 
ensure the beneficiaries’ involvement in design, execution and evaluation of the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment:  The main contents of the EA include: (i) a description of the 
environmental characteristics of the project area; (ii) expected positive and potential 
negative environmental impacts of project activities; (iii) a detailed review of national 
environmental regulations, namely the General Environmental Law (Ley 41) and the EIA 
regulations (De
creto Ejecutivo No. 59), and the Bank’s Operational Policies that would 
be applicable to all project activities; (iv) an Environmental Management Plan (EMP); 
and (v) a strategy to monitor and evaluate the environmental aspects of the project.  
 
The EMP presents a detailed screening process with specific criteria (including a 
negative list describing subprojects not eligible for EIF financing) and procedures that the 
DBC/ANAM staff would follow to evaluate proposed subprojects and assign them to a 
specific EIA category.   The screening process will be included in the project Operational 
Manual; all proposed subprojects will be carefully reviewed during the feasibility phase 
and, where appropriate, mitigating measures will be designed and implemented.  To aid 
the screening process, the EMP also includes a series of matrices that show potential 
impacts and mitigation measures for each subproject category and a corresponding matrix 
showing the costs, timetables, institutional responsibilities, indicators of success, and 
capacity building requirements for each mitigation measure.  
 
Subprojects that involve investment in small civil works or production support would 
include a detailed description of specific environmental risks, potential negative impacts 
and mitigation measures that proponents would have to comply with during subproject 
execution.  To aid this process, the OM will include a section that describes standard 
Environmental Rules for Contractors that identify best practices to prevent or mitigate 
negative environmental impacts. Agreements will be signed with subproject proponents 
to ensure adequate prevention and mitigation actions are conducted during subproject 
execution.  
 
DBC/ANAM, in coordination with municipal governments and comarcas, will supervise 
the execution of subprojects to ensure that these actions are properly implemented and, 
when necessary, suggest additional corrective measures.  These supervision activities will 
be part of the monitoring and evaluation of the Project and detailed in the OM.  
 
Social:  A summary of the main elements of the IPP is presented in the table is included 
in the PAD and have been mainstreamed into the project’s specific components and 
activities.  
 
The ICR of the PAMBC project found the design and implementation its Indigenous 
Development Action Plan to be satisfactory.  ANAM was able to consolidate an 
institutional framework for managing Protected Areas that proved to be participatory and 
inclusive of local communities and indigenous Comarcas.  
 
Successful institutional arrangements between ANAM and indigenous authorities under 
the PAMBC worked to ensure the effective participation of indigenous people in the 
planning and implementation of management and conservation in priority geographic 
areas of the MBC-P.  Important contributions of PAMBC included: (i) an extensive 
training and communications outreach campaign; (ii) the establishment of six 
Consultative Environmental Commissions (CCA) at the provincial, municipal and 
Page  7
Comarca levels to promote citizen involvement and advise on environmental matters; (iii) 
the establishment of the new Comarca for the Naso-Teribe territory; and (iv) support for 
the establishment of the National Council for Indigenous Development.  The proposed 
project will continue to support and build on these experiences.  
 
Some 300 indigenous leaders were trained in project management, gender equality, 
technology transfer and environmental management. Support was also given to Regional 
Indigenous Congresses, Comarca planning units, local authorities and the newly 
established CCAs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environment:  The EA was conducted by ANAM, based on extensive reviews of relevant 
information, field visits and initial public consultations to discuss the project concept.  A 
seven-day field mission was also conducted to examine some 30 community subprojects 
under the PAMBC project to assess their environmental impacts. Additional public 
consultations were also conducted in February 2005 with 54 participants from 
environmental NGOs, producer groups, grassroots organizations, indigenous 
communities, and others to present and discuss the results of the EA and get their 
feedback and observations. The EMP is accessible on the website of ANAM and will be 
available in the Bank’s Infoshop prior to appraisal.  
 
Social:  The Social Assessment consisted of an extensive review of existing socio-
economic information and PAMBC project documents; and a wide process of 
consultations to different potential project stakeholders in the project area.  Consultations 
included 49 events with 350 participants including 8 workshops; 78 interviews with 
individuals; 20 group interviews with community members that participated in the 
PAMBC project; non-participating communities; municipal and corregimiento leaders; 
SDCs, ANAM and MIDA regional and national staff; Agricultural Development Bank 
(BDA); Indigenous leaders; local producers organizations; PAMBC technical teams; 
local staff of Health and Education Ministries; and representatives of NGOs, some of 
which participated in the PAMBC project (e.g., FUDIS, Fundeprove, Aprosac, Prodeso, 
Ideas, FOCIV).  For the preparation of the IPP additional participatory workshops and 
group and individual interviews of qualified informants from indigenous communities 
were conducted in Kuna-Yala, Bocas del Toro and Panama.  The IPP is accessible on the 
website of ANAM and will be available in the Bank’s InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/19/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/19/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  9
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matthew A. McMahon 
04/19/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
04/19/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Juan Martinez 
04/19/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
04/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
04/19/2006 
Comments:   
