Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2436 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Panama 
Project ID: P098328 
Project Name: Social Protection Project 
Task Team Leader: Manuel Salazar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Other social development (P);Social safety nets (P);Other social protection and 
risk management (P);Child health (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Social Protection Project would support GOP efforts to strengthen the social 
protection system in Panama by expanding the Red de Oportunidades social safety net.  
Specifically, the project would support the GOP in scaling up and improving the coverage, 
targeting, and effectiveness of the Red de Oportunidades (RDO) to facilitate the access of 
extremely poor families to basic services in health, education, and nutrition and promote their 
demand for these services.  
 
To achieve this DO, the project would provide the RDO with technical and financial assistance 
to support activities that address the barriers that extremely poor families face in gaining access 
to adequate social services, both on the demand and supply sides: (i) a conditional cash transfer 
program to encourage extreme poor families to send their children to school and regularly use 
health and nutrition services; (ii) investments in extending the availability and improving the 
quality of public services in education, health and nutrition; and (iii) complementary inputs -- 
such as targeted communication, provision of formal identification documents and individual 
support to beneficiaries -- so that families can access the available supply of services. The project 
Page  2
would also support the GOP efforts to consolidate the coordination of social protection policy at 
the central level through the Social Cabinet and the Ministry of Social Development (MIDES), 
while improving social accountability with respect to the Red de Oportunidades at the local 
level.  It is expected that these activities would constitute a first step in a more comprehensive 
reform of the social assistance sector in Panama.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The program would be comprised of four main components.  
 
A. Implementation of a Conditional Cash Transfer Program (CCT)  
 
This component would support the GOP's efforts to scale up and carry out a CCT to extremely 
poor households living in indigenous, rural and urban areas. The program would disburse cash 
transfers to extremely poor rural, indigenous and urban marginal families to encourage them to 
invest in the human capital of their children by (i) maintaining school attendance of school-age 
children; (ii) pregnant mothers and children under-5 visiting health providers according to the 
country's health protocol.  The CCTs would scale up in two phases. The first phase is currently 
under implementation and is expected to benefit about 10,000 households in 37 corregimientos.  
The project would support the assessment of the first phase and, on the basis of its results, the 
expansion of the program to reach more than 50,000 extremely poor households starting in 2007. 
(Annex 1 presents the main features of phase 1)  
 
B. Support to Beneficiary Families  
 
In addition to the cash transfers, the project would support the government in helping families 
take advantage of the benefits offered by the Red de Oportunidades as well as other available 
social services.  Scaling up the Red de Oportunidades program implies a major change in the 
relationship between extremely poor households and publicly provided social assistance.  This is 
particularly true for the indigenous and the rural extreme poor. The Red de Oportunidades would 
tailor the program to their context and specific conditions of the various target populations 
(indigenous, rural, and urban).  In doing this, this component comprises the following activities: 
(i) A communication strategy, (ii) A strategy to help participating households understand the 
program, fulfill their co-responsibilities, support them when they are not complying, and in 
general to help them to obtain the maximum benefit from the program;. (iii) An intervention to 
help families obtaining identification documents (birth certificates and cedulas).  
 
C. Management, Monitoring and Evaluation of the Social Protection System  
 
This component would strengthen the GOP's capacity to formulate social assistance policies 
and strategies, improve inter-institutional coordination, and carry out the project. Specifically, 
the project would develop the following activities:  
 
(1) Strengthening the management capacity of the Ministries and local governments involved in 
the Social Protection System, mainly the Ministries of Social Development, Education and 
Health.  
 
(2) Strengthening the GOP's capacity to carry out, monitor and measure the impact of the CCT 
interventions.  
 
Page  3
(3) Carry out an impact evaluation to measure the impact of the Red de Oportunidades program 
in the medium-term.  
 
D. Strengthening the Supply of Basic Social Services in Health and Nutrition  
 
In order to achieve the expected impact from the Red de Oportunidades program, the 
government needs to improve the coverage and quality of supply in health and nutrition.  
 
Strengthening the supply of health and nutrition services can be best achieved by improving 
quality and coverage in the already existing primary health program (PAISS) implemented by 
the Ministry of Health.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be country-wide.  Based on the poverty map, it would target areas of greatest 
poverty in rural and urban marginal areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project would trigger the Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.10) safeguard policy. Given that the 
project would target about half of its benefits in indigenous comarcas, an Indigenous People's 
Plan (IPP) would be developed during project preparation in consultation with government 
authorities. The IPP would build on the indigenous survey and analysis completed by the 
Panama Poverty Assessment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
TBD.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
TBD.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/29/2007 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/28/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TBD.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Salazar 
07/31/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
07/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
07/28/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
