Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/15/2007 
Report No.:39839 
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Panama 
Project ID:  P105555 
Project Name:  PA BASIC EDUCATION II ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Task Team Leader:  Alexandria Valerio 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 3/21/07 
Estimated Board Date: 7/15/07 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan (SIL) 
Sector:  Early Childhood Education (45%); Primary Education (20%); Secondary 
Education (20%); Decentralization (15%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P); Education for all (P); Social safety nets 
(P); Indigenous peoples (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Counterpart funding:      2.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [x] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [x] 
2. Project Objectives 
 
The additional financing proposes no changes to the original project objectives of: (i) 
improving the quality and efficiency of basic education; (ii) improving equity of access to 
preschool and basic education; (iii) expanding coverage of preschool and early childhood 
education; and, (iv) strengthening the planning, supervision and policy-making capacity 
of MEDUCA. 
 
3. Project Description 
 
The project consists of three project components: (i) Improvement of Education Quality; 
(ii) Expansion of Early Childhood Education; and (iii) Institutional Strengthening. 
 
Education Quality: $2,013,988
 ($1,935,679 from IBRD and $78,309 from GoP). 
a) Educational Materials: Development of multigrade and IBE (inter-cultural 
bilingual education) materials and teacher training for multigrade and bilingual 
schools; furnishing and equipping of multigrade schools; 
b)  Distance Education (
telebásica
): Continued expansion of the 
telebásica
 program 
in grades 7, 8, and 9; 
Page  2
c)  Infrastructure: External supervision of the quality and completion of civil works; 
evaluation of the infrastructure subcomponent; 
d) Scholarships: The scholarship component would continue in its current form, 
administered and awarded by IFARHU (
Instituto para la Formación y 
Aprovechamiento de Recursos Humanos
). 
 
Early Childhood Education: $4,154,178
 ($2,317,009 from IBRD and $1,837,169 from 
GoP). 
a) Non-formal Preschools (CEFACEI): Expansion of the CEFACEI program to 
include 125 new groups reaching 3,125 more children, bringing the total number 
of children benefited from this program since 2001 to 66,064; training of 
community educators (
promotoras
)
and parents' associations (COPAMACEs); 
b) Home-based early childhood education: Continue to provide early childhood 
education to children living in remote and isolated areas by establishing 50 new 
groups benefiting 900 more children; capacity building for parent leaders and 
development and distribution of high quality and culturally relevant educational 
materials. 
 
Institutional Strengthening:
 
$558,200
 ($534,790 from IBRD and $23,410 from GoP). 
a)  Build on the success of the SIAREH system established under the Second Basic 
Education Project, growing its scope and coverage by adding new modules and 
funding its continued maintenance; 
b)  Create a digital documentation center to scan and house all official documents 
pertaining to MEDUCA and human resources; 
c)  Train officials of MEDUCA in the collection and use of official statistics, and 
continue to support the internal reorganization, modernization and 
decentralization of the Ministry. 
 
Project Coordination:
 
$273,722
 ($212,522 from IBRD and $61,200 from GoP). 
The additional financing would continue to support the PCU under current arrangements.  
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
 
The project will be implemented throughout the country of Panama, and its geographical 
coverage will be expanded through the additional financing. Certain subcomponents will 
continue to focus specifically on isolated rural, indigenous, and underserved urban areas.  
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Social Safeguard Specialist: Manolo Sánchez 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The World Bank Safeguard policies applicable to this project are: the Indigenous Peoples 
Policy.  An environmental assessment was carried out for the original project and was 
given an environmental rating of “C,” therefore the environmental safeguard is not 
triggered.  
 
The project is directly serving three indigenous communities—
 
Ngöbe, Kuna and 
Emberá—primarily through the development and distribution of bilingual and 
indigenous-language texts and materials. No large-scale negative impacts are anticipated. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
N/A 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
Project investments are targeted primarily to the poor indigenous, rural and urban 
communities which have limited access to basic education or have inadequate school 
facilities and lack qualified teachers and effective educational materials. Specific project 
actions to benefit indigenous communities are the provision of bilingual textbooks, 
supplementary reading and other educational materials for primary and preschool 
students and for adult indigenous parents participating in the home-based initial 
Page  4
education program. Native language-speaking indigenous teachers will be trained in the 
proper use of bilingual materials and in the techniques of multigrade teaching, which is 
the most typical characteristic of primary schools in small, isolated, rural indigenous 
communities.  
 
The project is working directly with the 
Unidad Indígena 
to implement aspects of the 
project benefiting indigenous communities. There is strong and fluid communication 
between stakeholders and the PCU through the 
Unidad Indígena
 as well as through the 
regional education directorates in indigenous areas (
Kuna Yala, Panamá Este, Darién, 
Bocas del Toro).  
 
A
social specialist accompanied the supervision mission in October, 2006 to evaluate the 
strengths and weaknesses of the IBE educational materials subcomponent. The 
strengthened participation of the 
Unidad Indígena
 was noted, as was its improved ability 
to design and implement IBE activities. Furthermore, workshops with the 
Unidad
 have 
been carried out to strengthen its knowledge of IBE issues.  The creation and distribution 
of texts and materials to schools in indigenous communities
—activities that will be 
scaled up under the AF—has not only contributed to indigenous children’s learning, but 
has also resulted in improved confidence among indigenous parents and authorities in the 
comarcas
 in terms of their relationship to the MEDUCA, and their ability to advocate for 
improved educational services in their areas.  
 
A
social assessment was also carried out as part of the project preparation for the 
Red de 
Oportunidades
 cash transfer program, which will be creating demand for early childhood 
education in the same three indigenous 
comarcas
.
This AF will be working closely with 
the 
Red de Oportunidades
,
which will promote indigenous participation by setting up 
operational committees in each of the three 
comarcas
.
These operational committees 
would meet bi-monthly to discuss and share experiences on program operation, gaps in 
coverage and alternatives to improve participation. The committee should serve as a 
mechanism to receive feedback from indigenous communities, not only about the CCTs 
but also about health and education services providers and possible barriers related to 
cultural and ethnic patterns. 
 
Because at least 75 percent of the project activities benefit indigenous peoples, the PAD 
will serve as the indigenous plan for this project. Capacity to implement these 
components has been demonstrated through the implementation of the Second Basic 
Education project, and no changes are foreseen for the AF. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The project is working directly with the 
Unidad Indígena 
to implement aspects of the 
project benefiting indigenous communities. There is strong and fluid communication 
between stakeholders and the PCU through the 
Unidad Indígena
 as well as through the 
regional education directorates in indigenous areas (
Kuna Yala, Panamá Este, Darién, 
Bocas del Toro).  
Page  5
The AF was prepared in full consultation with the 
Unidad Indígena
.
They took part in 
project development and gave feedback on the project at appraisal through its 
participation in a workshop, and gave its input at the signing of the Aide Memoir. The 
Unidad Indígena
 designated representatives from all three of the 
comarcas
 benefiting 
from the project to ensure that their feedback was incorporated in the technical proposal.  
 
Under the AF, the project will partner closely with the 
Red de Oportunidades 
program to 
meet the demand it creates for early childhood education in indigenous communities 
through CCTs. The 
Red de Oportunidades
 will be following its indigenous plan closely, 
liaising directly with operational committees in the 
comarcas
 that serve as a mechanism 
to receive feedback from indigenous communities, not only about the CCTs but also 
about health and education services providers and possible barriers related to cultural and 
ethnic patterns. The committee would consist of representatives of traditional authorities 
of 
comarcas
,
the program, elected authorities and social services suppliers (traditional 
and non traditional). 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
3/21/07 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
3/30/07 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
NO 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
YES 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
YES 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
YES 
Page  6
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
YES 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
YES 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
YES 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
YES 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Alexandria Valerio 
5/17/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
N/A 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Manolo Sánchez 
5/17/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Reidar Kvam 
5/17/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
5/17/2007 
Comments:   
