Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/22/2007 
Report No.:  AC2771
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Panama 
Project ID:  P098328 
Project Name:  Social Protection Project 
Task Team Leader:  Manuel Salazar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Other social development (P);Social safety nets (P);Other social protection and 
risk management (P);Child health (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objective focuses on supporting government efforts in (i) 
improving the effectiveness of the conditional cash transfer program to enhance access of 
extremely poor families to, and boost their demand for education and maternal and infant 
health services, (ii) strengthening the supply of preventive malnutrition interventions in 
the areas of RDO; and (iii) enhancing government capacity to design, implement and 
monitor coherent and efficient social policies and interventions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project development objectives are to: (1) improve the management and operation of 
the conditional cash transfer program to enhance its effectiveness in reaching the poorest 
and indigenous groups and providing them with an incentive to invest in the human 
capital of their children; (2) support beneficiaries to participate in the CCT program and 
increase beneficiaries? demand for education and maternal and infant health services; (3) 
strengthen the supply of growth promotion interventions in the areas RO; and (4) enhance 
government capacity to design, implement and monitor coherent and efficient social 
sector policies and interventions.  
 
Specifically, the project will support the following elements:  
Page  2
(1) 
To improve the management processes of the Red de Oportunidades (RO) 
program in order to increase its effectiveness, the project will support improvements in 
the mechanisms to target, select and register beneficiaries, monitor program 
implementation, and enforce internal, independent and social control.  
 
(2) 
To increase beneficiaries? demand for education and health services, the project 
will support the implementation of strategies to help families participate in the program 
and achieve full access to its benefits, through direct support to participating families and 
targeted communication efforts.  These strategies will be adapted to diverse social and 
cultural conditions in the indigenous jurisdictions.  
 
(3) 
 To improve the supply of growth promotion interventions and secure access to 
health services for the RO program beneficiaries, the project will support the design of a 
strengthened basic package of health services with community based growth 
interventions and the expansion of the strengthened package of services to the indigenous 
areas, taking into account the diverse social and cultural conditions in these areas.  
 
(4) 
To enhance GOP capacity to increase the efficiency of public social sector 
performance, the project will support the government in defining institutional 
arrangements for social sector policy making, coordination and monitoring; generating a 
solid knowledge basis for informed decision-making; and implementing an 
administrative structure for MIDES to perform its role of steward of social assistanc   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Physical isolation of many communities in the comarcas, poor access related to poor 
roads (Ngobe and Embera comarcas) and uncertain sea conditions (Kuna Yala), and high 
cost and uncertain reliability of transport.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr William F. Waters (LCSHS-DPT) 
Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres (LCSHH) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The presence of indigenous peoples in the project areas triggers compliance with the 
Bank?s OP/BP 4.10, which requires that the needs of these populations be taken into 
account in the design of the project, to enable them to benefit in culturally and 
linguistically appropriate ways.  Three project elements assure this. First, the project has 
defined all residents of indigenous comarcas as recipients of the conditional cash transfer. 
This feature is in concordance with indigenous cultural and social structures that 
emphasize the common good rather than individual benefit.  Second, project 
coordinators, supervisors, health promoters and some teachers are indigenous members of 
the comarcas in which they serve; this guarantees good understanding and close contact 
with project beneficiaries, particularly with respect to following cultural norms such as 
coordination with traditional authorities.  Third, the Social Assessment provided input 
from female and male residents of the comarcas regarding their perceptions of the 
project?s objectives and operation, and made specific recommendations regarding 
possible modifications and a system for monitoring and evaluation in which participation 
of members of each of the indigenous groups would participate.  
 
The project might produce an incremental demand and supply of basic ambulatory 
health services in rural areas of the country including vaccination. This fact has triggered 
the environmental assessment safeguard.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indigenous peoples -It can be anticipated that the project will increase demand for health 
and education services required as co-responsibilities of beneficiary families.  There will, 
therefore, be a need for increasing and improving trained personnel at local and regional 
health centers to provide additional services following culturally appropriate practices.  
This potential impact refers to the provision of services in fixed sites as well as Ministry 
of Health and NGO health teams that visit isolated communities in the comarcas.  
Similarly, there will be somewhat increased demand for educational services, which will 
require greater attention to satisfying the need for appropriate materials and equipment.  
 
Environmental assessment - It is not expected that the project will generate any large 
scale, significant, or irreversible environmental impacts. Panama has achieved one of the 
highest levels of vaccination rates in the region. In 2003 the estimated average coverage 
for children under 5 for DPT (vaccine against diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus) was 95 
percent nationwide and 90 percent among poor children, for BCG (vaccine against 
tuberculosis) was 96 percent nation wide and 90 percent among poor children. Therefore, 
the proposed project will not support any activities that will significantly increase the 
generation of biomedical waste except for only a marginal effect on the needle disposal 
load.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Indigenous peoples - With respect to the disbursement of the conditional cash transfer, 
the single most important alternative is to modify current rules and procedures that 
provide the conditional cash transfer to female heads of extended households to provision 
to female heads of mother-children units, the majority of which live in extended 
households in the indigenous comarcas.  With respect to compliance with co-
responsibilities, it will be essential to increase and improve the provision of health 
services and to a somewhat lesser extent, educational services.  
 
Environmental assessment - The health component will complement an existing 
outreach ambulatory health program (?Programa de Atenci?n Integral de Servicios de 
Salud? ? PAISS) by adding educational services to prevent malnutrition among pregnant 
women and children under five years old (PAISS+N); and by extending coverage of 
PAISS+N to indigenous and rural areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Indigenous peoples - The incorporation of indigenous project coordinators, supervisors, 
and promoters is the most important mechanism.  In indigenous comarcas, the program 
will disburse transfers to mother-children units instead of households. MIDES has 
planned the systematic incorporation of new communities within the comarcas into the 
program, and has been able to follow that plan.  Improved coordination with health care 
providers and school officials at the national, regional, and local levels is necessary.  
 
Environmental assessment - The Ministry of Health (MINSA) is developing an action 
plan to mitigate the potential environmental risks associated with an increase in the 
demand and supply of vaccines. The action plan will include activities to assess the 
practices and institutional capacity of the country to supervise, enforce regulations and 
handle immunization waste management by outreach teams and regional health services 
in the remote rural areas. The action plan will also include the consultation with experts 
and health authorities to develop recommendations to improve the transportation and 
final disposal of needles generated by the immunization programs in rural areas.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Indigenous peoples - The most important stakeholders are the indigenous residents of the 
comarcas.  The principal mechanisms for consultation and disclosure are (i) inclusion of 
traditional and elected authorities in a systematic process of project monitoring and 
evaluation and (ii) close coordination among the ministries of Social Development 
(particulary the Red de Oportunidades and Indigenous Peoples offices), Health, and 
Education through this system of monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Environmental assessment - Key stakeholders include national, regional and local health 
authorities, the outreach teams from MINSA and external organizations (NGOs) that 
deliver PAISS in rural areas; the communities where the beneficiaries of the RDO live. 
Page  5
The assessment to be included in the action plan that MINSA is preparing will include 
consultations with the NGOs involved in delivering basic health services and community 
leaders and community volunteers where PAISS+N will be expanded.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/12/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/14/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  6
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Salazar 
02/21/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres 
02/21/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr William F. Waters 
02/21/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
03/21/2007 
Comments:  Original ISDS was signed by Andrew Mason, as Acting Sector Manager, on behalf of 
Helena Ribe. 
