Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2984 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Papua New Guinea 
Project ID: P102396 
Project Name: PG Mining Sector Inst Strengthening TA 2 
Task Team Leader: Graeme Eric Hancock 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2008 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Gender (P);Other environment and natural 
resources management (S);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 4.00 
 
EC: European Development Fund (EDF) 
1.00
6.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives are (i) to support the institutional strengthening of 
the main mining sector agencies administering the mining sector to improve sector governance; 
and (ii) to build the capacity of the affected communities, especially women?s organizations and 
youth, to better benefit from mining sector activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would consist of six components as follows:  
 
?
Support for Mineral Resources Authority (MRA) to become fully operational and fulfill 
its responsibilities including licensing and overseeing Artisanal and Small Scale Mining 
activities and monitoring mine closure work  
 
?
Support for the Autonomous Bougainville Government to review previous legislation and 
to develop the legal, regulatory and institutional framework for mining  
Page  2
?
Support to the Dept of Mineral Policy and Geohazard Management (DMPGM) to 
complete a revised mining legal framework and a Sustainable Mineral Development policy; and 
to develop an offshore mining policy  
 
?
Support to the Internal Revenue Commission (IRC) to investigate and audit mining 
companies and to possibly extend IRC experience in mining to petroleum projects  
 
?
Support to Women?s Associations and Youth in six mining communities and regions and 
the National Council of Women (NCW)  
 
?
Support to the Government to Adopt and Implement the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative (EITI)  
 
The implementing agency is the Mineral Resources Authority (MRA).  The MRA will assist 
with coordinating implementation sub-components in both the DoMPGM and the IRC. Rather 
than an external stand-alone Project Implementation Unit, the project is proposed to be 
implemented through a Special Projects Unit (SPU) being established within the MRA and 
staffed by the MRA.  Some consultant support for the SPU may be required initially, e.g. to 
assist with developing capacity to manage procurement activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project components will mostly be led from Port Moresby with those related to women's 
programs and small scale mining being implemented in the relevant communities in existing 
mining areas (such as Porgera, Ok Tedi, Lihir, Wau etc).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The relevant Borrower's institutions - the Department of Mining and the Department of 
Environment (DoE) - have both demonstrated acceptable institutional capabilities under previous 
Mining TA project, although both institutions lack adequate financial resources for on site 
monitoring. All mineral development projects are subject to detailed EIA and SIA requirements 
under existing legislation and procedures. There have been no issues of safeguard violations in 
the previous loan and appropriate steps will be taken during project preparation to ensure that 
this remains the case.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is proposed to be rated as category B for environmental purposes.  The project 
will not involve direct investment in mining activities but through its policy and regulatory 
strengthening it could have indirect environmental impacts by encouraging increased commercial 
scale mining and ASM activities in the future.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/27/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/28/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Graeme Eric Hancock 
05/11/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
