Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/09/2007 
Report No.:  AC2096
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Papua New Guinea 
Project ID:  P079140 
Project Name:  PNG-Smallholder Agriculture Development 
Task Team Leader:  Oliver Braedt 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (100%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
27.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
17.90 
 Local 
Communities 
6.80 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
15.40
40.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to increase, in a sustainable 
manner the level of involvement of targeted communities in their local development 
through measures aimed at increasing oil palm revenue and local participation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project does not attempt to address the issues that negatively affect the rural sector 
economy through generic, nation-wide programs. Rather, it focuses on an important sub-
sector that can promote substantial socio-economic benefits to participating families and 
the rural economy in the project provinces.  Within this framework, it addresses many of 
the issues that are common constraints in the overall rural economy in PNG.  In doing so, 
it assumes realistic levels of fiscal, financial and institutional support and performance.  
 
The project includes three components: i) Smallholder productivity enhancement, (ii) 
Local governance and community participation, and (iii) Project management and 
institutional support. The project would be implemented over five years in WNB 
Province (Hoskins and Bialla schemes) and Oro Province (Oro scheme).  
Page  2
Component 1: Smallholder Productivity Enhancement.  The component would support: 
(a) planting additional oil palm blocks (up to 9,000 ha) along existing provincial access 
roads through in-filling of land still available within the areas covered by oil palm 
infrastructure in response to smallholder demand; (b) the upgrading (reconstruction)  of 
provincial access roads to existing smallholder oil palm blocks (about 620 km), and 
maintaining all existing and upgraded roads used for FFB collection, with the 
establishment of sustainable financing mechanisms for road maintenance; and (c) 
enhancement of smallholder productivity through improved extension services. To 
achieve this, the Project would use the existing smallholder service provider demand and 
supply frameworks, and enhance this capacity where necessary through project 
implementation arrangements and institutional support.  
 
Component 2:  Local governance and community participation.  The objective of this 
component would be to develop and demonstrate sustainable mechanisms for local 
governance and community participation, for possible replication in other parts of the 
country after project completion.  This would be achieved through providing 
development grants to Local Level Institutions (LLIs) and communities in the project 
areas and promoting participatory planning & budgeting and local accountability at the 
community level. The implementation of this component would be phased and the 
approach would be to promote self-reliant local development. through: i) community 
mobilization, facilitated by local motivators; ii) identification and prioritization of 
activities that would provide suitable solutions to local development constraints, through 
transparent and participatory planning processes at the level of wards or groups of wards 
joined by traditional community kinships; iii) approval and budgeting by communities at 
LLG level of activities; iv) provision of direct and assured funding to communities with 
transparent conditions to ensure accountability and effective use of funds; v) design and 
implementation of planned activities by the communities themselves, with support from 
local CBOs, NGOs and service providers; vi) and capacity-development of CBOs, ward 
development committees and LLI/provinces.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Institutional Support.  The Oil Palm Industry 
Corporation (OPIC) would take overall responsibility for project management, 
coordination and performance of the project components. Component 1 implementation 
would be undertaken through OPIC and its field offices with the support of the milling 
companies and the PNG Oil Palm Research Association (PNGOPRA).  Component 2 
implementation would be managed by an agency contracted out by OPIC to set up sub-
project implementation units (sub-PIUs) at the provincial level. Component 3 would aim 
at strengthening OPIC capacity in improving smallholder productivity through the 
provision of technical assistance and the establishment of an M&E system. It would also 
strengthen OPIC and the institutions involved in assisting rural communities to define 
their priority needs, and the capacity of service providers to respond to these needs. OPIC 
would also provide support to and coordinate with existing HIV/AIDs awareness / 
prevention campaigns in the project area. Environmental monitoring would also be 
supported in close coordination with the Department of Environment and Conservation 
(DEC).   
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The five-year project would be implemented in the country?s two main oil palm growing 
provinces (Oro and West New Britain). The majority of the project area is cultivated by 
smallholder farmers and is characterized by poor grazing land, degraded forest areas and 
scattered agricultural and oil palm production. The existence of conservation areas and 
areas of cultural, as well as social sensivity in the proposed project area is being 
determined by the Environmental Assessment (EA) and Social Assessment (SA). No 
interventions in critical natural habitats are foreseen.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert D. Crooks (EASRE) 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment / Forestry / Natural Habitats / Pest Management:  Significant 
impacts are not expected from activities undertaken in the proposed project. Every 
project activity (whether supporting individuals or communities) would follow all 
national laws and guidelines with regard to conservation operations, including obtaining 
all necessary permits. An EA and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is also 
being prepared, which will impact on how the project is implemented.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement:  It is not expected that project activities will lead to 
involuntary resettlement. However, in the unlikely event that this may happen, a policy 
framework has been prepared.  
 
Indigenous Peoples:  Almost the entire population in the project area are clasified as 
indigenous as defined in the policy, and the project, as a whole, must comply with the 
policy.  A beneficiaries assessment identifies different indigenous groups and the project 
Page  4
will inlcude a communication and consultation plan.  Mechanisms for community 
participation in component 2 are particularly designed to be inclusive in this respect.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There will be a cumulative impact insofar as the project will increase the areas of oil 
palm in the project areas at the expense of existing vegetation.  This is addressed within 
the EA and the SA that have been prepared by the borrower.  In particular site assessment 
procedures have been developed and will be applied to ensure that vegetation to be 
replaced by new palm plantings is not environmentally significant and thus the 
implications of the cumulative effect will not be environmentally significant.  
 
Furthermore, from the social perspective the project may possibly add to the land 
dispute problems already being experienced in the area and thus has cumulative impact 
potential.  This is also addressed within the EA and the SA that have been prepared by 
the borrower.  In particular site selection criteria have been developed and will be applied 
to ensure that there is no dispute about any block of land being proposed for oil palm 
establishment.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An EA and a SA are being undertaken to ensure the project?s compliance with Bank 
safeguard policies. In addition, a draft Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) is being prepared to ensure that the local investment cycle integrates 
environmental and social safeguards.  
 
An EMP is also being prepared with the aims of minimizing any potential adverse 
effects that the project might have on the environment. The EMP will contain strict 
guidelines for deciding on whether an area of land, which needs to be along and adjacent 
to an existing road in oil palm areas, could be converted to oil palm under the project and 
also contains provision for monitoring by the Department of Environment and 
Conservation (DEC) and an independent entity. All existing oil palm companies in PNG 
are ISO 140001 certified and have signed up to the Roundtable for Sustainable Palm Oil 
(RSPO), which contains provisions for immediate response to concerns expressed by 
people and organizations living and associated within the oil palm growing areas.  
 
The project will also prepare environmental and social guidelines that will be based on 
the outcomes on the various studies (see above) and will determine whether project 
support will be offered to individuals or not. These guidelines will address specific risks 
and opportunities presented. The preparation of these guidelines will draw on the positive 
experience of the Oro Smallholder Oil Palm Development Project (Loan 34850-PNG).  
 
Page  5
The project will strengthen the capacity of OPIC by appointing, training, or recruiting 
staff to coordinate collaborative programs with external organizations, address possible 
land issues and foster greater inclusiveness. OPIC will also support existing activities 
undertaken by provincial governments, CBOs and NGOs to address the rising incidence 
of HIV/AIDS among oil palm communities in the project areas.  
 
To address the weak institutional capacity among local community based groups and 
local governments, the project intends to build up the capacity of the LLIs and encourage 
partnerships between local institutions by using community organizations with proven 
track records in community development.  The Project Implementation Manual for 
component 2 will propose a set of principles for obtaining access to land for civil works 
activities for subprojects when/if required.  Built on the consultation process from the 
SA, the PIM will also ensure that the mechanisms to ensure inclusion, representation, and 
voice for different communities in the LLG governance activities will provide equivalent 
mechanisms to an Indigenous Peoples Plan.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for the proposed SADP have been identified as being smallholders, 
communities, growers associations, all project implementing entities such as OPIC and 
the mills, concerned central and provincial Government departments, NGOs, CBOs, 
church groups, and other related entities.  
 
Consultations with stakeholders began during the pre-identification and identification 
missions. Given the experience of the WBG in this sector in PNG, many of their views 
regarding the projects performance and design have been documented in studies 
undertaken by the Bank, the Government, and other interested parties. During project 
preparation stakeholder consultations were undertaken with all stakeholders. These 
consultations were in the form of workshops, face-to-face qualitative interviews, PRAs, 
and/or focus group interviews. The objective of these activities was to ensure that all the 
views of the key stakeholders are taken into account for not only project design purposes, 
but also to determine roles and responsibilities during the implementation and monitoring 
of the SADP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2007 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Page  7
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Oliver Braedt 
03/09/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert D. Crooks 
02/14/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Lars C. Lund 
02/15/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
03/02/2007 
Comments:   
