Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2332 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/03/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Paraguay 
Project ID: P088277 
Project Name: Investment Climate and Private Sector Development 
Task Team Leader: Eduardo Martin Urdapillet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (60%);General finance sector (20%);General industry 
and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
17.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
3.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to support the MIC’s efforts to promote private sectordevelopment as a 
fundamental instrument for Paraguay’s economic growth, improving competitiveness of 
Paraguayan firms with special emphasis on small and medium enterprises. The project will reach 
this objective through technical assistance for the development of institutional capabilities, the 
improvement of the legal and regulatory framework, and the launch of targeted initiatives that 
strengthen businesses and workers.  
 
Given that a number of diverse initiatives are being financed by grants and loans from the 
European Union, the United States Millennium Challenge Initiative, and the IDB, among other 
institutions, the Government has a strong interest that the World Bank complement and better 
integrate those interventions avoiding overlaps in terms of activities. On the other hand, this 
project also favors a comprehensive and all-encompassing view of the different initiatives being 
Page  2
undertaken, so that the coordination and synergies created lead to concrete results in the 
development of the private sector through increased productivity.  
 
Based on a comprehensive view of private sector development, the achievement of the 
proposed objective will be measured against the following proposed outcomes: (i) increase in 
non-traditional exports of Paraguayan firms; (ii) improvement of the business climate and the 
competitiveness of the private sector; (iii) higher access to financing for export-oriented firms.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will consist of four components to be implemented by MIC. This Ministry 
has the central role in private sector development in Paraguay, given that it has recently absorbed 
remaining activities that were housed at the Ministry of Finance (e.g. , REDIEX, Red de 
Inversion y Exportaciones). The possible total loan amount was originally estimated at $6.5 
million, but may change as further discussions with authorities proceed regarding the export 
finance mechanism component.  
 
Component 1 - Business Modernization, Innovation and Promotion. This component will 
provide technical assistance for diagnosis, design and implementation, training and monitoring, 
and is organized in two key sub-components.  
 
a. 
Business Modernization and Innovation: The aim of this component is to foster the 
creation and diffusion of modern business practices among Paraguayan firms through the 
development of products and processes in non-traditional export sectors according to 
international best practices adapted to the Paraguayan reality. The first phase of this component 
will build upon a sizeable number of studies and donor initiatives that have already identified 
sectors with promising export potential included in the Foros de Competitividad. These programs 
have largely centered on generating diagnostics or assessments of these sectors, but have lacked 
in terms of execution. What will differentiate this project is a focus on the implementation of 
concrete initiatives, so that exportable offerings in Paraguay truly improve. To this end, the 
component seeks to work closely with private sector associations to develop and implement 
Strategic Export Plans. The specific activities envisioned as part of this component are: revise 
and validate the sectors that have been identified as priority industries in previous 
projects/studies; analyze the production and export status of the priority sectors vis-
Ã
-vis the 
situation/trends in international markets (gap analysis) and evaluate the sector-specific and firm-
level capabilities that are needed to create new product or process offerings that will lessen this 
gap; design Strategic Export Plans for targeted sectors with specific and quantifiable targets  and 
responsibilities; provide training to SMEs that responds to firm-level needs and the skill gaps 
identified in the gap analysis; and  evaluate, in coordination with other agencies, the need for an 
innovation policy that calls for the creation of innovation centers (CITES) with a specific focus 
on SMEs.  
 
b. 
Export Promotion and Attraction of FDI: This subcomponent aspires to propel 
Paraguay’s insertion into global markets by enhancing the institutional capacityof REDIEX and 
ProParaguay, both divisions of the MIC, to promote trade facilitation services to small and micro 
exporters and strengthen its FDI attraction services to potential investors. On one side, the export 
promotion efforts under this project will focus on market intelligence services, advisory 
Page  3
assistance and training to foster these agencies’ ability to serve their customers. On the otherside, 
FDI attraction initiatives will center on defining a Paraguayan FDI strategy. Some of the 
activities being considered are: undertake appraisals of services, market information and training 
demanded by small and micro exporters;  launch a study that assesses Paraguay’s image abroad, 
its international competitiveness,  and its potential FDI-recipient sectors; evaluate best practices 
of other countries that developed successful export promotion and FDI strategies; define 
processes and systems to manage export promotional and FDI activities in collaboration with 
other agencies; and launch those activities in coordination with other agencies.  
 
Component 2– Legal and Regulatory Reforms to Improve the Business Climate. 
Thiscomponent will support both vertical (within sectors) and horizontal (across sectors) legal 
and regulatory reforms that streamline business procedures..  
 
a. 
Targeted Reforms of Value-Chains in Export Sectors: The purpose of this subcomponent 
is to address sector-specific bottlenecks steaming from the legal and regulatory environment. 
Experience shows that while some of the regulatory constraints are generic, others are particular 
to these sectors and can only be analyzed and diminished by pursuing targeted initiatives within 
them. To accomplish this, the project will leverage the newly created business climate 
roundtables at the MIC to implement concrete action plans that streamline sector-specific 
business procedures. Some of the activities under this sub-component are: evaluate value-chains 
to identify the existing legal and regulatory bottlenecks that impede their growth; design 
administrative reforms and legislative proposals- both at the country and subnational level- to 
eliminate these constraints and foster growth and employment in these sectors; and develop 
action plans to streamline business procedures and monitor and evaluate results.  
 
b. 
Improvements Across Sectors in the Legal and Regulatory Framework: The purpose of 
this subcomponent is to address widespread legal and regulatory constraints in the business 
climate of Paraguay, by seeking to: evaluate procedures related to the opening, day-to-day 
operations, and closing of a business, and carry out proposals for its improvement; facilitate the 
development of a National Competitiveness System (Sistema Nacional de Competitividad) based 
on current legislative discussions; and support legal reforms that create more flexible 
employment options fostering work in the formal economy.  
 
Component 3 - Access to Export Financing Mechanisms for Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs). This component will determine appropriate financing mechanisms to support exporting 
activities by SMEs. Initial conversations with the authorities have focused on the pre-export 
stage as the key missing link in overall financing for export oriented businesses. Discussions 
have presented some successful experiences of the World Bank in setting up export oriented 
mechanisms in other countries such as Turkey and Tunisia, but the specific mechanism 
appropriate for Paraguay will be defined as a part of this project.  
 
In order to define the suitable mechanism, the project will analyze financial instruments that 
allow for the financing of exports for SMEs based on international best practices in relevant 
countries and the specific needs of Paraguayan businesses; define and develop the chosen 
financing mechanism,  in coordination with other agencies and the private sector; train the 
Page  4
personnel responsible for the promotion and management of this fund and develop processes and 
procedures for its operation; and communicate the characteristics of  the fund to potential clients.  
 
Component 4 
–
Strengthening of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce in Export Promotion 
and Integrated Management of on-going PSD Efforts. This component will support the MIC 
through substantive capacity building within the areas of export promotion and FDI, and in the 
overall management and coordination of on-going PSD efforts with different donors.  
 
In order to achieve this goal, the project will: reengineer management processes of the MIC to 
improve its effectiveness in export promotion activities and the attraction of FDI; develop 
performance indicators, a management information system (MIS) and performance-based 
management procedures; design required processes to integrate on-going PSD efforts; and train 
MIC’s staff in the new processes and management systems designed.  
 
The four initiatives above will work closely and complement activities of the business dialogue 
roundtables being financed by the PR-100 of the IDB, the promotion of non-traditional export 
sectors supported by a grant from the Government of Taiwan, the certification and quality 
standards program currently financed by a Grant of the European Union, and the overall 
deregulation and transparency initiative supported by a Grant of the US Government under the 
Millennium Challenge Initiative. Taking together with a comprehensive and coordinated 
approach, the goal of this loan is to assure concrete effectiveness in the development of the 
private sector of Paraguay.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in Paraguay on a national scale.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As an operation focused on technical assistance, the project is not expected to have any 
potentially significant environmental and social impact. No safeguards are triggered by the 
project so no assessment is included referred to the Borrower’s institutional capacity for 
safeguard policies. Still, as this operation moves into preparation and further detailing, the 
project team will closely monitor potential triggering of safeguards as well as necessary 
enhancements to have components inclusive of social, indigenous peoples and environmental 
aspects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSFW) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/21/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No studies are currently deemed required. As mentioned above, as this operation is prepared, 
the project team will monitor potential triggering of safeguards as well as necessary 
enhancements to have components inclusive of social, indigenous peoples and environmental 
aspects.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Eduardo Martin Urdapilleta 
04/27/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/01/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan G. Goldmark 
05/02/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
