Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/07/2006 
Report No.:  AC2294
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Paraguay 
Project ID:  P082026 
Project Name:  Road Maintenance 
Task Team Leader:  Andres G. Pizarro 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 5, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (70%);General transportation sector (30%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
74.06 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
31.60 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
31.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to establish a sustainable road management 
strategy that ensures the upgrading and maintenance of the road network through a 
rational and balanced use of scarce resources. The guiding principle of this approach will 
be improved road conservation within a comprehensive vision that ensures the 
sustainability of road investments and the preservation of existing road assets. The 
project???s specific objectives will be: (a) developing the institutional capacities of the 
MOPC for strategic planning in road management; (b) arresting the deterioration of 
Paraguay's priority road network, composed of international and regional road corridors, 
and maintaining its level of service as perceived by road users; (c) improving access for 
the poorest and most excluded rural communities to the primary paved road network.  
 
The project will help to establish the strategic and programmatic principles that will 
allow MOPC to coordinate all efforts and financing in a more rational manner, taking 
into account fiscal realities. The project will be national in character providing a national 
logical framework, but will be implemented for its rural access component in 
Departments that rank high in terms of poverty and have low levels of accessibility. The 
approach, however, may be replicated throughout the country. The project will be used to 
Page  2
catalyze a working relationship between the Ministries of Finance and Public Works on 
prudent fiscal management.  
 
The approach will seek to promote, as a guiding theme in all components: (i) 
performance, through the identification of targets for each intervention, to be monitored 
and whose attainment will be the indication of success; (ii) accountability,  through 
planning and programming all interventions based on objective and quantifiable criteria 
and (iii) participation and transparency through mechanisms designed to facilitate 
stakeholders? having the opportunity to influence and share control over the decision 
making about the initiatives that affect them and with the flow of timely and reliable 
information on the progress of activities and results obtained made accessible to all 
relevant stakeholders.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Strengthening Strategic Planning and Road Management (Estimated cost 
US$6.5 million (not including contingencies), of which US$4.55 would be financed by 
the Bank Loan)  :This component would finance the strengthening of strategic planning, 
road conservation, and budget management within a framework of fiscal constraints, in 
particular, it will support a series of consulting services, training and goods that may be 
grouped into four subcomponents.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening of strategic planning; This subcomponent will 
finance consulting services, goods and training essentially to (i) improve the legal 
framework of the road sector and road classification; (ii)set-up a strategic planning unit 
and equip it with the necessary instruments, knowledge base and training for it to begin 
performing its tasks; (iii) introduce and implement a traffic counting system; (iv) 
strengthen the procurement unit with a software system to improve its contract and 
procurement monitoring ; (v) provide strengthening training for the VMOP.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening budget preparation and execution; This 
subcomponent will finance consulting services to (i) develop a management of works and 
budget execution monitoring system; (ii) Develop and implement an automated works 
certification and payment system.  
 
Sub-component 1.3: Strengthening Road Management and Maintenance: This sub-
component will finance consulting services, training and goods to (i) strengthen 
management of road improvement and maintenance contracts; (ii0) Update the pavement 
management system and the road inventory; (iii) develop and implement a 
communication strategy on road maintenance;  
 
Sub-component 1.4: Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project: This sub-component will 
finance works and consulting services to set-up base lines and mechanisms to monitor 
outcome and impact indicators. These activities include (i) Measuring vehicle operating 
costs; (ii) Socioeconomic impact surveys, baseline and monitoring; (iii) Baseline and 
surveys of user satisfaction; (iv) Strengthening and training UGPG in project 
Page  3
coordination and Bank procedures etc.: (v) Implementation of Indigenous People's Plan; 
(vi) Implementation of Environmental Mitigation Plan.  
 
Component 2: Improvement and maintenance of the paved road network (Estimated 
cost US$43.3 million (not including contingencies), of which US$30.31 would be 
financed by the Bank Loan): This component has two subcomponents which complement 
each other (i) performance based contracts; (ii) toll system optimization. The toll system 
optimization is estimated to increase revenue collection from US$7 million a year to 
around US$12 million, however the amount may be significantly higher as the amount of 
existing fraud is difficult to estimate. The improvement of revenue collection would 
improve resources available for the maintenance of the paved road network. The 
optimization of the toll system and toll increasing strategies are tied to road section 
improvements and user satisfaction, as such both programs will be tied and coordinated 
in implementation as to obtained the desired effects.  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Performance-based maintenance contracting ($39.67 million): This 
sub-component would finance (i) contracts that include initial rehabilitation works to 
meet the minimum level of service, road safety works, vertical and horizontal signaling, 
and maintenance works of the national paved road network, through performance-based 
maintenance contracts (GMANS). The prospective road networks have been identified 
and contracts have been structured into six GMANS. The project will finance three of the 
identified GMANS. GMANS 1 (381km): covering routes PY02, PY03 and PY08; 
GMANS 2 (467km): covering Southern Access to Asuncion, route PY 01, PY 04, and 
GMANS Urban (108 km): covering part of route PY02 and part of Southern Access to 
Asuncion. The six GMANS that have been prepared cover the entire main paved road 
network of the Eastern region of Paraguay. The purpose of this approach was to remain 
holistic and programmatic despite the fact that the loan would not finance all the needs. 
The MOPC will seek financing from other sources to cover the remaining contracts, but 
following the procedures and mechanisms developed by this project. (ii) A training 
program on performance-based contract preparation and monitoring for MOPC staff.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Toll system optimization ($3.6 million): This sub-component 
would finance (i) A Toll System Optimization Master Plan, and (ii) Investments to 
implement the Master Plan. The Toll System Master Plan would ultimately define which 
tolls would be relocated, what sequencing would be used to start charging in both 
directions and what investments in infrastructure and systems are necessary. The loan 
would finance part of the Master Plan, concentrating on the tolls that are on the routes 
that will benefit from a performance-based contract.  
 
Component 3: Improvement and maintenance of unpaved road network (Estimated cost 
US$43.29 million (excluding contingencies), of which US$30.3 would be financed by the 
Bank Loan): This component will finance the rehabilitation and conservation of unpaved 
national roads that connect to the national paved network, and secondary roads 
connecting rural communities to these; and propose a comprehensive solution for 
improved access to isolated rural communities.  
 
Page  4
Sub-component 3.1: Road improvement and maintenance works. The general approach 
for the preparation of this component has been to adopt solutions whose conservation is 
sustainable in the long run financially; this has been done by matching the proposed 
works to historical expenditures and looking at available resources of local governments. 
Also the whole network has been taken into account so as to give signs of transparency to 
the community. The road network included was considered an entity by Department (the 
regional administrative division). So initially a ranking of all the Departments in the 
country was carried out on the basis of objective criteria (rural population, poverty, km of 
unpaved network), the top three ranked Departments were selected: Caaguazu, San Pedro 
and Caazapa. . The candidate road network in each Department was then chosen through 
a
clear and participatory process to determine the priority segments in each Department. 
The strategy has sought a progressive approach for improving the roads level of service, 
in line with fiscal realities, and avoiding creating expectations that cannot be met. This 
framework was chosen so that it could be applied permanently in the future and MOPC 
could use it to guide future interventions.  
 
A
variety of interventions will be financed. As for the main unpaved road network in 
each Department, interventions may entail the contracting of road rehabilitation and 
maintenance; or contracting arrangements for specific works (bridges, drainage, etc.) 
leaving the rest to be carried out by force account. For community access roads, low cost 
solutions will be sought through participatory processes. These would be implemented by 
the communities themselves, the Intendencias, or the Gobernaciones through agreements 
(Convenios) with the MOPC.  
 
Sub-component 3.2: Capacity building and development program for MOPC district 
Offices and Local Governments. This subcomponent will finance works, goods and 
consultant services to (i) improve the infrastructure, systems and equipment in MOPC 
District offices to improve road management and contacting of maintenance; (ii) 
Capacity building for MOPC District staff on managing maintenance contracts; (iii) 
Capacity building program for Local Governments   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in the Eastern part of Paraguay.  
 
The performace-based maintenance contracts will be implemented on routes PY01, 
PY02, PY03, PY04 and PY08.  
 
The unpaved road works and maintenance component will be implemented over the 
eligible road netwroks in San Pedro, Caaguazu and Caazapa.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (IEGSG) 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN) 
Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez (LCCPY) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
All road segments that will be either improved or maintained under this project were 
assessed. None of the sub-projects is expected to result in major environmental impacts. 
The proposed Project involves rehabilitation and maintenance works in existing roads, 
and as such no major environmental impacts that could endanger the natural surroundings 
of the area of influence, or the local population is expected. Due to the size and quantities 
involved in the works to be executed, no significant negative impacts are expected that 
might not be easily reverted or mitigated. Most sections use current road alignments and 
right-of-way. The main environmental impacts will happen during the construction phase 
and cause localized temporary negative environmental impacts that can be effectively and 
easily mitigated.  
 
Additionally, due to the identification and inventory of potential environmental 
liabilities, it is expected that the project will help eliminate existing environmental 
impacts not attributable to the project, such as problems of erosion of accesses? 
sediments, canalization of entries and exits of draining works, among others.  
 
The main social impact of the project concerns the indigenous populations living in the 
project?s area of intervention, and the population that will be affected by resettlement. A 
Social Evaluation of the component of improvement and maintenance of the unpaved 
road network (component 3) was carried out during project preparation.  The objective of 
this evaluation was to identify opportunities, barriers and risks that could complement 
previous social analysis carried out during project preparation, and to serve as basis for 
reinforcing the social impacts of the this component?s intervention strategy. The 
Project?s expected social results are circumscribed to the indirect social impacts to be 
generated by the road accesses in the beneficiary communities; therefore, this evaluation 
focused on the population of the three Beneficiary Departments: Caaguaz?, Caazap?, and 
San Pedro.  
 
Page  6
Since the project involves only maintenance of existing highways, there would be no 
resettlement of homes or businesses, or taking of land for new highway construction.  
However, along the paved highways, there are significant numbers of structures ? mainly 
small businesses and a few homes ? built on the highway right-of-way, often directly on 
the highway shoulder to attract passing motorists. These structures range from simple 
awnings erected for shade to more elaborate structures constructed of wood or, in a few 
cases of masonry.  Most of the existing structures are businesses designed to attract 
customers for the sale of fruits, vegetables, ornamental plants, snack foods, drinks and 
other merchandise, or services such as tire repair shops. Many of these small businesses 
are temporary, such as seasonal fruit stands.  Many of the structures are linked to homes 
just outside the right-of-way.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The most important long-term impacts are related to increased traffic on improved and 
rehabilitated roads due to better accessibility. This could result in increased traffic 
accidents and affect surrounding environment. The project will assist local authorities and 
other stakeholders in developing mitigation measures to reduce potential long-term 
impacts of increased traffic volumes. Other long-term impacts identified during project 
preparation concern the socio-economic impacts on the indigenous communities living in 
the area of intervention of the project, and the impact on the businesses affected by the 
resettlement plan discussed below.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As there are no significant adverses environmental impacts as the project deals only with 
maintenance of existing roads, no project alterantives were considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Within Paraguay?s public administration, the environmental management of road projects 
is under the responsibility of the Environmental Unit (UA for its acronym in Spanish) of 
the MOPC.  
 
The UA?s duties, which are specified in Ministerial Resolution No. 991 dated August 
21 2000, include: (i) supervision of the process of execution, supervision and control of 
the environmental quality of road projects (through reports, and inspection of works); (ii) 
coordination together with the MOPC of the execution and elaboration of bidding and 
procurement documents for road projects; (iii) environmental supervision of MOPC?s 
public works as stated in Law No. 1533/2000 and Res. 991 mentioned above; (iv) 
participation in the elaboration of Terms of References for Studies including 
Environmental Impact, Design, Procurement, in addition to bidding documents, in road 
projects.  
 
The UA has designed mitigation measures for the road improvement and maintenance 
components of the project, both for the paved and unpaved networks. These mitigation 
Page  7
measures are part of a Plan for Mitigation of Environmental Liabilities, and which follow 
the World Bank?s guidelines on this issue. These mitigation measures include the 
following: (i) the first measures to be taken into account must be included in the MOPC?s 
General Environmental Technical Specifications, with the commitment of the contractors 
and inspectors to abide by them; (ii) a program to repair environmental liabilities is part 
of the mitigation measures, and includes measures of control of accesses? sediment 
erosion, cleaning of entry and exit canals of drain structures, re-vegetation, and 
complimenting drainage works; (iii) a strong Plan of Environmental Quality Control will 
be included; (iv) an Erosion Control plan defining measures of control of temporal and 
permanent erosion, structural and non-structural erosion, and vegetative erosion, 
throughout the project, and in borrowing sites, and waste disposal; (v) other plans to be 
included are those on reforestation for stabilization of soil movements, on fauna 
protection, on visual quality control, and on contingencies related to the use and transport 
of inflammable materials, explosives, etc with efficient channels of communication; and 
(vi) finally, there should be a plan for complete withdrawal from the project?s corridor 
and camps, which should be returned clean and to the satisfaction of the inspector and 
supervisor.  
 
The operation proceedings that the UA require for the development of construction 
activities, such as inspection and supervision of works, are considered adequate for the 
modalities proposed in the routine improvement and maintenance of unpaved roads and 
the performance-based maintenance contracts for paved roads. The institutional capacity 
of MOPC?s UA is considered adequate for this project. However, some weaknesses have 
been identified during the assessment of the UA?s institutional capacity, which need to be 
addressed, such as: limited resources and staff, and limited political influence.  
 
In terms of resettlement issues, the MOPC has conducted a preliminary census of 
structures erected along highway rights of way, classified them according to their use and 
construction, and has photographed the location of each one.  A total of 647 illegal 
structures was identified.  However, the census has not included demographic and social 
information because MOPC wanted to avoid setting off a speculative surge of new 
occupants.  There are a few locations where there are several businesses clustered in a 
short stretch of highway, but, in general, occupations are spread out at long intervals 
along the highway. Despite the illegality of these structures, MOPC recognizes that many 
of them have been in place for several years and that they are an important source of 
income for the occupants.  MOPC has therefore taken a policy decision, consistent with 
Bank Policy, to displace the absolute minimum necessary number of these structures.  In 
most cases, the displacement will involve simply setting the structure back from the 
highway far enough to allow maintenance works to be conducted or to remove structures 
that pose a safety risk to their occupants or to highway users.  
 
The eligibility criterion adopted by MOPC is either that a structure occupying the right-
of-way is (a) an impediment to maintenance works or (b) presents a safety risk.  Shortly 
after maintenance contracts are let, all occupations along the highway segment covered 
by the contract will be censused and assessed.  Occupants of the highway rights-of-way 
will be formally notified that they are illegally occupying the highway right-of-way and 
Page  8
that their presence does not constitute a commitment by MOPC to allow them to continue 
in place indefinitely.  They will further be notified that any construction of new facilities 
or the consolidation or expansion of existing structures occupying the highway right-of-
way will not be permitted and may be subject to immediate removal by the authorities.  
Entitlements will consist mainly of the provision of building materials, vehicles, and 
construction assistance necessary to set the occupant back further from the highway 
shoulder.  Special provisions will be made for persons judged to be exceptionally 
vulnerable such as elderly persons, single mothers, invalids, etc.  They will be attended to 
by MOPC social workers who will see to it that their special needs are met.  In cases 
where it is logistically impossible to simply set back the business location, the occupant 
may be offered another location along the highway, preferably at a point where the right-
of-way can accommodate the relocated business. For each highway segment included in 
the project a separate Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared.  The Resettlement 
Framework prepared by the MOPC includes a detailed outline for RAPs that includes a 
census of structures, characterization of construction types, demographic census, etc. 
Actual implementation of the resettlement plan will be delegated to contractors selected 
by competitive bidding.  However, the census, special consideration for vulnerable 
people, project monitoring, grievance procedures, and ex post review will be managed by 
MOPC itself.  
 
Finally, as far as indigenous communities are concerned, the MOPC will be the 
governmental agency responsible for the execution of the Indigenous People Plan (IPP) 
designed during project preparation, with respect to the (i) training activities for young 
people and leaders; (ii) construction and equipping activities of the Training Centers; and 
(iii) the inclusion activities for the indigenous communities in the programs for road 
maintenance. The IPP?s Coordination Unit will be part of the Environmental Unit at the 
MOPC, and will use its offices and equipment for its operation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders identified by the social evaluation during project preparation are: 
(a) two groups of beneficiaries with different economical and social assets in a context of 
high levels of rural poverty: a small number of people with the highest assets coexisting 
with a large number of poor people, most of them small farmers, including vulnerable 
groups such as women, children and youth, unemployed,  and indigenous communities; 
(b) a challenging mechanism of institutional arrangements (national and sub-national 
governments) with weak experience and managerial capacities in participatory processes 
within a context of low levels of transparency and accountability; and (c) private 
contractors, who in most cases do not have experience in road conservation activities.  
 
A
Social Participation Framework (EPS) has been set up from the outset of the project, 
to promote a wealth of feasible mechanisms to ensure the active participation of all 
stakeholders, ranging from one-way communication, such as information meetings, to 
joint responsibility in implementation for ensuring continued feedback, social oversight, 
and sustainability of the project. This framework resulted of a series of consultation with 
key stakeholders aimed at ascertaining the local existing experience in similar processes. 
As part of this framework, the project will implement the following measures: (i) 
Page  9
Foreseeing differentiated intervention strategies according to the needs and capabilities of 
the different beneficiary groups; (ii) An institutional strengthening component with 
capacity building and training in all aspects of rural road management at all levels; (iii) 
Strengthening the implementation of the Communication Component of the Participation 
Framework with public awareness campaigns and capacity building according to 
different group of stakeholders? assets and needs; (iv)  Strengthening the implementation 
of the Social Participation Framework that has been set up from the outset of the project 
preparation to enhance public awareness , ensure the participation of most vulnerable 
groups (including women, children and youth, and indigenous communities), and 
increase transparency and accountability  through flow of timely and reliable information 
accessible to all relevant stakeholders. All of these measures will be developed in the 
Operational Manual of the Project.  
 
The Project also includes an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), which was designed with 
the objective of effectively promoting the participation of indigenous peoples in the 
programs of execution of maintenance works in the rural road network, within a 
framework of equality and respect. The IPP identifies the way in which the Project can 
respond to some of the concerns raised by the indigenous peoples located in the 
intervention area. The IPP was designed in collaboration with representatives of the 
indigenous communities, indigenous associations, and non-governmental organizations 
working with indigenous peoples, in the Departments where the Project will be 
implemented, namely the Departments of Caazap?, Caaguaz? and San Pedro. As a result 
of the participation of the indigenous communities in the project, the IPP aims at 
achieving a sustainable improvement of the quality of life of the targeted indigenous 
communities, through the strengthening of the organizational and managerial capacity of 
these communities, and by training their members and generating employment.  
 
Finally, the MOPC also prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the highway 
segments for which maintenance contracts will be implemented during Year I of the 
project and a Resettlement Framework (RF) for subsequent highway segments, which 
was prepared in accordance with OP4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) with assistance from 
the Bank team and consultants.  The RF carefully balances the need to provide adequate 
highway maintenance and safety with the principle of minimizing the amount of 
involuntary resettlement and disruption to peoples? lives. The resettlement affects only 
illegal occupants of the right of way that may affect maintenance works. The idea being 
to avoid stoppages of maintenance works, or situations where the contractors may justly 
require compensation due to obstacles to their activities. The Ministry has backed this 
process with the parallel issuance and dissemination of a Misniterial Rasolution 
reminding all that it is illegal to occupy the right of way. The RF and RAP concern only 
the paved highways because there are no resettlement issues on the unpaved highways 
that would be maintained during the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2006 
 
Page  10
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/07/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/04/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/07/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/04/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/07/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  11
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andres G. Pizarro 
06/07/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
06/07/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez 
06/07/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
06/07/2006 
Comments:   
