Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2605 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/07/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Peru 
Project ID: P101427 
Project Name: PE Low Income Housing 
Task Team Leader: Abhas Kumar Jha 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 12, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Housing construction (40%);Housing finance and real estate markets 
(40%);Micro- and SME finance (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Program Objective: The overarching objective of the proposed Program is to significantly and 
sustainably increase the provision of incremental and finished low-income housing solutions for 
the bottom three quintile income segments in Peru by facilitating access to an integrated package 
of mortgage lending, credit-linked subsidies, mortgage insurance, and urban upgrading.  
 
Specifically, the Program will develop, redesign and launch a program of reforms, subsidies, 
and investments that will have the cumulative effect of increasing the private supply of 
affordable housing solutions for lower-income quintiles C, D, and E. The Program aims to 
leverage this package of instruments and reforms to encourage the sustained 'down market' 
movement of private sector developers, the mortgage banking sector, and microfinance 
institutions to address currently unmet demand for affordable housing.  
 
Project Development Objective (APL 1): The objective of the proposed first Adaptable 
Programmatic Loan (APL) is to facilitate improved access to incremental and finished low-
income housing solutions for income segments C, D, and E through support to existing credit-
Page  2
linked subsidy instruments and related investments. Specifically, the first APL will aim to: (i) 
provide initial support to the Government in areas where investment would have a high impact 
on poverty; (ii) support proven and well-designed instruments and methodologies for the 
delivery of low-income housing; and (iii) facilitate critical technical assistance and analytical 
work that will lay the foundation for sector reforms to be implemented under the second APL 
stage.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Instrument and Program It is proposed that the operation should be structured as a two-stage 
APL over a six to eight year period. The use of a two-stage APL instrument will enable the Bank 
to engage the Government of Peru over a period of time to facilitate both immediate, short-term 
developmental impact and also allow for the time to engage and partner with the Government of 
Peru on deeper medium-term sector reforms and investments. Both stages of the APL will be 
focused around clearly distinguishable short, medium, and longer-term objectives and targets 
with clear policy-related triggers. The two-stage program would incrementally deepen support 
for policy reforms, pilot and mainstream new instruments, and take proven investments in low-
income housing to scale.  
 
The use of an APL instrument is preferred to a traditional Sector Investment Loan (SIL) or 
Development Policy Loan (DPL), given that the APL instrument will enable the Bank to both 
support a series of critical investments and leverage policy reforms through the use of incentive-
oriented triggers over the three phases.  
 
APL 1:3-4 years ($250m): The proposed first stage of the APL would aim to address three key 
short-term objectives: (i) support proven high-poverty-impact interventions; (ii) finance the 
rollout of well-designed subsidy products that address important gaps in the low-income market; 
and (iii) support technical assistance and studies that will help to establish the analytical 
foundations for sector reforms and new product and instrument development. A critical outcome 
of APL I will be to redesign the housing subsidy program focusing on the development of an 
integrated suite of products that could more effectively meet the existing gap in reaching key 
low-income market segments. This reformed system would involve the development of 
integrated housing subsidy-cum-mortgage insurance products including the current CMV, the 
Techo Propio group of instruments, and other related programs. Further detail on the proposed 
content of APL I is provided below.  
 
A
summary depiction of the triggers and indicators for APL-2 may be seen below:  
 
Tentative Triggers for Phase 2  
 
Trigger  
 
1.
Substantial increase in private sector financing of housing in the US$12000-20000 segment.  
 
2.
Constraints to land supply eased  
 
3.
24
new cities ready to enter Mi Barrio Program  
 
Indicators  
 
1.
At least 20, 000 new credits sanctioned in the US$12000-20000 bracket.  
 
2.
Recommendations of land market study adopted by government.  
Page  3
3. Launch of new integrated $8000-20000 subsidy program  
 
4.
Mi Barrio umbrella agreement signed and first 18 months of investments ready to be bid out.  
 
5.
Real estate indicator program operational  
 
6.
Annual auditing (financial and concurrent) of the  
 
project is satisfactory.  
 
APL 2: 4-6 Years ($250m): The second phase of the proposed APL would aim primarily to: (i) 
support the implementation of a series of structural reforms in housing subsidy policy and land 
use management, zoning, and regulation practices; (ii) pilot second generation instruments and 
products (e.g. local currency-denominated mortgage insurance products, housing microfinance, 
financial instruments for low-income land development, etc.); (iii) expand support for urban 
upgrading through support for citywide strategies; and (iv) provide a technical assistance 
window for further studies, analytical work and product development. Under APL II, the 
Government would effectively implement the reformed integrated subsidy program that will be 
redesigned under APL I. The proposed loan would finance these new instruments through a 
combination of liquidity facility and direct investment mechanisms. APL II will also aim to pilot 
and evaluate the performance of a series of 'second generation products' developed under APL I 
with the aim to potentially scale up these instruments in subsequent stages. Lastly, APL II would 
continue to finance the MiBarrio upgrading program, but under a revised citywide strategic 
focus.  
 
Components for APL 1: It is envisioned that the proposed first APL will support three key 
investment and technical assistance components.  
 
Component 1 - Liquidity Facility for FMV ($175m): The component would finance the creation 
of a liquidity facility for FMV to support the rollout of the new FMV product aimed at the 
$10,000 to 20,000 segment of the housing market. Specifically, the facility would support both 
the good payer subsidy (a flat $3,000 upfront subsidy). The World Bank will also provide a 
credit enhancement for the 80 percent refinancing that FMV offers to commercial banks making 
mortgage loans. The liquidity facility could also be used for specific programs aimed to facilitate 
access to construction finance and bridge lending for small and medium-sized developers. In 
structuring the facility consistent with OP/BP 8.30, the team will reflect on lessons from Bank 
experience on the design and management of lines of credit (LOC) as outlined in the recent OED 
review.  
 
Component 2 - MiBarrio Urban Upgrading Program ($70m): The proposed component would 
initially finance a series of upgrading subprojects currently in the MiBarrio pipeline. These 
subprojects would be appraised during preparation and the task team will aim to ensure that a 
transparent eligibility framework was applied in the selection of these investments. Financing for 
this initial sample of subprojects would be accompanied by an extensive learning, monitoring, 
and feedback framework that would inform the redesign of a broader Government program. In 
parallel, the component would finance the preparation of implementation of a second and 
potentially third pool of subprojects that correspond to a redesigned MiBarrio Program. It is 
anticipated that this reformulated program would be organized around a more strategic, citywide 
approach to upgrading and include high quality technical assistance to beneficiaries in design, 
construction, and materials purchase (along the lines of the highly successful Patrimonio Hoy 
Page  4
program run by Cemex in Mexico). An output based aid (OBA) type instrument for subsidizing 
household connections for water and sewage will be piloted in cooperation with the parallel 
World Bank water and sanitation project. During preparation, the task team will evaluate a range 
of possible design options including the use of umbrella agreements with cities, municipalities, 
and/or departments.  
 
The component will finance under APL 1 a package of only basic infrastructure services 
including tertiary water, network sanitation, roads, drainage, public lighting, electricity 
connections and related community infrastructure. The Project will not finance in this first APL 
investments in primary or trunk infrastructure.  
 
Component 3 - Technical Assistance ($5m): The proposed operation will finance a series of 
technical assistance activities and studies that aim to: (i) systematically address underlying gaps 
in knowledge on the microstructure of low-income housing market dynamics in Peru through a 
series of analytical studies; (ii) support the redesign and development of an integrated housing 
subsidy program; (iii) support the development of new 'second generation' products that may be 
piloted in subsequent APL stages; and (iv) facilitate a redesign of the MiBarrio urban upgrading 
program. The component will also finance retroactively, through the use of a PPF, preparation 
activities and critical studies required at or prior to effectiveness.  
 
Much of the Technical Assistance (TA) program will be front-loaded and the recommendations 
of the studies will feed into the actions required for completion of the second phase triggers. Key 
studies and TA that will be financed under the program will include: (i) the development of an 
integrated mortgage insurance product that will be combined with an upfront subsidy; (ii) a 
comprehensive analysis of land markets for low-income housing in Peru identifying the 
bottlenecks in the delivery of appropriate and serviced sites to private, public, non-profit, and 
informal sector providers of urban housing; (iii) a comprehensive CMV risk assessment and 
mitigation strategy; (iv) the development of a comprehensive, reliable, up-to-date, and public 
system of hedonic housing price and real estate indicators that is useful to the private sector, 
regulators, and public sector subsidy providers; (v) the development of construction bridge loans 
and guarantees (along the lines of SHF and SOFOLES in Mexico, and NURCHA in South Africa 
); (vi) an analysis of the rental housing market for low-income households; (vii) a comprehensive 
social impact analysis that will include extensive consultations with stakeholders to optimize the 
impact of the Program on all groups, but with a focus on the most vulnerable; and (vii) new 
instruments and modalities for enhancing the reach of housing microfinance that would include 
the feasibility of a credit-card based publicly supported housing microfinance acquiring platform 
among building material suppliers and small and medium contractors (viii) a strategic 
environmental analysis that will include a preliminary analysis of key gaps in the legal, 
regulatory and institutional framework affecting environmental management of the low-income 
housing sector and key issues affecting sustainable development of the housing and urban 
upgrading program, and  (ix) capacity building for urban planning by local governments 
(including hazard mitigation). The team will work with the Government during preparation to 
further specify the range of TA and analytical work required under APL I.  
 
Eligibility and targeting framework The Project will work with the Government of Peru to 
develop and improve the targeting framework for subsidies in the sector. In particular, the task 
Page  5
team will analyze the current efficiency and precision of targeting procedures for existing 
subsidy products as part of a broader study on the redesign of the integrated subsidy system to be 
completed prior to effectiveness. The study will recommend a series of measures to improve the 
quality of targeting and eligibility procedures for the range subsidy of instruments (e.g. improved 
means-based testing) and these recommendations will be implemented through technical 
assistance under component three of the first APL. Additionally, the Project will establish during 
preparation a transparent eligibility framework for the MiBarrio Program to effectively screen 
cities and barrios based on both need and willingness to participate.  
 
Institutional arrangements The Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanitation (MVCS) will 
serve as the project implementing agency. A project management group will be established under 
the direction of the Vice Minister for Housing and Urbanization. The core project management 
group will include a small number of policy and technical specialists and will rely on 
considerable coordination and co-execution with other key institutions in the sector.  
 
In particular, Component One of the Project will be operated by the Fondo Mi Vivienda 
(FMV), a limited liability company controlled by MVCS and created under the Fondo Nacional 
de Financiamiento de la Actidivad Privada (FONAFE). FMV has a strong track record since its 
establishment in 1999, primarily in the administration and promotion of the first CMV credit-
linked subsidy instrument. Under the Project, FMV would administer the liquidity fund created 
under Component One to facilitate the implementation of a retargeted CMV subsidy and related 
mortgage insurance and construction finance instruments.  
 
Similarly, Component Two will be implemented with the assistance of a technical unit currently 
managing the MiBarrio program. The unit is currently housed within the Banco de Materiales 
(BANMAT). BANMAT has a recent history of poor performance in the implementation of a 
range of lending and investment programs. It is also believed that working with BANMAT may 
also involve important fiduciary risks related to this performance record. The preliminary 
assessment of the task team, however, is that the MiBarrio unit within BANMAT has a solid 
management record and sound technical capacity. During preparation, the task team will evaluate 
with the Government the feasibility and appropriateness of either relocating this technical unit 
directly within the Ministry or as a stand-alone institution linked to the Ministry, along the lines 
of COFOPRI. The latter arrangement may be justified given the proposed expansion in scope of 
the national program over the two-stage APL period. In the event that the MiBarrio unit remains 
within BANMAT, the task team will work closely with the Bank financial management and 
procurement experts to develop transparent, 'ring-fenced' fiduciary arrangements and controls 
with rigorous technical independent review and ex-post supervision mechanisms.  
 
Lastly, Component Three will likely be implemented through the core implementation group 
within MVCS, which will coordinate closely with and involve key sector actors depending on 
the nature of the proposed technical assistance, analytical study, or reform initiative.  
 
Safeguards policy approach. The Bank team has tentatively concluded that the proposed 
operation will trigger Bank safeguard policies for Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Cultural Property (OP 4.11), and Indigenous Peoples (OP 
4.10). Given that the Project will support a broad number of investments in urban areas across 
Page  6
the country, the specific investments of which will not be identified ex-ante, the team proposes to 
develop an Environmental Management Framework (covering OP 4.01), Resettlement Policy 
Framework (covering OP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (covering OP 4.10) 
documents. These management instruments will specify screening procedures to ensure 
subprojects are appropriately designed and sited, provide detailed guidelines on the development 
of environmental, resettlement action and indigenous peoples plans, and outline management and 
mitigation procedures associated with subproject investments. Component two of the Project will 
finance in part a sample of upgrading subprojects already in the MiBarrio Program pipeline. 
Relevant site specific safeguard mitigation plans will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal 
(i.e. environmental assessment, resettlement action plan and indigenous peoples plan).  
 
While not likely, it is possible that Project investments under the first APL will trigger the 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) safeguards policy. The project will mainly be implemented in 
larger urban areas, but it is possible that it will also be implemented in small towns with 
exclusively indigenous populations. The team recognizes that larger urban areas and small towns 
represent different realities with respect to the conditions and nature of potential indigenous 
groups and therefore has decided to trigger OP 4.10. By triggering the policy, the Bank team 
would work with the client to establish an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework that would 
outline screening criteria and management guidelines for consultation and the mitigation of 
adverse impacts in the case that it is established that OP 4.10 is triggered in the context of a 
discrete subproject. It is the task team's understanding that OP 4.10 applies to projects of this 
nature in larger urban areas only where significant and identifiable indigenous communities are 
determined to be located in these areas involuntarily, as defined by the concept of 'forced 
severance'.  
 
The APL approach is designed to achieve social development outcomes. The major purpose of 
the Sectoral Social Assessment (SSA) is to provide operational guidance on developing the 
project design, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation frameworks. An SSA will 
therefore be prepared to examine and support the Borrower's capacity to carry out social analysis 
and to appraise the social impact of each sub-project in the APL series. The SSA will carry out a 
sectoral social analysis of the context and social issues, in this case the Peruvian urban land and 
low- and middle-income housing sectors. It will combine the social analysis with a participatory 
process of stakeholder consultations and involvement.  
 
The project EA will take the form of a Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA), the goal of 
which will be to: (i) analyze environmental policies, institutions, and development plans for the 
Peruvian urban land and housing sector (placing special emphasis on low-income housing), 
identify associated potential environmental effects, and identify necessary measures for 
environmental management and planning, and/or guidelines; (ii) assess the applicability of, and 
propose a framework to ensure compliance with, World Bank Safeguard Policies in the context 
of the proposed project; and (iii) develop terms of reference for a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment to evaluate the environmental issues and options associated with the Government of 
Peru?s (including central and local governments) low-income housing, urban land, and urban 
upgrading programs and policies. The Strategic Environmental Assessment would be conducted 
as part of APL I activities.  
 
Page  7
The Bank team estimates that the first stage of the APL will have only minor environmental 
impacts consistent with a Category B rating.  
 
Collaboration with IFC The task team envisions a close coordination with the IFC under the 
proposed Program, particularly through collaboration in technical assistance and instrument 
development around issues of rental housing and housing microfinance. During preparation, the 
two teams will explore TA collaboration opportunities. The IFC has helped establish 
Titulizadora Peruana_Peru's first secondary mortgage market company. This is an independent, 
multi-function company with the main business objective of acquiring and securitizing high-
quality residential mortgage loans sourced, initially, from the major mortgage originators in the 
Peruvian financial system. The proposed Bank-supported Program would complement 
securitization both through TA that aims to encourage standardization in loan origination and 
more broadly through support to a Soles-denominated CMV product. An additional and 
important area for collaboration with the IFC will be around the municipal administrative 
barriers reduction program being launched nationally. The program aims to simplify a range of 
municipal-level business, construction, and land use permitting and licensing procedures.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Urban areas throughout Peru, with the possible inclusion of some smaller towns.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The existing institutional capacity for environmental and social management is being assessed 
during preparation in the Environmental Assessment and Social Sectoral Assessments. Based on 
the findings of these studies, recommendations will be incorporated into the project design to 
ensure that sufficient safeguard management capacity exists   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project EA will take the form of a Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA). 
Additionally, as part of the SEA, TORs will be developed for a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment, which would be conducted as part of APL I activities. The project's stand-alone EA 
will also include application of the EMF to the first group of subprojects to be processed under 
Component 2, which will be identified prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Adequate screening mechanisms to identify the presence of any natural habitats in subproject 
areas, and measures to ensure compliance with OP 4.04 will be incorporated in the EMF.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Provisions to ensure adequate site screening and chance find procedures in accordance with 
OP 4.11 will be incorporated in the EMF.   
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project will mainly be implemented in larger urban areas but it cannot be excluded that it 
will also be implemented in small towns with indigenous populations. The Bank team would 
work with the borrower to establish an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework that would 
outline screening criteria and management guidelines for consultation and the mitigation of 
adverse impacts in the case that it is established that OP 4.10 is triggered in the context of a 
discrete subproject. Individual Indigenous  
 
Peoples Plans for any subprojects known prior to appraisal which trigger the policy will also 
be completed and disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The resettlement policy is triggered because it is likely that project investments will cause 
impacts on land, property and otherwise impact economic activities. A resettlement policy 
framework will be prepared by the borrower which will provide the necessary guidance for 
mitigating such adverse impacts, i.e. planning, implementing and monitoring of resettlement 
action plans. Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal for any 
investments identified prior to appraisal which would cause involuntary resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/27/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04)and Cultural Property (OP 
4.11): A Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) would be conducted during project 
preparation to examine existing policies, institutions, and development plans for the Peruvian 
urban land and housing sector, identify associated potential environmental effects, and 
identify necessary measures for environmental management and planning, and/or guidelines. 
One key output of this SEA is an Environmental Management Framework that will specify 
screening procedures to ensure subprojects are appropriately designed and sited, provide 
detailed guidelines on the development of environmental management plans, and outline 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
other environmental management and mitigation procedures associated with subproject 
investments. For the purposes of the EMF the definition of "subproject" will include  
 
support for infrastructure investments through two mechanisms: (i) direct or indirect 
financing for the creation or modification of housing areas under Component 1 through  
 
the liquidity facility, and (ii) direct infrastructure investments for urban upgrading (tertiary 
water, network sanitation, roads, drainage, etc.) under Component 2. The EMF  
 
will include the measures needed to reduce environmental impacts under both (i) and (ii). 
Specific provisions will be included to avoid subsidizing or otherwise encouraging the  
 
construction of housing in areas vulnerable to natural disasters. Environmental guidelines 
for contractors, will be included in all bidding documents. Capacity building measures will 
be financed through the project as needed for the agencies responsible for implementing the 
EMF.  
 
Another output of the SEA is terms of reference for a Strategic Environmental Assessment 
to evaluate the environmental issues and options associated with the Government of Peru's 
(including central and local governments) low-income housing, urban land as well as urban 
upgrading programs and policies. The Strategic Environmental Assessment would be 
conducted as part of APL I activities.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10): A Strategic Social 
Assessment will also be conducted as part of APL I activities. It will mainly examine and 
support the Borrowers capacity to carry out social analysis and to appraise the social impact 
of each sub-project in the APL series. The sectoral social analysis will be combined with a 
participatory process of stakeholder consultations and involvement.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared, and disclosed before appraisal, to 
provide the necessary guidance with regard to resettlement and compensation as mitigation 
(Resettlement Action Plans) of land acquisitions, other impact on property and/or economic 
activities. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will also be prepared by the 
borrower, and disclosed before appraisal, in case the project will finance sub-projects in rural 
towns with indigenous populations (Indigenous Peoples Plans will thus be prepared).  
 
TOR's for the Environmental Management Framework, the Resettlement Policy Framework 
and the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework have been prepared and the resulting 
studies will be consulted and disclosed before appraisal.  
 
The Sectoral Social Assessment and Strategic Environmental Assessment will be conducted 
during APL I.   
 
Page  10
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abhas Kumar Jha 
12/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/07/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
