Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/07/2006 
Report No.:  AC2471
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Peru 
Project ID:  P095570 
Project Name:  Peru Decentralized Rural Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 16, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSFT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (50%);General public administration sector (30%);General 
transportation sector (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00 
 
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
50.00
100.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims at improving access of rural households to income generating 
opportunities and to social services, through scaling up to the entire country the 
decentralized rural roads policies that have been successfully developed during the past 
decade and through piloting, in 15 provinces, specific incentives aiming at promoting 
greater complementarities and bundling of rural infrastructure interventions at the 
provincial level.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. Improvement of Rural Transport Infrastructure:  This component will scale up to the 
entire country the decentralized rural roads policies that have been successfully 
developed during the first two rural roads projects (rehabilitation or improvement of rural 
roads prioritized through participatory planning, improvement and re-construction of 
bridges that are critical to ensure connectivity on rehabilitated rural roads, periodic 
maintenance of rural roads, improvement of non-motorized transport (NMT) tracks, 
improvement of other types of rural transport infrastructure and a pilot for the 
stabilization of slopes and the protection of rural roads against river-based erosion).  
Page  2
2. Territorial Development. The objective of this component is to enhance the impact 
that improved transport conditions can make on rural development by enhancing 
complementarities with other types of investments and by promoting productive 
activities. This component will: (1) scale up the Local Development Window (LDW) 
model developed during the second Rural Roads Project; and (2) experiment in 15 
Peruvian provinces a Rural Infrastructure Pilot that will include specific incentives to 
promote greater complementarities across rural infrastructure investments.  
 
3.
Institutional Development. This component will provide a comprehensive 
institutional strengthening package at the local and central levels, in the broader context 
of the decentralization reforms. The main objective is to strengthen the regulatory 
capacity of the national level while empowering municipalities being more inclusive 
(men and women) in the definition and implementation of their rural transport policies. 
At the local level, the main actors targeted will be the provinces which have been 
identified as the right level to both get the benefits of economies of scale and ensure 
accountability to key stakeholders.  
 
4.
Project Administration. This component will cover project administration costs, as 
well as monitoring, evaluation and audits. The Project will be administered by PROVIAS 
DECENTRALIZADO in close coordination with other ministries.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Rural areas in all Peruvian regions. Peru encompasses three different physical 
environment (macro-regions): the coastal areas ("Costa"), the highlands ("Sierra") and the 
tropical forest areas ("Selva"). The most concentrated areas of indigenous peoples 
communities are located in the regions of Apurimac, Ayacucho, Arequipa, Huancavelica, 
Cuzco and Puno.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASEN) 
Ms Maria Elizabeth Dasso (LCSEO) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSEO) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSFT) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with 
this project. In particular, the project does not foresee significant environmental impacts 
that could jeopardize the natural environment of its influential area.  
 
This has been confirmed by the Environment and Social Assessment Report that was 
performed during project preparation on a sample of road rehabilitation works potentially 
eligible for financing under the proposed project: half of the projects in the sample were 
found to present a "moderate social and environmental risk" while the other half 
presented a "low social and environmental risk".  
 
The project was categorized as "category B". This category is justified by the fact that 
the rural road works to be supported under the project would not include any new road 
construction, road paving, or major road upgrading (to a new road standard).  
 
There will be several benefits from the project, including employment generation, easier 
access to social services and to markets, and improvement of the physical environment 
(improved road drainage).  
 
However, some potential and limited negative social and environmental impacts have 
been identified:  
 
-
land aquisition and very limited physical resettlement  
 
-
other impacts on private property  
 
-
air pollution caused by the emission of particles into the atmosphere during the 
execution of road improvement works  
 
-
solid waste produced during the execution of road improvement works  
 
-
noise and/or vibrations from the use of equipment during the execution of road 
improvement works and during the extraction of materials .  
 
-
protected areas may be affected by the execution of works in areas declared under an 
environmental protection regulation  
 
-
impact on zones affected by erosion (less stable slopes)  
 
-
impact on physical and cultural heritage  
 
These potential impacts would be prevented and/or mitigated through the safeguards 
instruments that have been developed and adopted by PROVIAS DECENTRALIZADO 
(in particular, the Environmental and Social Management Framework and the 
Resettlement Policy Framework).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
They include:  
 
-
marginal impacts on indigenous peoples through increased exposure to different 
lifestyles  
Page  4
-
negative changes in the landscape  
 
-
increased pedestrian and road safety risks coming from increased traffic  
 
None of these impacts is potentially major. These potential impacts would be prevented 
and/or mitigated through the safeguards instruments that have been developed and 
adopted by PROVIAS DECENTRALIZADO (in particular, the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework and the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
One alternative for project design could have been to pre-identify road segments to be 
rehabilitated and/or to give the responsibility for such prioritization to central units (eg. 
PROVIAS DECENTRALIZADO).  
 
Instead, building on Peru's decentralization reforms, project design includes the 
establishment of participatory processes for the prioritization by local stakeholders 
themselves of rural roads, NMT tracks and other rural infrastructure investments. This 
empowerment of beneficiaries is expected to improve the overall effectiveness of the 
project in achieving its development objectives, but also be a way to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address all the safeguards issues that were identified at concept stage, the Borrower 
has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework. In addition, 
PROVIAS DECENTRALIZADO performed an environmental and social assessment 
report, based in particular on the analysis of a sample of road rehabilitation works.  
 
Through the Environmental and Social Management Framework, the project would use 
screening criteria to exclude from eligibility any significant road improvements within 
forested or other areas of high environmental sensitivity.  
 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework includes specific procedures 
related to the protection of physical and cultural heritage. In this regards, the national 
legislation is very strict and it requires for all works that a Certificate of Inexistence of 
Archeological remains be prepared.  
 
PROVIAS DECENTRALIZADO (former PROVIAS RURAL) has been successful in 
managing two Bank-financed rural roads projects over the past decade. PROVIAS 
DECENTRALIZADO is a high capacity agency which has developed a high level of 
expertise in all aspects of decentralized rural road management, including for safeguards 
policies. During the implementation of the Second Rural Roads project, a "Plan Piloto 
Selva" has explored implementation options (including river-based transport with the 
construction of two wharfs) in the Selva to benefit native communities and small rural 
Page  5
towns. This has allowed developing a methodology to monitor possible adverse effects of 
rural transport works and take corrective actions.  
 
The institutional capacity to manage social and environmental issues is much less 
developed at the decentralized level (ie. in municipalities and in Provincial Road 
Institutes). Therefore, a plan for the strengthening of the management capacity of those 
issues was prepared and is annexed to the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are poor rural cumminities which are the main users of the rural 
transport system as well as municipal governments and central institutions.  
 
Two vulnerable groups have been given a particular attention during project preparation. 
These are indigenous peoples and women.  
 
To ensure proper consultation and participation of indigenous peoples, an Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework has been prepared. Six Peruvian regions located in the 
Peruvian Sierra (Apurimac, Ayacucho, Arequipa, Huancavelica, Cuzco and Puno) 
concentrate the largest indigenous communities. In these six regions, 2,300 small farmers' 
communities have been registered. These communities are characterized by high levels of 
poverty and a heavy dependence on agriculture. In this context, rural roads are critical so 
that these communities can access social and income-generating opportunities.  
 
Women constitutes a particularly vulnerable group in rural areas since they have to deal 
with a triple struggle: illiteracy, economic discrimination and violence. To address this 
issue, PROVIAS DECENTRALIZADO has set up a specific gender unit and has 
approved a "gender ation plan" to streamline gender in its activities. As a result, 
significant progress could be observed in terms of women participation in the rural roads 
committees, in the Local development Window's initiatives and in the staff of the micro-
enterprises for routine road maintenance. Building on an evaluation of the gender agenda, 
the project will continue implementing these policies, advance women's economic 
empowerment in the project and ensure its proper transfer to decentralized entities (in 
particular to the Provincial Road Institutes).  
 
Regarding consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, a specific workshop was 
organized on February 27, 2006 to present the various safeguards documents prepared by 
PROVIAS DECENTRALIZADO. Various comments and feedbacks were received from 
stakeholders during this workshop that helped improve the content of the documents. 
Final safeguard documents were published in both the country and in the Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/23/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/22/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/23/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/21/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/23/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/21/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable (all above documents were disclosed in country and in the Infoshop)   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  7
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
08/18/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez 
08/22/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
08/21/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Maria Elizabeth Dasso 
08/21/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
