Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2276 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Peru 
Project ID: P095570 
Project Name: Peru Decentralized Rural Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader: Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 1, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
100.00 
 
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
50.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project would aim at increasing the effective and productive use of sustainable rural 
transport services, through scaling up to the entire country the decentralized rural roads policies 
that have been successfully developed during the past decade, and at improving coordination 
with other rural infrastructure interventions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Improvement of Rural Transport Infrastructure (estimated cost: US$109 million 
of which US$37.5 million would be financed by the Bank loan). This component would focus on 
the scaling up to the entire country of the decentralized rural roads policies that have been 
successfully developed during the first two rural roads projects (whose scope was limited to the 
12 poorest ?departamentos?). Activities to be financed would include: (1) rehabilitation or 
improvement of rural roads prioritized through participatory planning; (2) maintenance of rural 
roads (routine, periodic, emergency); (3) improvement and maintenance of non-motorized tracks; 
(4) improvement and maintenance of bridges; and (5) improvement of transport infrastructure 
that are specific to the ?Selva? (including river-based).  
Page  2
Component 2: Territorial Development and Rural Infrastructure Pilot (estimated cost: US$9 
million of which US$4 million would be financed by the Bank loan). This component would (1) 
experiment in about 15 Peruvian provinces the approach proposed by the Peru Rural 
Infrastructure Strategy with the preparation of provincial rural infrastructure plans, (2) 
experiment in these provinces institutional arrangements (provincial infrastructure institutes) in 
order to promote greater complementarities across infrastructure sectors; (3) introduce an 
incentive mechanism that would reward municipalities that would actively participate in the 
pilot; and (4) scale up the local development window model developed during the second Rural 
Roads Project. The objective of this component would thus be to enhance the impact that 
improved transport conditions can make on rural development by enhancing complementarities 
with other types of investments and by promoting the spurring of productive activities in those 
areas where transport conditions have been improved. The Rural Infrastructure Pilot would 
include the preparation of participatory rural infrastructure plans and the design and 
implementation of institutional arrangements that would promote the bundling of infrastructure 
services (in particular the constitution of provincial infrastructure institutes headed by provincial 
infrastructure boards). These plans are expected to leverage financing for rural infrastructure that 
would come from municipalities and sector-specific programs (in particular those supported by 
the Bank in the water/sanitation and rural electrification sectors). A Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) has been signed between PROVIAS RURAL and other central agencies to 
formalize this agreement. The methodology for participatory planning and prioritization of 
infrastructure would build on the experience of the participatory road plans already used in Peru 
and on the territorial development model developed by the Bank in other countries.  Provinces to 
be targeted will cover a diversity of situations, including cases of municipalities with access to 
specific sources of financing (?canon minero?) which would help implement the rural 
infrastructure plans. Municipalities that are actively participating in the pilot in order to improve 
complementarities across rural infrastructure sectors will be rewarded (eg. through a larger 
contribution of the program to finance their rural roads? investments). On the other hand, the 
Local Development Window (LDW) would act as an intermediary so that productive activities 
that become viable with the improvement of transport conditions can get a better access to 
financing. The LDW would intervene in a large number of provinces (chosen among the poorest 
ones).  
 
Component 3: Institutional Development (estimated cost: US$12.0 million of which US$5.0 
million would be financed by the Bank loan).  This component would provide a comprehensive 
institutional strengthening package at both local and central levels, in the broader context of the 
decentralization reforms. At the local level, the focus will be put on participatory planning so 
that infrastructure expenditures (in particular roads) are better aligned with territorial 
development strategies with an adequate participation of key stakeholders (including the poor). 
The key level will be the provinces which have been identified as the right level to both get the 
benefits of economies of scale and ensure accountability to key stakeholders. The technical and 
regulatory capacity of provincial road institutes will also be developed, with emphasis on the 
sustainability and efficiency of road interventions, but also on the regulation of transport 
activities. Technical assistance will be made available to scale up and strengthen the road 
maintenance model which has proved efficient to both ensure the sustainability of road 
investments and strengthen the entrepreneurial capacity of the micro-enterprises (which have 
Page  3
created employment opportunities for the rural poor). At the national level, focus will be put on 
regulation, preparation of national rural transport policies, monitoring and evaluation, and on 
providing institutional support to municipalities. The component will also finance the definition 
of a sustainable fiscal framework for rural transport and rural infrastructure at the national and 
decentralized levels (eg. use of transfers, possible mobilization of private financing, indirect 
impact of transport investments on national and local tax revenues).  
 
Component 4: Project Administration (estimated cost: US$20 million of which US$3.5 million 
would be financed by the Bank loan). This component will cover project administration costs, as 
well as monitoring and evaluation. Project will be administered by Provias Rural in close 
coordination with other ministries.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rural areas in all Peruvian regions.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Project implementation agency (PROVIAS Rural) has been succesfully managing two Bank-
financed rural roads projects over the past decade. PROVIAS Rural is a high capacity agency 
which has developed a high level of expertise in all aspects of decentralized rural road 
management, including for safeguards policies. During the implementation of the Second Rural 
Roads project, a "Plan Piloto Selva" has explored implementation options (including river-based 
transport with the construction of two wharfs) in the Selva to benefit native communities and 
small rural towns. This has allowed developing a methodology to monitor possible adverse 
effects of rural transport works and take corrective actions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSEO) 
Ms Maria Elizabeth Dasso (LCCPE) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSFW) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project does not foresee significant environmental impacts that could jeopardize the 
natural environment of its influential area. Following the Operational Policy [OP 4.01], the 
project would be "Category B". This category is justified by the fact that the rural road works to 
be supported under the project would not include any new road construction, road paving, or 
major road upgrading (to a new road standard). While the project plans to focus largely on road 
rehabilitation (restoration of pre-existing conditions), it would most likely also support some 
significant road improvements (within the existing road standards). However, the project would 
use screening criteria to exclude from eligibility any significant road improvements within 
forested or other areas of high environmental sensitivity.  
 
The Environmental Assessment Policy for Category B projects is therefore applicable to 
define the environmental studies that will have to be performed prior to the investments 
(Environmental Assessment Report and Environmental and Social Management Framework).   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Chance Find Procedures will be included in the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Because this is a national project subject to the demand of the municipalities, we shall not 
know before appraisal where the project will be implemented and therefore cannot anticipate if 
Indigenous Peoples will be affected by project activities. An Indigenous Peoples Framework is 
being prepared by the borrower to address potential impacts on Indigenous Peoples.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Since the project only involves the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, no significant 
resettlement is expected. To address potential cases, a resettlement framework is being prepared 
by the borrower.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard-related studies include:  
 
-
Environmental and Social Management Framework  
 
-
Environmental Assessment Report that include the environmental evaluation of the first 
package of works  
 
-
indigenous peoples framework  
 
-
resettlement framework  
 
All these studies are currently available under draft format and are expected to be finalized 
by June 30, 2006.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
03/30/2006 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/01/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
06/01/2006 
Comments:   
