Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2788 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/09/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Peru 
Project ID: P104760 
Project Name: Peru Irrigation Subsector in the Sierra and Water Resources Management 
Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader: Douglas C. Olson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 17, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 11, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (35%);Agricultural extension and research (5%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
27.00 
 Local 
Farmer 
Organizations 
5.00
32.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project PDOs are (a) to improve farmers' incomes in the Sierra through increasing the 
production and improving the commercialization of higher-value crops for internal markets and 
exports and (b) improve overall WRM in the country and in selected river basins.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of US$30 million over a 
five-year period.  The overall project cost is estimated at US$ 62 million.  
 
Component 1:  Increasing irrigation performance in the Sierra (US$ 37.3 million) would be 
implemented in priority irrigation districts  selected based on the following criteria: (a) existing 
or potential production of cash crops for exports; (b) good road access to markets and (c) WUOs 
capacity above a certain level.The component would follow a demand-driven and participatory 
approach in which farmers groups participate in sub-project design, financing, execution and 
Page  2
supervision and are fully responsible for O&M. Cost-effectiveness principles would guide the 
selection of alternative sub-projects design and unit cost ceilings would be established in order to 
reach a large number of beneficiaries.  The project would follow an integrated approach to 
irrigation improvement including support to modernize irrigation infrastructure, formalize water 
rights, improve agricultural practices and the commercialization of agricultural produce.  
 
Sub-component A:  Modernization and Rehabilitation of Irrigation Systems (US$10 million) 
would include the feasibility studies, execution and supervision of: (a) works aimed at increasing 
water availability or improving the timing of water delivery such as canal lining and small water 
regulation structures.  Selection criteria and cost-sharing arrangements between water users, the 
project and local governments would be defined during project preparation and (b) measuring 
devices at the head of hydraulic sector defined in relation with water user right formalized under 
sub-component D.  
 
Sub-component B:  On-farm irrigation improvement (US$12.7 million) would finance the 
feasibility studies, execution and supervision of on-farm irrigation improvements for the 
production of higher-value crops.  Eligibility criteria and cost-sharing arrangements between the 
project, water users and local governments will be defined during project preparation.  
 
Sub-component C:  Institutional strengthening and support to production and marketing 
(US$8.6 million) would finance (a) capacity building of WUOs, including training in the 
technical, financial and administrative aspects of irrigation management, and the provision of 
office equipment; (b) awareness campaigns on the benefits of on-farm irrigation improvements 
to stimulate farmers demand and local governments support and (c) support to agricultural 
production and marketing in order to reap the full benefits of irrigation investments through the 
promotion of interactions between farmers groups benefiting from component B and: (i) various 
public and private programs providing extension services and technical assistance related to 
irrigation management and agricultural practices; and (ii) processing, marketing and exporting 
firms.  The project would provide extension services and technical assistance in areas where 
there is no existing program to do so.  
 
Sub-component D.  Formalization of Water Rights (US$ 6 million) would finance the 
formalization of water rights in the valleys where components A and B are being implemented 
and their integration into the existing national water rights registry (RADA).  
 
Component 2:  Water Resources Management Modernization (US$ 20.0 million)  
 
Sub-component E.  Improving WRM in selected river basins (US$ 5.7 million) would include 
(a) the formulation of preliminary IWRM plans in priority river basins ; and (b) IWRM pilots in 
two of the priority river basins supporting (i) the establishment and operation of a river basin 
water organization, and (ii) the implementation of management activities and physical 
investments defined in the IWRM plan (i.e. river basin hydrometric system improvement, 
equipment and model to strengthen river basin water quality monitoring and control system, 
small emergency works).  
 
Sub-component F.  Strengthening the national WR information system (US$5.7 million) 
including (a) real-time information system design and implementation and (b) selective 
rehabilitation and modernization of hydro-climatologic equipment in selected river basins.  
Page  3
Sub-component G. Strengthening Water Quality Monitoring Systems in priority river basins . 
(US$ 2.8 million)  
 
Sub-component H. Capacity building in IWRM (US$ 3.4 million) of key staff of institutions 
involved in WRM including IRH, regional governments and river basin organizations.  
 
Sub-component I.  "Cultura de Agua" (US$ 2.4 million) would finance awareness campaigns 
on the need to better manage water resources.  
 
Component 3: Project implementation support (US$ 6.3 million) would finance the 
administration, monitoring and evaluation and auditing of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Sierra Irrigation Component would be implemented in priority irrigation districts (IDs) 
selected based on the following criteria: (a) existing or potential production of cash crops for 
exports; (b) good road access to markets and (c) a Water Users Organization(WUO) with a 
managing capacity above a minimum level to be defined.  Accordingly, 18 IDs were tentatively 
selected during the identification mission, covering an area of 315,000 ha and including 210,000 
water users. The 18 IDs are: Huancabamba, Mashcon, Chonta, Cajabamba, Huamachuco, 
Callejon de Huaylas, Mantaro, Tarma, Chivay, Ayacucho, Abancay, Andahuaylas, Pasco, 
Sicuani, La convencion, Juliaca, Hauancan and Ramis.  
 
The main social issues in the 18 IDs are related to the fact that: (i)those are areas of post 
conflict: families victims of the armed violence in the Andes are in the process of building their 
social capital and social organizations; (ii) areas of coca leaves plantations that deals with 
cocaine producers; (iii) areas with high rates of women as head of households that are 
responsible for taking care of the farm, their children and their elderly relatives; (iv) areas with a 
high level of poverty and low level of education. The social assessment to be conducted during 
project preparation will provide useful recommendations on how to handle these issues.  
 
On the environmental standpoint, irrigation in the project area is usually characterized by low 
water use efficiency due to the wide use of unimproved irrigation technology, deteriorating 
infrastructure due to poor operation and maintenance and inadequate water pricing. Productivity 
is low because irrigated areas in the Sierra are mainly used for the production of low-value crops, 
mostly for self-consumption and yields are low. Excessive use and unsafe handling of pesticides 
is also a problem in some areas. Soil degradation including soil erosion and nutrient depletion 
affects some areas, especially the ones located on the slopes of the mountains. Increasing water 
scarcity is a problem, resulting in water conflicts in some of the areas.  
 
The Water Resources Management Component would cover the entire country (Sub-
components: F, G, H and I) and prioritized River Basins based on the intensity of WRM issues, 
such as water conflicts and water quality deterioration, and their socio-economic importance in 
the country (sub-component E and G).  The tentative area of intervention for sub-component E 
covers 10 prioritized river basins: Puyango-Tumbes, Chira-Piura, Chancay-Lambayeque, 
Jequetepeque, Santa, Ica, Chili y Moquegua-Tambo, Tacna-Puno and Rimac-Chillon-Mantaro.  
The tentavive area for Sub-component G covers the river basins of Moche, Santa, Moquegua-
Tambo and Chili.  
 
Page  4
Customary law and traditional water management is still alive in some of the communities of 
the project areas. The project will learn from them, and adapt operations to upgrade successful 
practices and mitigate any possible social conflict. The social assessment will provide 
recommendations on these matters.  
 
Peru faces increasing water shortages.  Irrigation accounts for 80% of water use, but efficiency 
is low.  The Peruvian piedmont and coastline are prone to devastating floods and mud-floods 
mainly due to the high precipitation on degraded upper basins; while the southern part of the 
country is particularly prone to droughts.  Water quality is deteriorating due to the release of 
untreated effluents from mining, industries, municipalities and agriculture.  The legal and 
institutional framework for WRM does not recognize the multi-sectoral nature of water nor that 
it is an economic good.  It is characterized by poor policy coordination and overlapping 
responsibilities.  It suffers from overly centralized decision-making and weak accountability and 
transparency. Although seven autonomous River Basin Authorities have been set up under the 
MOA, they do not function well.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower's institutional capaccity for Safeguard policies is considered adequate. The 
implementation agency (PSI) has already developed and implemented for PSI-II (on-going 
project) an environmental management plan, a pest management plan, an indigenous people 
planning framework and an environmental assessment for project extension in the Sierra. 
Furthermore, following the recommendations of the pest management mission in April 2005, a 
training of key staff of the implementing agency is foreseen in the area of integrated pest 
management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
Ms Maria Elizabeth Dasso (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has been classified as "category B" because it is not expected that any sub-
projects will be classified as category A due to their size or expected impacts.  The works 
undertaken as part of sub-component A, B and E are small in scale. They would consist of 
community work for the rehabilitation and modernization of existing irrigation schemes, the 
rehabilitation and construction of small dams and small-scale emergency civil works in the case 
of sub-component E.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
This policy is triggered by sub-component A and B. Most protected areas in the Sierra 
regions are located high in the mountains. Hence, while the area of the 18 IDs selected are most 
certainly not located in protected areas, it is possible however that small dams to be rehabilitated 
or constructed upstream will be located in natural protected areas. In addition, it is important to 
maintain (or improve) the current natural condition of aquatic habitats/ecosystems (including 
minimum instream flows) which are the source of irrigation water, or the recipients of water 
discharged
from irrigated areas.  Given that the 18 potential Irrigation Districts are pre
-
identified, 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the project EA will identify the locations and types of natural habitats in these districts, with a 
particular focus on any critical natural habitats, and assess how they may be affected by project 
actitivities.  The project's negative list will exclude from project financing any subproject which 
could lead to significant degradation or loss of any critical natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
This policy is triggered because on-farm irrigation improvement (component B) on an 
estimated 4,500 ha should lead to an intensification of agricultural production by shifting from 
low-value crops to higher value crops for exports, which could lead to increased use of 
pesticides. A PMP will be developed building upong the one prepared for PSI II project and 
adapting/enhancing it as necessary to cover the PMP issues and capacity building needs of the 
beneficiaries of this project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
This policy is triggered by sub-component A, B and E. Given the prevalence of 
archeologically and culturally significant sites and artifacts in the Sierra region, in addition to 
including "chance findings", initial screening of proposed subprojects will include an explicit 
screening for any known physical cultural resources in the subproject area.  The EMP will 
provide for appropriate measures to be taken to protect such resources when identified.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
This policy is triggered by sub-components A,B,C and D because these components will 
have a direct impact on indigenous people whose concentration is high in the Sierra.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy was triggered to address potential involuntary resettlement, rather than excluding 
potential sub-projects that would involve resettlement.  A resettllement framework will be 
prepared by the project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
This policy is triggered by sub-components A and B because: (a)some of the irrigated areas 
that will be improved depend on dams for their water supply and (b)some sub-projects may 
include the construction or rehabilitation of small dams. For new small dams, the EMP will 
incorporate generic dam safety measures designed by qualified engineers; for existing dams, 
provisions for conducting dam safety reviews by independant dam safety specialists should be 
included. An indigenous peoples planning framework will be developed for the overall project, 
since both indigenous and non-indigenous are likely to benefit from the project.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/22/2007 
 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It is expected that the safeguard-related studies will be completed by June 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Douglas C. Olson 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
