Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/12/2006 
Report No.:  AC2458
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P089082 
Project Name:  PH-GEF-Manila Third Sewerage Project 
Task Team Leader:  Luiz Claudio Martins Tava 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (50%);Sewerage (50%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
84.46
84.46 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The GEF-Manila Third Sewerage Project (GEF) development objectives are to assist the 
GOP in the Project Areas in: (a) identifying essential adjustments to administrative, 
institutional, and regulatory practices and existing legislations in order to attract private 
investments in the Recipient?s wastewater sector; (b) increasing the effectiveness of the 
agencies responsible for water pollution control through improved coordination; and (c) 
promoting innovative, simple and effective wastewater treatment techniques.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is a complement of the on-going Manila Third Sewerage Project approved by 
the Bank in 2006.  The GEF project components 1 through 4 aim at identification of 
impediments to cooperation among sector agencies, and to non-conventional investments 
in sewerage and sanitation; components 5 and 6 would assist MWSS in pursuing higher 
investments in sewerage and sanitation by its concessionaires and in experimenting 
suitable technology for disposing of septage.  Component 7 is technical assistance for 
project management, monitoring, evaluation and dissemination.  A detailed project 
description is in Annex 4 of the Project Appraisal Document.     The summary is as 
follows:  
Page  2
Component 1: Partnership strengthening (US$1.00 million)  
 
The component would:  (a) strengthen partnerships among the Recipient?s agencies 
responsible for water pollution control to improve coordination and effectiveness, 
through carrying out studies of successful pollution control and wastewater management 
partnership models worldwide, and identifying and carrying out measures for improving 
existing administrative, institutional, and regulatory practices; (b) establish an integrated 
partnership information center in DENR to consolidate existing data concerning the 
wastewater sector which would then be disseminated to stakeholders in said sector; (c) 
integrate water quality monitoring systems of the Recipient?s agencies responsible for 
water pollution control; and (d) expand the public assessment of water services to include 
sewerage and sanitation services.  
 
Component 2: Planning and Policy Development (US$0.50 million)  
 
This component would (a) update the sewerage and sanitation master plans and 
applicable standards for MWSS? jurisdiction areas; (b) refine policies, procedures, and 
guidelines for regulating the providers of septic tank desludging service; and (c) develop 
procedures and standards for implementing the Recipient?s Clean Water Act and the 
Sanitation Code.  
 
Component 3: Innovative financing (US$0.50 million)  
 
This component would help the government in developing and testing innovative 
financing arrangements for the sewerage and sanitation sector to attract private sector 
investment in the sewerage and sanitation sector, including provision for technical 
assistance.  
 
Component 4: Use of market-based incentives (US$0.10 million)  
 
This component would assist the LLDA in improving its environmental user fees 
systems and implementing market-based incentives in such systems through provision of 
technical assistance.  
 
Component 5: Rate rebasing (US$0.60 million)  
 
The component would provide technical assistance and training to MWSS and the 
Recipient?s relevant government agencies for the preparation and negotiations of 
2007/2008 rate rebasing in the water and wastewater sector.  
 
Component 6: Joint sewage and septage treatment plant (US$4.65 million)  
 
This pilot would upgrade a selected sewage treatment plant in Quezon City to a 
combined septage and sewage treatment plant, including the first year trial operation of 
the combined septage and sewage treatment plant.  
 
Component 7: Project management (US$1.00 million)  
 
This component would provide technical assistance and operating support to assist 
DENR in implementing, coordinating, monitoring, evaluating, and supervising the 
Project and disseminating the Project?s results and outcomes.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the Laguna de Bay-Pasig River-Manila Bay watershed area 
which is in and near Metro Manila.  Sewage in these areas drain to rivers and other 
tributaries causing severe pollution and degrading the water resources of the watershed.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The MTSP GEF will have an overall positive impact on the environment by attracting 
additional investments to reduce environmental and health risks attributed to wastewater 
and polluted surface water exposure.  The Project goals of aligning concessionaires? 
performance targets to environmental goals, forging partnerships and cooperation among 
different agencies/entities involved in sewerage management and sanitation and 
broadening the spectrum of available finance for pollution reduction will strengthen the 
framework for financing long-term environmental protection of the area.  
 
The project is largely comprised of technical assistance and contains one component 
that will finance the civil works to rehabilitate and upgrade a sewage treatment plant to a 
combined septage and sewage treatment plant.  The project triggers the Environmental 
Assessment policy because of the environmental issues associated with this component. 
The resettlement and IP policies are not triggered as there is no acquisition of land or 
economic resettlement and the area does not contain indigenous groups.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is specifically designed to support environmentally sustainable regional 
development through identification and removal of institutional, economic and technical 
barriers toward investment in reducing pollution that reaches the South China Sea 
Page  4
through the Manila Bay.  The anticipated long term and indirect impacts are thus 
expected to be related to reduction of pollution and thus be environmentally positive.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project was designed with environmental enhancement in mind and thus the 
alternatives considered all had environmental benefits.  Some of the key alternatives 
considered were:  
 
No project alternative: In the no project alternative, environmental degradation will be 
higher as investments in sewerage and treatment will be of lower standard, and use less 
effective planning with limited consideration of environmental hotspots. Additionally, 
investments in treatment systems will be fewer or completed at a slower rate due to lack 
of understanding of the benefits of the combined septage and sewage treatment system 
and innovative financial mechanisms.  
 
Focus of rate rebasing technical assistance:  The project will support capacity building 
and training for the upcoming negotiation of the rate rebasing exercise.  Rather than 
adopting the ongoing approach to sewerage and sanitation, the project will pursue an 
alternative that specifically supports several measures that would improve the 
environmental performance of the concessionaires through investments in sewerage and 
sanitation.  These include improving the tariff structure to support scaling up investment 
in sewerage and sanitation and ensuring investment is prioritized in key hotspots which 
will be identified during implementation based on environmental impact and 
performance.  
 
Technology for demonstration:  Alternatives for sludge disposal and use as well as 
alternative treatment technologies were considered in the demonstration pilot during the 
preparation of the Manila Third Sewerage Project.  Specifically, the disposal of treated 
septage in the lahar area was chosen over other options including the ocean dumping of 
the septage which underwent a trial during the Manila Second Sewerage Project but was 
less desirable due to the lack of public support.  Alternative technologies for treatment 
were also considered and the use of a combined septage/sewage treatment plant was 
chosen as it provides an opportunity to demonstrate a low cost solution that could utilize 
the close to 20 non-functional small scale sewage treatment plants in Manila to treat 
sewage and septage the cities septic tanks.  The technology also provides additional 
treatment that would reduce the amount of septage sludge that would need to be disposed 
or used as soil conditioner.  
 
Site of the demonstration plant:  Two sites from MWCI and five sites from MWSI were 
considered for the proposed prototype sewage-septage treatment plant under Component 
6.  The site was selected due to a number of advantages from a technical perspective and 
also due to the following environmental/social issues:  (i) the wastewater currently 
pollutes Culiat Creek; (ii) it is close to the source of septage and thus reduces the length 
of time for travel and potential traffic disruptions; (iii) the site area is relatively small; 
Page  5
(iv) there are no informal settlers on the site; and (v) there are significant numbers of 
septic tanks in adjacent areas to draw septage.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project impacts are related to Component 6 including the construction and operation 
of the treatment plant and the collection of and transport of the sludge.  They are shown 
below along with their mitigation measures.  
 
Impact:  
 
Construction of treatment facility  
 
Minimal erosion from site preparation and spoil management  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Dry season construction activities, spoil management plan.  
 
Impact:  
 
Demolition and construction wastes  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Proper recycling and disposal including asbestos wastes as they are encountered.  
 
Impact:  
 
Safety of workers and pedestrians.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Protective equipment, fencing of areas, safety nets to prevent falling debris.  
 
Impact:  
 
Traffic congestion.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Hauling of debris in non-rush hour.  Assign workers to direct traffic.  
 
Impact:  
 
Dust from construction site activities.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Regular watering in affected areas.  
 
Impact:  
 
Noise  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Use of new and well-maintained earthmoving equipment.  
 
Impact:  
 
Waste management from construction workers.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Sanitation facilities and proper waste collection and disposal.  
 
Impact:  
Page  6
Local flooding  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Provision of adequate drainage system.  
 
Operation of treatment facility  
 
Impact:  
 
Wastewater effluent  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Meet treatment and effluent standards.  
 
Impact:  
 
Air emissions from generator and odor from treatment plant operation.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Operation and maintenance of generator. Use of odor control system.  
 
Impact:  
 
Noise Pollution  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Good foundation design and enclosures.  
 
Impact:  
 
Solid waste from facility.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Treatment of wastewater in facility and proper waste collection and disposal.  
 
Impact:  
 
Flooding impacting area and building.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Drainage system and good building design.  
 
Impact:  
 
Health and safety for residents and visitors.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Design of building and safety equipment.  
 
Impact:  
 
Management of sludge produced.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Will be used as a soil conditioner in lahar area.  
 
Collection and transport of sludge  
 
Impact:  
 
Spillage and cleaning of vehicles and septage collection equipment  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Regular maintenance and management of equipment, plant and of vehicles  
Page  7
Impact:  
 
Air quality and odor from vehicles.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Regular maintenance and cleaning of vehicles.  
 
Impact:  
 
Traffic and congestion.  
 
Mitigation Measure:  
 
Assign workers to direct traffic, traffic plan and ensuring sufficient parking area for 
operational vehicles at plant site.  
 
The costs of mitigating construction impacts will be included in the costs of facilities. 
Other mitigating and monitoring costs (odor, noise, workers health, site safety and 
hygiene) will be borne by MWSI.  
 
In addition to the environmental assessment undertaken for the civil works, the project 
took a regional approach to environmental enhancement based on work done during 
preparation of the Manila Third Sewerage project and the associated Regional 
Environmental Assessment.  Some of the key regional issues identified through this 
process and addressed through project design are: (i) wastewater is politically and 
socially much less of a priority than water supply and therefore needs specific incentives 
and efforts to increase public awareness; (ii) financing mechanisms for sewerage and 
sanitation are limited and innovative financing mechanisms are thus necessary; (iii) 
monitoring compliance with laws and institutional coordination are limiting investment in 
and maintenance of sewage and septage management systems; and, (iv) standards and 
accreditation for septage tank desludging service providers are needed to improve the 
quality and availability of this service and reduce the environmental impacts of illegal 
disposal practices.  
 
Implementation arrangements: The MWSI would be primarily responsible for 
compliance with the environmental safeguards of Component 6 by securing proper 
implementation of the ECC and EMP.  Implementation of the environmental 
management plan during construction will be undertaken by the construction contractor 
as an obligation under their contract.  
 
Institutional Responsibilities:  The Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
(DENR) Foreign Assisted Project Office as the implementing agency of the Grant, shall 
be responsible for ensuring the completeness and accuracy of all GEF MTSP 
environmental reports to be submitted to the Bank.  DENR, through its 
environmental/social unit, will perform an oversight function to ensure that 
environmental covenants in the Grant Agreement are complied with and that the EMP is 
properly incorporated into the contracts used to implement Component 6 of the project.  
 
EA approval: The IEE and EMP for the STP/ SpTP have been approved by DENR.  
 
Page  8
Monitoring, auditing and reporting:  Monitoring, auditing and reporting procedures 
related to the EA implementation, covering both biophysical and socio-economic 
parameters, are described in the EMP.  
 
Monitoring arrangements include:  
 
Internal monitoring:  MWSI?s site managers, wastewater project development team, 
plant managers and Pollution Control Officer (PCO) will be responsible for the 
monitoring and oversight of the EMP including oversight of associated obligations of the 
construction contractor.  
 
External monitoring: An external auditor will be hired to serve as a third party 
monitoring unit during project implementation. The auditor will check MWSI?s 
compliance with the EMP.  
 
Reporting:  MWSI will provide a monitoring report to DENR, copied to the World 
Bank.  The World Bank supervision missions will summarize the status of compliance.  
 
Implementation completion report: As part of the monitoring/impact assessment to be 
done at the end of the project, the World Bank will work with DENR, LLDA, MWSS, 
MWSI and other project participates to evaluate the effectiveness and implementation of 
the EMP. The evaluation will be attached to the final report on the project and lessons 
learned will be incorporated into the EMP and EA process for future projects, as 
appropriate.  
 
Capacity to implement safeguards: DENR, MWSS and LLDA have extensive 
experience in the preparation and implementation of similar World Bank projects.  
Through the implementation of the ongoing various investment projects such as the Land 
Administration Management Project 1, Laguna de Bay Institutional Strengthening and 
Community Participation Project and the Mindanao Rural Dev., Project- GEF Coastal 
Marine Biodiversity component; and various technical assistance projects funded by trust 
funds such as the Montreal Protocol Ozone depleting substances phase-out project and 
the Capacity building on Persistent Organic substances, the DENR has developed 
effective working procedures for coordinating investment activities.  Also MWSI has 
extensive experience with Bank procedures, as this project is a follow-up to the MSSP 
and MTSP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The proposed project has strong support from the residents and government authorities at 
the national and local levels with strong commitment.  Several public consultations, 
including residents, were done during the EA work.  The following approaches were 
taken for public consultation:  (a) consultation meetings with local residents, 
communities, local government representatives, and (b) questionnaire analysis of public 
opinion supplemented by interviews.  
 
Page  9
The environmental documents prepared by MWSI were publicly disclosed on March 17, 
2006 at the InfoShop in Washington and in the Knowledge Development Center of the 
World Bank Manila Office.  Project related information and the EA documentations were 
also disclosed in the project area during public consultation processes and to the general 
public from March to August, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
11/28/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz 
11/29/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
11/30/2006 
Comments:   
