Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2993 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/03/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P101076 
Project Name: PH - CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION 
Task Team Leader: Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
GEF Focal Area: Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Sub-national government 
administration (35%);Flood protection (15%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Other environment and natural resources management 
(S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The key objective of the proposed Philippines: Climate Change Adaptation Project is to develop 
and demonstrate the systematic diagnosis of climate-related problems and the design of cost-
effective adaptation measures, while integrating climate risk awareness and responsiveness into 
economic and operational planning, particularly in agriculture and natural resources 
management. The project would aim to reduce the negative impacts of the increasing risks due to 
climate change on poverty alleviation and economic development, particularly in agriculture and 
natural resources management, and through enhanced interagency coordination with respect to 
climate change adaptation and natural hazard risk management.  The proposed project, which is 
envisaged as the first phase of a long-term adaptation program by the Government of the 
Philippines, is expected to have the following four building blocks: (i) improve coordination of 
adaptation policy by DENR; (ii) implement climate risk reduction in key productive sectors; (iii) 
strengthen proactive disaster management within the NDCC; and (iv) enhance provision of 
scientific information for climate risk management.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The components are designed to address new climate risks in specific productive sectors as well 
as generate benefits by alleviating barriers to development caused by the effects of climate 
change. Although the activities to enhance climate risk management in these sectors may 
generate some global benefits (for instance in relation to natural resources management of 
valua
ble ecosystems), the benefits of the proposed project’s activities will primarily be local, for 
instance in agriculture or water resources.  
 
Component 1: Adaptation policy and institutions:  Component 1 would aim to improve 
coordination of adaptation policy by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
(DENR).  GEF support would be used to revisit the institutional arrangements for climate 
change, including: (i) strengthening the IACCC’s work on adaptation; and (ii) reviewing the 
institutional arrangements for climate change adaptation within DENR.  
 
Component 2: Implement climate risk management in key productive sectors to make 
investment activities more resilient to climate risks by incorporating appropriate climate risk 
management in the activities’ design and implementation.  The component would finance the 
following activities: (i) review of current practices and institutional arrangements for the use of 
climate risk information within DA, NIA, and DENR; (ii) enhancement of climate risk 
management in the context of the specific activities and investments within these departments, in 
order to build experience, demonstrate the value of climate risk management, and generate best 
practices.  
 
Component 3: Strengthen proactive disaster risk management within the National Disaster 
Coordinating Council (NDCC). The component would support the: (i) enhancement of NDCC’s 
capacity in disaster risk reduction; and (ii) incorporate climate change in NDCC risk analyses 
used for disaster risk reduction, particularly at the regional and local government levels.  
 
Component 4: Enhance provision of scientific information for climate risk management. The 
component would: (i) strengthen PAGASA’s capacity to deliver appropriate climate information 
products to various end users;  (ii) include climate risk information in a standardized hazard and 
risk mapping system; (iii) build on existing capacity in non-governmental scientific institutes, 
including at University of the Philippines and the Manila Observatory; and (iv) strengthen the 
weather insurance institutional and operational aspects.  
 
Component 5: Program Management and Support.  This component would support project 
management and coordination of implementation activities. Examples of activities to be financed 
are: (i) the key sectoral departments involved and the IACCC, with assistance from NEDA, 
would organize close monitoring and evaluation of applications of climate risk management, in 
order to extract best practices and lessons learned; share tools and methodologies; and 
particularly to demonstrate the costs and benefits of climate risk management; and (ii) relevant 
information would be made accessible in a national virtual knowledge base on climate risk 
management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
Country wide coverage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project's coordinating agency, the DENR, is the primary agency with the mandate to review 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) studies for any investment operations that fall within the 
purview of the Philippine EIA system. The EIA study and review is a requirement for the 
issuance of environmental compliance certificates (ECCs) by the DENR to any investment 
operations prior construction or implementation. The EIA system has been in existence for more 
than two decades and there have been several previous efforts to improve its implementation 
and, as such, the Central and Regional Offices of the DENR have substantially improved their 
capacity to review project impacts and ensure that these are addressed in the design and 
investment implementation. The DENR has offices at the Regional, Provincial and Municipal 
levels that could handle environment concerns of subprojects. Moreover, DENR has 
led/facilitated the establishment of multi-stakeholder structures to deal with environmental 
management (as in the case of PAMBs in protected areas) and environmental monitoring (as in 
the case of multi-partite monitoring teams for environmentally critical projects).  
 
The Department of Agriculture and its attached agency, NIA have past experience with 
executing Bank assisted projects, and it is expected that with the guidance of the DENR, there 
would be adequate capacity to carry out required actions.  The other participating agencies, 
NAMRIA, PAGASA and the NDCC will not be carrying out any works as would be the case of 
the DENR/DA/NIA, although the impact of the activities they may be supporting would be 
assessed during project preparation.  
 
Furthermore, the recently prepared Environment and Natural Resources Management Project 
(ENRMP) will be supporting the DENR to address the several core problems that remain, in 
particular with regards to environmental performance monitoring and evaluation, effectiveness 
of reach of the EIS system, uneven application of existing screening criteria and technical 
specifications to subproject selection and design, and time-cost effectiveness of processes.  This 
should further increase DENR's institutional capacity for safeguard policies implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASRE) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Almost all project activities are considered “soft” (policy issuances, institutional 
arrangements, building and strengthening capacity),  with the exception the activities linked to 
climate proofing of small scale infrastructure, implementation of NRM activities and activities 
that relate to changing cropping patterns to take into account changing climate.  All of these are 
small in scale with temporary and localized negative impacts.  
 
Environmental guidelines will be formulated to ensure that negative impacts, if any, of the 
climate proofing activities and implementation of the NRM activities are addressed and that their 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
positive impacts are maximized.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Although there is presently no evidence that there will be any effects on the natural habitats, 
this issue will be reviewed during project preparation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The implementation of climate sensitive NRM action plans may affect forested areas and/or 
forest dwellers dependent on forest and forest products for their subsistence. The project 
environmental guidelines will ensure that these are seriously considered and addressed in the 
design and implementation of the action plans.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The project will not finance the purchase of pesticides. It will instead encourage the use of 
integrated pest management (IPM) which has shown some degree of success in the Philippines.  
The project design will ensure adequate information dissemination on IPM as part of the package 
to implement more adaptive crops and cropping patterns.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
There is no evidence that any cultural resources would be affected.  This will be determined 
during preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous peoples are known to inhabit many parts of the country and there is potential that 
some of the NRM areas selected for climate sensitization may be home to some.  Hence, 
plans/interventions to be proposed or facilitated by DENR and the National Commission on 
Indigenous Peoples will need to ensure that IP's interests are well considered and that they are 
meaningfully engaged, following the provisions of IPRA.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
There is no evidence that any involuntary resettlement will take plcae.  This will be 
determined during preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/01/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/20/2008 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Documentation to be ready by end of August 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
