Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2636
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P101964 
Project Name:  National Program Support for Tax Administration Reform. 
Task Team Leader:  Vera Songwe 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 11, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASPR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Debt management and fiscal sustainability (P);Tax policy and administration 
(P);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
To increase government revenues by increasing the efficiency and effectiveness 
of the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR);  
 
2.
Enhance BIR capacity to undertake a sustainable and long-term reform program   
 
3. Project Description 
The program comprises of four components on change management, human resource 
management, tax enforcement and tax compliance. Under these components, the program 
would finance consulting services, business and information systems, and training over 
four years.  
 
A. 
Management, Change Management, and Project Management.  
 
Developing a Management culture within the Bureau of Internal revenue: Weak 
management was diagnosed as a critical element in poor revenue performance at the BIR. 
This component aims to increase management capacity and internal control through the 
creation of special units to define and supervise efficiency and effectiveness indicators, 
Page  2
increase the transparency of the institution through internal and external dissemination of 
information, improved accountability, training of management in basic people, systems, 
and information management skills, and initial steps to battle corruption. The component 
will also seek to prepare the institution to institutionalize a culture of management in 
BIR, goal-setting and control through a redefinition of unit functions, with result 
orientation and performance measurement. The project will support efforts launched by 
the USAID to institutionalize the use of Operational Performance Indicators linking 
outputs to outcomes and performance rewards. This will allow the alignment of the 
organization bottom-up with its mission and values, and a top-down strategic planning 
processes ending in an operations plan consisting of the aggregate of unit plans. Better 
control will in turn lessen corruption opportunities. It includes preparing the institution 
for the later introduction of an automated Management Information System, budget 
programming and cost accounting systems, training, and the strengthening or introduction 
of quality control and internal audit units.  
 
Facilitating and communicating the change agenda: Resistance to change is both normal 
and of critical importance to reform, both for taxpayers and staff. A unit of specialists 
would be responsible for facilitating employee acceptance to the reform process and 
activities, communicate the reform, coordinate and assist in the definition of the various 
phases and activities of the program, manage its implementation and monitor its 
execution. The organization's capacity would be strengthened to provide qualitative and 
quantitative information about the organization's goals, results, policies and processes; to 
obtain employee buy-in with the organization's mission, vision and values, and with 
management policies and strategies, and obtain employee feedback; to define and 
implement policies, programs and communication plans, define and measure information 
campaign performance indicators including developing and contracting external and 
internal surveys for performance measures and feedback; to define targets and messages 
to be delivered, marketing campaigns, and select third party implementers. Finally, this 
component would finance Project Management costs, including a project manager and a 
project administration unit in charge of project procurement, accounting, and relationship 
with donors and overall program administration and archiving. Estimated costs: US$3.36 
million.  
 
B. 
Human Resources Management.  
 
An inefficient incentive system with poor performance indicators is a strong basis for 
poor performance and corruption. Although a full review of the BIR HR systems and 
human inventory is beyond the scope of this project, this component would begin the 
process through a review of the Attrition Law, the definition of a staff performance 
monitoring and evaluation system linked to improved incentives, training, and career 
path, to enable management of the staff life cycle, from selection to retirement, including 
future employee relocation. Estimated cost: US$2.33 million.  
 
C. 
Tax Compliance:  
 
Page  3
Insufficient taxpayer registration and weak stop-filer control are two sources of revenue 
loss which can be addressed immediately. This component would give immediate priority 
to cleaning up the taxpayer register and to ensuring that all registration data held by 
revenue district offices (RDOs) are properly validated and included in the central 
taxpayer register; and improve tax registration, filing and collection systems and services. 
Taxpayer compliance will be greatly enhanced with a rationalized and consolidated set of 
regulations, memoranda and rulings. Taxpayer services will in addition expand on-going 
efforts to provide better services, such as hotlines, use of the internet including e-filing, 
upgrade surveys of taxpayers to detect areas of concern, and improve service standards. 
Estimated cost US$3.59 million.  
 
D. 
Tax  Enforcement and Control:  
 
Improved use of risk-based systems for taxpayer auditing and a national audit plan are 
necessary to better target taxpayer auditor efforts and thus increase their efficiency. This 
component will focus and direct audits based on evasion studies, improved case 
management systems and sector-specific selection criteria and risk management-based 
allocation of audits, and address arrears management and taxpayer mapping. Under this 
component the benchmarking systems developed by the BIR would be assessed and 
rolled out to all the RDOs. This component complements Component A above and 
supports the business process changes needed to ensure effective and efficient operational 
performance, especially in the BIR operations divisions. Estimated cost: US$1.72 
million.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project shall occur at the national office of the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) in 
Quezon City and its non-computerized revenue district offices (RDO) across the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASRE) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project does not have any safeguard issues since it will only finance consulting 
services, business and information systems and training. There is no civil works or any 
activity that will have negative environmental implications. There are also no involuntary 
resettlement and indigenous people issues. On the contrary, it is expected that improve 
tax compliance, tax enforcement and strengthened performance accountability of BIR 
personnel will result in greater revenue collection and generation that result to more 
services to the poor. The poor will be protected from unintended impacts of the rising 
cost of consumer goods through tax exempt (e.g., VAT and other taxes to consumer 
goods).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long term impacts will be positive due to increased tax collection and strengthened BIR.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  5
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Vera Songwe 
11/22/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
11/22/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro 
11/22/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Deepak Bhattasali 
01/29/2007 
Comments:   
