Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2258
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P094063 
Project Name:  National Support for Basic Ed 
Task Team Leader:  Dingyong Hou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve quality and equity in learning outcomes 
for all Filipinos in basic education. The project will assist the Borrower in the 
implementation
 of
DepED’s reform through financing priority items under four 
components drawn from the Basic Education Sector Reform Agenda. The project 
emphasizes improved governance through effective school-based management, enhanced 
teaching, quality assurance, and better resource mobilization, including greater 
involvement of local governments and more systemic support from private sector 
partnerships.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has four components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthened School-Based Management  
 
Component 2: Improved Teaching Effectiveness  
 
Component 3: Enhanced Quality and Equity through Standards, Assessment and 
Support  
 
Component 4: Effective Resource Mobilization.  
 
Component 1 supports the development and implementation of school-based 
management (SBM), legislated in The Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001 (RA 
Page  2
9155). SBM forms a central pillar in DepED’s emphases on decentralization and 
meaningful community participation. The principal target group for this Component is 
the school with its community, encompassing individual parents, the Parents, Teachers 
and Community Association (PTCA), local government, the private sector, and Non-
Government Organizations (NGOs).  
 
Component 2 seeks to improve teaching effectiveness through two major policy 
interventions.  
 
•
Refine current work on teacher competency standards and apply them to 
performance appraisal, training needs, promotion, hiring practices, pre-service training 
and licensing.  
 
•
Achieve a more equitable distribution of teachers across schools through 
application of principles identified by DepED for improved teacher deployment.  
 
Component 3 applies a standards-based approach to address the growing disparities in 
both inputs and outcomes of basic education. To mitigate the risk that SBM could 
exacerbate inequity since well-resourced communities are better placed to support 
school-level interventions than are poorer communities, this component seeks to monitor 
provision and outcomes, and then to tailor support to particular needs of communities to 
ensure standards are met.  
 
This component has three elements under a Quality Assurance (QA) framework.  
 
•
Develop nationwide standards for key learning areas based on the Revised Basic 
Education Curriculum (RBEC). Also set minimum service standards for inputs (such as 
classrooms, textbooks, student readiness, community participation, and operating costs).  
 
•
Provide support to assist achievement of the standards under the QA framework. 
In particular, develop and implement national strategies to support learning in English 
language, Filipino language, Mathematics and Science and enhance the operations of 
regions with divisions in supervising and supporting schools to implement their school 
improvement plans.  
 
•
Develop a comprehensive Information Communications Technology (ICT) 
frameworkto provide ready access to information - including norms for divisions, regions 
and national level – as feedback to schools to promote transparency, improve governance, 
permit evidence-based advocacy, and encourage meaningful accountability.  
 
Component 4 will seek to improve budget planning and management and resource 
mobilization by restructuring the DepED budget. Normal recurrent costs such as salaries 
and operating expenses will continue to be listed as budget items as at present. However, 
whereas historically the DepED budget also included numerous items for isolated 
projects, the restructured budget will focus on major reform programs and their 
implementation within multi-year plans. Such a strategy will enable DepED to provide 
funding predictability for the reform agenda and to manage more effectively its system-
wide implementation.  
 
Under this Component of NPSBE, the following policy actions will be undertaken.  
 
•
Develop a financing framework to ensure effective delivery of education as well 
as systematic planning through continuing support for major reform programs.  
Page  3
•
Develop policy/mechanism to promote cost sharing between national and local 
governments and to generate incentives for public-private partnerships.  
 
•
Integrate demand side financing dimensions into the financing framework to 
improve the effectiveness of existing interventions and promote strategies where schools 
take initiatives to provide access and encourage retention for needy or vulnerable children 
as part of their school improvement planning.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As a national program support, the reform actions will be system-wide with specific 
interventions targeted at poor and disadvantaged groups/communities where the 
resources constraints are more severe and the capacity to implement change is limited.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASEN) 
Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The operation will finance construction of new classrooms.  These types of activities are 
assessed to have minor and localized environmental impacts, i.e., normally during 
construction phase only.  To address construction impacts, civil works contract will have 
environmental provisions that will require contractors to: (i) strictly practice proper 
housekeeping; (ii) implement dust suppression measures; and properly store, manage and 
dispose excavated earth materials.  
 
Classroom construction and rehabilitation that would impact on critical natural habitats 
and protected areas would not be financed.   
 
With regard the indigenous people, the operation is envisaged to enhance learning 
outcomes, especially for the poor and disadvantaged groups, including indigenous 
Page  4
peoples through a more enabling education policy environment. The mechanisms to 
ensure participation of indigenous people during the project and to address their concerns 
are central to the proposed reforms as provided for in the Indigenous People Planning 
Framework (IPPF) as Annex 10 to the PAD.  The IPPF ensures compliance of the 
National Program Support for Basic Education to the Philippines Indigenous People’s 
Rights Act or IPRA (Republic Act No. 8371) as well as to the World Bank Revised 
Operational Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10).  Specifically, the Framework 
outlines the mechanisms for participation of indigenous peoples in the NPSBE before and 
during the Project implementation.  The Framework also provides for the preparation of 
the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan as part of the School Improvement Plan in 
target schools which will cover students from indigenous cultural communities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The preparation of the reform program involved a series of consultative workshops with a 
range of stakeholders at all levels.  The DepED incorporated feedback from these 
consultations into the design of the reform program.  The stateholders' views are being 
systematically analyzed and further consolidated as part of the preparatory studies, 
supported by a PHRD grant.  Even while the formulation of the reform program was 
already based on previous consultations, the final design was further subjected to pre-
implementation formal communication and consultation with a broad range of 
stakeholders including LGU officials, teachers, PTCAs, student organizations, indigenous 
peoples organizations, agencies for corporate social responsibility, and civil society 
organizations.  These consultations have been conducted in the two main islands of the 
Philippines (i.e., Luzon and Visayas) and will be completed in Mindanao by the first 
week of April 2006.  Said consultations also served as venues for social marketing to 
ensure that all stakeholder groups will have an initial appreciation of the reform 
objectives and commitment to  participate in implementation of the reforms.  Part of the 
consultations focused on the discussions of the IPPF with the participation of local IP 
representatives, the selection of which were done in coordination with the National 
Commission of Indigenous Peoples.  
 
Page  5
As mentione in the IPPF, the participation of indigenous people will be further achieved 
through continued consultations during the Project implementation specifically with 
regard the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Developmentn Plan.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dingyong Hou 
03/31/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
03/31/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Loreto Padua 
03/31/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
09/13/2005 
Comments:  EASES is pleased to transfer project safeguards clearance responsibility to EASHD. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
04/12/2006 
Comments:   
