Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2222 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/08/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P079935 
Project Name: Second National Roads Improvement 
Task Team Leader: William D. O. Paterson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 19, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 12, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (82%);Central government administration (18%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S);Technology diffusion (S);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
219.30 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
245.10
245.10 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Program goal remains as originally defined, that is the establishment of management 
arrangements which ensure the upgrading and preservation of the National Road System (NRS) 
in an environmentally, socially and financially sustainable manner.  
 
The development objectives for Phase 2, taking account of the progress achieved under Phase 1, 
are proposed to be:  
 
(a) 
Improved road management organization is operational for the National Road System 
countrywide, with responsibilities, assets and staffing appropriately realigned to national and 
local roles;  
 
(b) 
Road preservation needs are sustainably funded by revenues from road users, with 
appropriate allocation to national and local levels;  
 
(c) 
Physical condition of the primary arterial roads in the NRS is improved.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
NRIMP-2 is expected to support a total cost of about US$270 million with a loan size of about 
$200 million, and will: (a) upgrade and rehabilitate about 500 km of national arterial roads; (b) 
support delivery of a comprehensive road maintenance program through long-term performance-
based contracts and preventive, routine and emergency maintenance; (c) improve the 
effectiveness of public road management services in DPWH through improvement of business 
processes and efficient utilization of resources; and (d) implement incremental reforms in road 
management organization and in road financing through road user cost recovery.  
 
The project would be structured with two main components, each with two sub-components, as 
follows:  
 
A. 
Road Network Improvement (approximately US$220 million)  
 
A.1. 
Road Upgrading and Rehabilitation ??? Covering about 500 km of existing paved and 
unpaved national arterial roads, including some sections beginning implementation under Phase 
1, new sections identified through feasibility studies under Phase 1, major landslide risk 
mitigation and repair, and preparation of Phase 3 program.  
 
A.2. 
Asset Preservation ??? This would include expanded implementation of long-term 
performance-based contracts (LTPBC) for comprehensive maintenance on up to 1,000 km in 
regions willing to participate; financing part of the preventive maintenance program, and 
guidance to improve the DPWH???s delivery of routine and emergency maintenance programs.  
 
The road upgrading and rehabilitation component is a rolling program of ICB works, so Phase 2 
would finance 2-3 packages begun under Phase 1 and several new sections.  Preparation work to 
date is indicating that some new sections may be more appropriate for implementation by 
LTPBC, so the detailed engineering is being adjusted accordingly.  The Road Board is now 
funding preventive and routine maintenance programs in the order of $100 million / year from 
the SRF ??? the projectcould either provide top-up funds to the SRF as budget support or apply 
normal project-based financing for part of the program, with the objective of improving resource 
utilization.  
 
B. 
Capacity Development (approximately US$50 million)  
 
B.1. 
Organizational capacity - Institutionalization and further development of business process 
improvements (planning, programming, operations, information, financial management, and 
network communications) in all regional offices and a substantial number of the 190 (and 
growing) district offices of DPWH.  Support of a comprehensive Capacity and Human Resource 
Development Plan, including participatory formulation of a results-based capacity and human 
resource development plan comprising establishment of baseline capacity indicators and data, 
performance monitoring, training, and staff empowerment at all levels.  
 
B.2. 
Sector institutional reform ??? Support for introducing a fuel levy and increasing cost 
recovery revenues to the road fund to support 90% of maintenance needs, for various minor 
reforms in road management functions to be implemented progressively through a proposed 
participatory approach involving a road social contract and road management reform charter; and 
for an Anti-corruption Action Plan (ACP) to be implemented.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be located in several areas in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. There are 11 
sub-projects identified under the project to date: Magapit- Sta. Ana Road, Mindoro East Coast 
Page  3
Road, Halsema Highway all form Luzon; Iloilo- Ivisan/ Sigma-Capiz/ Aklan Boundary, Kalibo 
Bridge, Bacolod-Kabankalan, Escalante-Vallermoso Road, all from Visayas; and Malita-Jose 
Abad Santos Surigao-Davao Coastal Road, Cotobato City- Marawi City Road all from 
Mindanao.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Land acquisition and resettlement procedures are well-established on a programmatic basis and 
performed generally well under Phase 1.  The resettlement action plan (RAP) and environmental 
compliance (ECC) requirements for Phase 2 are evolving based on the current schedule for the 
detailed engineering of Phase 2 road upgrading projects, and the initial packages will involve 
little or no land and resettlement requirements.  Safeguard policies triggered will be OP 4.01, 
4.10 and 4.12.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASEN) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In general, the project impacts include the local impacts associated with the construction and 
operation of several national road systems. The impacts of these roads will be the subject of 
environmental assessment for each sub-project.  
 
The environmental assessment process will be undertaken in accordance with the draft 
environmental framework plan submitted to the Bank-Manila for review, which defines a set of 
guidelines for undertaking environmental assessment.  This framework addresses the EA 
requirements set by the government (Presidential Decree (PD) 1151, Presidential proclamation 
2146, DAO 03-30). This is complementary to World Bank OP 4.01 and include environmental 
screening and scoping, impact assessment, development of an environmental management plan, 
monitoring and public disclosure and consultation.  
 
The assessment process will produce Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) reports and 
EMPs for the construction, rehabilitation and expansion of the road systems, separate 
environmental management plans will be implemented by DPWH and construction contractors 
under their supervision.  The issues to be covered are anticipated to include those associated with 
construction including traffic, health and safety, landslides, erosion control, flooding, 
management of cut materials, and waste management including fuel and oil.   
 
If, based on the success of the first batch of sub-projects, more roads will be pursued under 
this project, the IEEs will be prepared during implementation.  The impacts are expected to be 
similar to those for the earlier NRIMP-1 projects which include impacts associated with 
construction (waste management, traffic and accidents, erosion, removal of trees, air and noise 
pollution, localized flooding) and operation (dust, odor and noise, waste from generator and 
employees, flooding of area near site, fire and safety, and management of cut materials).   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The Mindoro East Coastal Road, Halsema Highway 2, and the Tandag-Marihatag Section of 
the Surigao Davao Coastal Road pass through areas with known Indigenous Peoples (IPs).  
Under Philippine law, projects that affects Ancestral Domains and areas with pending 
application to be declared an Ancestral Domain would need the free, prior and informed consent 
(FPIC) of the Indigenous People affected by it.  The consistency of the contract packages with 
existing Ancestral Domains Sustainable Development and Protection Plan (ADSDPP) will also 
be determined.  
 
Of the twelve proposed contract packages, two (Halsema Highway and Malita and Don 
Marcelino- Jose Abad Section) shall traverse known Ancestral Domains. The contract packages 
are for rehabilitation of roads that have existed even prior to declaration of affected areas as 
ancestral domains. The IPs in these areas are among those who have requested for the road 
rehabilitation so project acceptabity is not seen as a problem.  
 
The Philippine systems for IPs is adequate and DPWH will abide by this.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
For the first phase of the loan package (2007-2011), major land acquisition/resettlement may 
be required along the Mindoro East Coastal Road in Mindoro Oriental, Halsema Highway 
2,Cotabato Marawi Road, and the Iloilo Zarraga Road. Full Resettlement Action Plans are 
expected to be done for these contract packages.  Minor land acquisition/resettlement may 
happen with the Sta. Ana Magapit Road, Malita-Jose Abad Santos, Digos-Cotabato, Bislig-
Manay, Bacolod-Bago, and the Tandag-Marihatag Section of the Surigao Davao Coastal Road.   
There also will be some economic loss due to increased traffic congestion and closure of roads.  
 
A
draft of the Resettlement Policy prepared by the Environment and Social Safeguards 
Office of DPWH  and is now being revised based on comments from the Bank, thus making it 
consistent with the O.P. 4.12.  This will govern projects requiring land acquisition, 
compensation, and resettlement of Displaced Persons and susceptible communities.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/04/2007 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Timetable for EA preparation:  
 
Scoping with stakeholders - March 1-15, 2006  
 
Data collection and necessary monitoring - April 30, 2006  
 
First draft IEE report  
 April 30, 2006  
 
First round public consultation  - April 1-15, 2006  
 
Second draft EA/EMP reports & first draft EA Summary - August 15, 2006  
 
Second round public consultation - August 30, 2006  
 
Information disclosure   - October 27, 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William D. O. Paterson 
11/30/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
12/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
12/07/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
