INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
1. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/16/2006                        Report No.:
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Philippines                   Project ID: P098572
Project Name: Northern Negros Geothermal Power Project
Task Team Leader: Selina Shum
Estimated A  raisal Date: November 2006  Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: EASEG                   Lending Instrumenf: carbon finance
Sector: Renewable energy                               -_-
Theme. Infrastructure services for private sector development, Rural services and
infrastructure, environmental policies and institutions
IBRD Amount (US$m.):       0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):        0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):        0.00
l PCF Amount (US$m.):       8.30
Other financing amounts by source (US$m.):
BORROW ER/RECIPIENT                                   38
JBIC                                                 107
Environmental Category: A - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing  N/A            Simple []        Repeater [I      -
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)  Yes  N ]   No i
2. Project Objectives
The project aims to develop a 40-MW capacity geothermal power plant in the Pataan
sector of the Mt. Kanlaon geothermal prospect in the island of Negros. The additional
power generating capacity will help meet the projected growth in demand for electricity
in the Negros-Panay Grid. The utilization of geothermal steam for power generation will
also help reduce the country's dependence on imported fuels and contribute towards the
global objective of reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emission.
3. Project Description
'I'he proposed 40MW geothermal project is the first development within the Mt. Kanlaon
geothernal prospect, a 4,191-ha block which includes the multiple-use and buffer zones
of the 24,388-ha Mt. Kanlaon Natural Park (MKNP). Geological exploration works
within the prospect began in the late 1970s and exploratory drillings were conducted
within Catugasan, Hagdan and Pataan sectors in 1994-95. The present project is located
in the Pataan sector which was found to be the most commercially viable of the three
sectors. '\ development block of 220-ha has been delineated outside the Mt. Kanlaon
Natural Park. The present project includes the following major components:
* Construction, installation and commissioning of a 40 MW power plant:
* Drilling and maintenance of 15 production and 3 reinjection wells;



*  Construction/installation of the Fluid Collection and Reinjection System (FCRS .
consisting of a network of pipelines, separator stations and associated control
facilities; and,
*  Construction and operation a switchyard facility and a 24-km, 138-kV. single
circuit spur transmission line.
T he project builds on PNOC-EDC's experiences in geothennal power development in
Leyte (700MW), Palinpinon (1 92MW), Mt. Apo (200MW) and Bacon-Manito (20(MW 1.
Development works in the project site started in 1997 and as of this update, most of the
projeci's civil works have already been completed and all wells have already been drilled.
The current activities are geared towards the construction of FCRS, the power plant and
the transmission line.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed project will be located at the northwestern slope of the Mt. Kanlaon
volcano, in Sitio Pataan, Barangay Mailum, Bago City, Negros Occidental. 'rhis is
outside of the MKNP. The lands occupied by the project were formerly private
agricultural lots. The topograplly of the area is generally mountainous with elevations
from 70(-S0() masl.
The Mt. Kanlaon Geothermal Prospect and Mt. Kanlaon Natural Park
The 4,191-ha Mt. Kanlaon Geothermal Service Contract (prospect) area includes portion
of the 24,388-ha Mt. Kanlaon National Park. Results of geological explorationis in the
1980s have identified three sectors within the block namely, the Catugasan, llagdan and
Pataan. Subsequent resource assessments have determined that the commercially viable
resource is in the Pataan sector. The assessments have also determnined that although the
resource outside the Park is able to sustain a 40 MW geothermal power plant, part of the
resource is situated (or can be accessed only from) inside the Park.
Recent developments in Philippine protected area system may allow PNOC-IEDC to
develop the geothermal resource inside the Park. The National Integrated Protected Area
System (NIPAS) law of 1992 provides for, among others, the re-classification and re-
delineation of all protected areas such as National Parks. It also provides for the
establishment of "buffer" or "multiple-use" zones where controlled economic activities
such as energy development may be allowed at the fringes of the protected area to shield
ii from further human encroachment. Pursuant to NIPAS, a bill converting the Mt.
Canlaon National Park into Mt. Kanlaon Natural Park (MKNP) underwent public
consultations from September 23, 1996 to January 13, 1997. The bill which desigilates a
169-ha area within the northwestern flank of MKNP as a buffer zone specifically
reserved for geothermal energy development was enacted into law by Philippine
Congress as Republic Act No. 9154 in August II, 2001. The implementing rules and
regulations for the utilization of the buffer zone have yet to be issued by DENR. PNOC-
FDC has indicated it may develop this buffer zone in the future. However as far as the
present 40MW project is concerned, it is restricting all development activities outslde the
boundaries of the MKNP.



5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mr. .lonas Bautista (EASEN)
Mr .osefo Tuyor (EASEN)
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSD)
1 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                  Yes       No
E Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                      X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                -             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)              X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) ___-        X   l
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                  |   X
I. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Sunmmary of Key Safeguard Issues
l Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts;
The safeguard issues associated with the project include displacement of 43 farming
families, the conversion of 100 hectares of agricultural lands into industrial use, the
alleged encroachment of the project into the Mt. Kanlaon Natural Park, the hydrogen
sulfide (H1-S) emission from the power plant and the possible contamination of surface
water and groundwater. All of these issues however have been well analyzed, clarified
and resolved in the EIA report and the various consultations, including the fonnulation
and implementation of a resettlement plan.
On the issue of displacement of families, PNOC-EDC has implemented a resettlemenm
and compensation program for the affected families. Under the program, the 25 families
who have opted to avail of the resettlement package are now living within a newl-,
developed resettlement site while the 18 families who have opted to receive cash
compensation have since left the area. On the issue of land use conversion of the projecl
site underwent thorough screening by the Department of Agriculture (DA), the
Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR), DENR and other government agencies involved
in land use conversion process. The converted lands however were mostly of marginal
productivity being mountainous and erosion-prone and hence were clearly unsuitable for
continuous agricultural production. On the issue of encroachment into the Natural Park.
PNOC-EDC has restricted all development activities within alienable and disposable
lands outside the Park. In terms of environmental impacts, the hydrogen sulfide emission
from the power plant is expected to be at acceptable levels with maximum concentration
predicted at around 60ptg/Ncm while impacts on water quality is expected to be only in
the form of short term turbidity due to remaining earth-moving activities in the protect



site. Contamination of river water is highly unlikely as spent geothermal brine will he
reinjected back to the geothennal reservoir 2-3 km underneath from the earth's surface
Finally, the contamination of groundwater due to the interaction of geothermal wells and
the aquifer has been ruled out because of the presence of an impenneable cap rock that
separates the two plus the fact that the geothermal wells are lined with cement and steel
casing up to a depth of 1,600 m.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
PNOC'-EDC may develop in the future the 169-ha buffer zone within the nortliweste-rti
flank ot MKNP, specifically reserved for geothermal energy development. This will be
covered by a separate EIA study.
3. Describe any project altematives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimiize
adverse impacts.
The development of indigenous energy resources such as hydro, wind, solar, biomass,
natural gas and geothermal are encouraged in the Philippines. Geothermal is the mosL
readily available indigenous energy resource in the Negros-Panay Grid. It also stands out
as the better alternative in terms of investment and land area requirements. The proposed
40MW geothermal plant will help meet projected increase in power demand in the
islands of Negros and Panay. As other indigenous energy sources are not readily
available, the most feasible alternative would be the installation of additional generating
capacity from diesel or coal-fired power plants. This would entail either of the
repair/overhaul of old diesel-fired power plants or the acquisition of new diesel powk et
plants and barges. Bagasse cogeneration plants are one option but these plants are not
base load plants.
4. Descrihe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
a) Re: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)
The project sponsor has prepared two separate EAs, one for the geothermal stcairi hteld
development and another for the Transmission Line. The EA for the geothermal steam
field development was a full EIA study. Conducted in 1995, the study area covered
approximately 5,000 hectares, some 2,000 hectares of which are part of the MKNP' It
also included the Bago River and tributaries draining from the MKGSC, the coastal
waters near the outlet of the Bago River and population centers downwind of thrce
proposed project sites. Since at that time, the exact location of the geothennal resource
was still unknown, the study considered the development of 80MW geothermal power
within either Catugasan, Pataan or Hagdan Sector. The scope of the study was
comprehensive, covering geology, hydrology, meteorology, air quality, noise, terrestrial
ecosystem, freshwater biology, marine ecosystem, oceanography and bathymetry.
pedology and land use, and the socioeconomic conditions of the area. The EIA report
' t the turie of the preparation of the EA, the park was still called Mt. Canlaon National Park It was
proclaimed as Mt. Kanlaon Natural Park (MKNP) by legislation under the National Integrated Protected
Areas System (NIPAS) law. The MKNP law has designated a 169-ha portion of Park's buffer or multiple-
use zone for geothermal development. The present 40MW project is outside this zone.



contains Baseline Characterization, Projection of the Environmnental Conditions witholot
the Project, Impact Assessment, Risk Assessment, Environmental Management Plan and
Watershed Management Plan. The preparation and review of the EIA report followed the
Philippine EIS process and included information drives and dialogues with surrounding
communities in Murcia, Bacolod City and Bago City. The EIA study was also thc first
participatory EIA to be conducted in the Philippines where the local communities arvz
involved in data collection, analysis and validation of results. Two (2) public hearilngs
were held under the auspices of the DENR: one in Marmbucal, Murcia in April l 8. 1995
and another in Mailum, Bago City in April 19, 1995. The Environmental Compliance
Certificate (ECC) was issued in December 1995 after a review by the DENR-appointed
EIA Review Committee.
The EA ior the Transmission Line was in the form of Initial Environmental Examination
(lEE) checklist as prescribed by Philippine Laws. The lEE preparation involved
consultations with the affected communities who endorsed the TI. alignment to the
DENR. The IEE checklist also included an Environmental Management Plan. The ECC
for the TL was issued by DENR in the same year.
PNOC-EDC has more than 20 years of experience in conducting environmental impact
assessments and in formulating and implementing social and environmental manage-ment
programs for its geothermal power development projects. Its Environmental Managemenit
Department (EMD) and Community Partnerships Department (CPD) are stafted by more
than 20 office-based and around 150 field-based personnel. PNOC-EDC has also
implemented various projects under the Bank, including the 640 MW Leyte Geothermal
Project and recently the 20 MW Nasulo Geothermal Project under the Bank's C>arbon
Finance Program.
b) Re: NVatural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
Although the project does not entail conversion of natural habitat, the Bank Policy on
Natural Habitat was triggered due to the potential indirect effects of hydrogen sulfide and
noise emissions on the flora and fauna inside the MKNP as well as potential increase in
human encroachment due to better roads toward the project site. This is critical because
MKNP forest line has been receding due to illegal activities such as slash and bUrn
fanning, subsistence logging, fuelwood gathering and poaching. In some areas. forests
are found only 1-2 km inside the park's boundaries.
Results from the EA and information gathered from other documents howevei indicate
that these impacts are either insignificant or highly unlikely. In terms of H2S and noise,
the three production well pads which hug the boundary of the Park will not cmit much
112S or noise during plant operations. The main source of emission which is the power
plant is located about 500 meters from the Park's boundary and mathematical simulations
and actual measurements indicate that H2S and noise emissions from the power plant will
be witlhin standards for residential areas even within the immediate vicinity. In terilis ot
f'acilitating further human encroachment, the reverse may actually be expected. In other
sites, the presence of geothermal project has actually discouraged illegal activities in
nearbv public forests due to 24-hr security guard duty. Already the human activities in



the area have been reduced with the resettlement of 43 families. The alternative
livelihood which PNOC-EDC provides to the nearby communities under its Watershed
Management Program is expected to reduce pressure on the MKNP while reforestation
projects will help restore denuded areas of the Park.
The protection that geothermal projects provide to the Natural Parks has been recognizedl
by Philippine law. The National Integrated Protected Area System (NIPAS) law of 1992
provides lor the establishment of "buffer" or "multiple-use" zones where controlled
economic activities such as energy development may be allowed at the fringes of the
protected area to shield it from further human encroachment. Crafted under this
framework, the MKNP Law which was passed in 2001 has designated a 169-ha area
within the northwestern flank of MKNP as a buffer zone specifically reserved for
geothermiial energy development. PNOC-EDC has indicated it may develop this bufter
zone in the future. However for the present 40MW project, the Company is restricting all
development activities outside MKNP.
c) Re: Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
PNOC-EDC has resettled some 43 farming families who resided within 500 meters from
any geothermal project facility. The resettlement program was patterned after the levyte
Geothermal Project Resettlement Program which the company implemented iulder
Bank's supervision in 1992-94. A draft resettlement plan was prepared in 1995 and
consultations with the affected families started as early as 1996. The preliminary plan
was submitted and approved by JBIC in 1996. In 2000, a resurvey of the affected
population and another round of consultations were conducted and the resettlement plan
was finalized. In 2001, a suitable resettlement site was selected by the resettlers rhe
Resettlement Plan generally conforms to the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement. It
contains definition of policies, criteria for eligibility, survey of the affected population,
provision for conflict resolution, provision for consultation and negotiation and
livelihood assistance. Although the preparation and execution of the resettlement plan
was not under Bank supervision, the following salient features were noted based on the
review of documents, site visits and interview with PNOC-EDC staff and resettlers
I The resettlement program was designed as a community development progran
Aside from the houses and amenities, the resettlers were provided with
replacement farms adjacent to their village. They were also trained and organizeed
to manage the communal areas and to facilitate livelihood development
assistance.
2  There was meaningful consultation and participation of resettlers. They werc
informed of their rights and consulted regarding the types and nature of
compensation options. They also participated in the identification of the
resettlement site.
3. (ash compensation was at full replacement cost of assets. Those who opted for
resettlement have received compensation for crops lost OT rendered inaccessible
due to the project while those who opted for cash compensation received full
replacement costs of their houses, lands, crops and other properties.
4   -Assistance was provided during transfer including transportation of belongings.
meal and disruption allowance.



The resettlers were transferred only after the houses in the Relocation site werc
completed.
d) Re: Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
The project will not affect any indigenous people or cultural minority. The present
residents in the area are new settlers from the lowland areas who belong to the llonggo
and Cebuano ethno-linguistic stocks, two of the largest mainstream groups in the Visavas
and Mindanao area.
e) Re: Forest (OP/BP 4 36)
The project will not affect the forest as all development activities will be confined %k ithiri
the existing 220-ha geothermal development block which were agricultural area.
Moreover, the geothernal plant will serve as a protective layer for continued
encroachment of human activities into the forest. The company's watershed management
programii is expected to preserve and even enhance the forest cover of the MNKP andi
ncarbv denuded areas.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people
The key stakeholders of the project are the National Government of the Philippines, the
resettled community which has been organized into Napatagan Farmers Association
(NAMAFA), the host Local Government Units (i.e., Barangay Mailum, City of B3ago and
Province of Negros Occidental) and the local residents who will benefit from
emplovimient, royalty receipts and other government-mandated benefits.
Documents provided indicate that as early as the exploration phase, PNOC-ELD( - was
already in close consultation and collaboration with project's stakeholders. Starting April
21, 1994, PNOC-EDC collaborated with residents of host barangays, local governments,
government agencies, and non-government organizations for the implementation of a
watershed management and forest patrol plan in the geothermal exploration block.
Coordination and consultation continued during the conduct of the EA in 1994-95 as
required tnder the Philippine EIS process. The project was among the first projects in tlle
Philippines to employ a participatory EA wherein local residents are involved in thle
collection of data and the validation of environmental impacts. As part of the EA review
process. PNOC-EDC conducted 36 dialogues were conducted from January 15 to Apr]l 6,
1995 in the host and surrounding viliages. The EIS process culminated in two public
hearings held in Minoyan on April 18, 1995 and in Mailum on April 19, 1995
After the EIS process, consultations continued with groups affected by specific concerns
or project components. These include rights-of-way acquisition of the project site and the
resettlement of 43 households located within the development block and the rights-of
way acquisition for the 25km transmission line route. Among the items subjected to
consultation were the compensation package, the resettlement site and the duration ol tle
usufruct period of houses and lot. PNOC-EDC also negotiated rights-of-way from
individual land owners for the transmission line and has consulted with the respective
local governiment units for the optimum alignment of the transmission line. It has secured
endorsements for the transmission line from 11 Barangays, the Municipality of Murcia



and the City Councils of Bago and Bacolod Cities. PNOC-EDC is in continual
consultation with the local communities in the implementation of the its social and
environmental programs through the barangay and the municipal governments, the
Multisectoral Monitoring Team (MSMT), and the Mt. Kanlaon Natural Park Board in
which PNOC is a member, the resettled families association, NAMAFA and the other
livelihood associations that PNOC-EDC has organized among the communities
surrounding the project site. Additional due diligence works on PNOC-EDC's continued
engagement with the local communities will determine whether additional consultation
on the project is necessary.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                          12/02/2005
Date of in-country" disclosure                       12/02/2005
IDate of submission to InfoShop                      03/24/2006
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan
Date of receipt by the Bank                          12/02/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     04/18/1995
Date of submission to InfoShop                       03/24/2006
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to befilled in when the
LIDS isfinalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?  Ye
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the  No
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Hias a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as     No
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples"
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
Manager- review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?.



OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints  No
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these  No
constraints')
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include  No
rovisons for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's  Y'es
Infoshop'.
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a  Yes
fonn and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
L∞ anid local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
[lave satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safegiuard
policies'
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
cost"
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the     e's
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies'?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Y'es
horroweer and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
D. Approvals
Signed and submitted by:                        NeM                         Date7
'T'ask Team Leader:             Ms Selina Shum.                    ..a . 16!Oo
Environmental Specialist:       Mr Jonas Bauti  sta/7  '   I71-                1 l I
Environmental Specialist:       Mr Josefo Tuyor                            I I '6!O06
Social l)evelopment Specialist:  Ms Victoria Florian Lazaro       !6 11
Approved by:                       .ek4 OIèA/ ) D                       -I
Regional Safeguards Coordinator;  'Mr Glenn S. Morgan  t521
Comments
Sector Manager:                 Ms Junhui Wu                 I--               -
Comments:



