Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2396 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/30/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P071119 
Project Name: PH-Private Sector Development for MWSS Financial Rehabilitation 
Task Team Leader: William D. Kingdom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
25.00
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]  
 
The Project development objective would be to improve MWSS? financial status through 
enhancement of MWSI revenues.  
 
This will be achieved through: (i) upgrading the level of water supply services in the west 
concession area (MWSI) via reconstruction of the distribution network, better control of non-
revenue water, improved performance of provided services, and increase in water sales; and, (ii) 
strengthening the associated institutional arrangements focused on managerial responsibility for 
regularly monitoring the status of distribution network and ensuring  sustainability of high-
quality, state-of-repair of production and distribution facilities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Maynilad Water Services Inc (MWSI) is a private company awarded a government 
concession through the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) to operate the 
West zone of Metro Manila (population=7.9 million) for 25 years (1997-2022).  The MWSI 
concession agreement includes obligations to provide water supply connections, continuity of 
Page  2
water supply and ensure adequate water quality.  They are also obligated to provide sewerage 
and sanitation services in compliance with wastewater standards.  The water supply system 
currently has very high physical and commercial non-revenue water levels (approximately 60%), 
insufficient water pressure (affecting 3 million people) and in some areas 24 hour service cannot 
be provided (affecting 3 million people).  
 
Since being awarded the concession in 1997, MWSI has had financial difficulties and in 2003 
filed a petition for Corporate Rehabilitation.  In 2005 a Debt and Capital Restructuring 
Agreement and a Rehabilitation Plan was approved that among other things set targets for 
increasing the billed water volume (from 700 Mld to 1800 Mld by 2015) which would require an 
associated reduction in non-revenue water.  
 
The Bank-supported project (Phase 1) will assist in the financial rehabilitation by restructuring 
and rehabilitating the water supply network in the northern and central hydraulic areas of the 
MWSI concession in order to reduce non-revenue water.  It will include the following 
components:  
 
Component 1:  Establishment of Hydraulic Areas. The component would include strengthening-
restructuring of the primary distribution network through establishment of 35 separate hydraulic 
areas, each fed by a single monitored inflow. Works would include separation of hydraulic 
zones, laying of about 180 km of primary mains, construction of two balancing reservoirs, and 
upgrading of pumping stations.  
 
Component 2:  Zone Rehabilitation. The component would involve the establishment of 128 
zones within the 35 hydraulic areas, each fed by one or two monitored inflows. The works would 
include (a) full or partial replacement of the distribution network (dia 50-300 mm), and 
installation of about 250,000 service connections, flow meters, pressure reducing valves and 
associated works in 90 priority zones, and (b) provision of water meters, transport, construction 
equipment, various instruments and computers. The rehabilitation would involve separation of 
zones, full replacement of pipes with proven unsatisfactory conditions, namely asbestos cement 
pipes, pipes deeper than 2 m that are difficult to locate, and pipes where burst rates are shown to 
exceed 4 bursts per km and year.  
 
Component 3: Services and Training The component will include engineering support for 
design and construction management and supervision, institutional study to strengthen 
implementing and operating capacity of MWSI, and monitoring of the project results and 
outcome.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Manila's west zone concession area covers 540 km2 and consists of nine cities and two 
municipalities in Metro Manila and one city and five municipalities in the province of Cavite.  
The project will be located in all zones excluding the Southern zone.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
MWSI has recently completed the Manila Second Sewerage Project (MSSP) which was partly 
financed by the Bank.  Based on this and the various infrastructure projects which it has 
Page  3
undertaken in the past eight years, MWSI has demonstrated its institutional capacity to ensure 
compliance with Bank's safeguard policies and the Philippine government's environmental and 
social regulatory requirements.  Monitoring records indicate MWSI has performed satisfactorily.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Morton (EASEN) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSD) 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASEN) 
Mr Shunong Hu (EASUR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project impacts are those associated with the new construction and rehabilitation 
activities necessary to restructure the distribution networks to establish the hydraulic areas and 
zones as well as the actual implementation of the works necessary to reduce non-revenue water 
in each of the zones.  
 
Environmental Assessment Framework:  MWSI is preparing a programmatic environmental 
management plan that will cover the scope of the proposed works.   As rehabilitation within the 
individual zones will be undertaken in reaction to monitoring and planning that will be done 
during project implementation, the framework will allow for the necessary flexibility in the 
detailed design of individual investments to account for slight changes in the location, phasing 
and type of works to be undertaken in a given area. The plan will include an EMP that would 
include standard operating procedures for contractors.  The issues to be covered are anticipated 
to be those associated with construction including traffic, health and safety, use and removal of 
asbestos cement pipes, erosion control, and management of backfill material, waste management 
including fuel and oil and chance find procedures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Resettlement Policy prepared by MWSI was submitted on August 29, 2006 to the Bank 
for review. This has been reviewed and found in compliance to OP 4.12.  This will govern 
circumstances under the project that require land acquisition, compensation, and resettlement of 
Displaced Persons and susceptible communities. MWSI will formulate overall framework plan 
for the conduct of Social Impact and Land Acquisition Assessments to cover the different stages 
of the project where private properties and informal settlements are affected.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The water supply for the system to be rehabilitated originates from a reservoir that is retained 
by the Ipo Dam, which is itself fed by a reservoir retained by the Angat Dam (see diagram in 
Annex).  As both dams are >15 m in height, the Safety of Dams Policy (OP4.37) is triggered.  
The Task Team has had initial dialogue with the Borrower on the requirements of the policy and 
they indicated their willingness to conduct further assessments. The Task Team has engaged a 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
dam specialist to join the team. Previous documentation in relation to the dam safety assessment 
on Angat Dam has been provided to the Bank for review. The dam specialist of the Task Team 
will visit two dam sites to assess the situation and conduct further dialogue with the Borrow in 
early November 2006. During his visit, an action plan for further assessment by an independent 
expert for the safety of two dams would be discussed and agreed upon.  
 
The Task Team has had initial dialogue with the Borrower on the requirements of the policy 
and they indicated their willingness to conduct further assessments. The Task Team has engaged 
a
dam specialist to join the team. Previous documentation in relation to the dam safety 
assessment on Angat Dam has been provided to the Bank for review. The dam specialist of the 
Task Team will visit two dam sites to assess the situation and conduct further dialogue with the 
Borrow in early November 2006. During his visit, an action plan for further assessment by an 
independent expert for the safety of two dams would be discussed and agreed upon.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/04/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
D.  Timetable for EA preparation:  
 
Scoping with stakeholders  
 
-
September 20 2006  
 
Data collection and necessary monitoring 
 
 
-    August 30 2006  
 
First draft IEE report 
 
 
 
 
 
-    August 30 2006  
 
First round public consultation   
 
 
-    September1-15 2006  
 
Second draft EA/EMP reports & first draft EA Summary 
-    October 15 2006  
 
Second round public consultation 
 
 
 
-    October 30 2006  
 
Information disclosure  
 
-
December 15 2006  
 
E.      Timetable for Dam Safety work  
 
Desk review by WB dam safety specialist  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
-
October 10 2006  
 
Site visit by WB dam safety specialist  
 
-
November 5-10 2006  
 
Completed assessment by independent expert  
 
-
December 1 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William D. Kingdom 
11/29/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
11/30/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
11/30/2006 
Comments:   
