Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC1760
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P084967 
Project Name:  National Program Support for the Second Mindanao Rural Development 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Carolina V. Figueroa-Gero 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 29, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Roads and highways 
(30%);Sub-national government administration (15%);Water supply (15%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (P);Rural policies and 
institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
42.12
42.12 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
MRDP 2 aims to (i) improve access to livelihood opportunities of targeted communities 
and (ii) institutionalize a decentralized system for agriculture and fisheries service 
delivery that promotes participation, transparency and accountability.   
 
3. Project Description 
(1) 
  Institutional Strengthening Component: Aims to strengthen the framework and 
linkages for the integrated delivery of devolved services by the national and local 
government units.  
 
(2) 
Rural Infrastructure Component: Aims to finance local infrastructure priorities of 
responsive to needs and priorities of LGUs and communities, for increasing agricultural 
and fisheries productivity and market development.  
 
(3) 
Community Fund for Agricultural Development (CFAD) Component: Aims to 
strengthen decision making capacity at the community level for design and 
implementation of local priorities, ensure that DA and LGU programs and technical 
assistance better reflect community needs and priorities.  
Page  2
(4) 
Natural Resource Management Component: Aims to conserve coastal resources 
and marine biodiversity through co-management of critical marine habitats and through 
the introduction of improved, upstream land management practices that would arrest land 
degradation, enhance the integrity of important ecosystems and benefit landholders who 
are mostly poor farmers, fisherfolk, and/or indigenous people.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
MRDP2 will be implemented in all of the 27 provinces of Mindanao, covering 180 
municipalities. Mindanao is home to the majority of the country's indigenous peoples, 
with 61 percent or 7,165,432 of 11,798,190 IPs living in all regions and almost all 
provinces (24 of 25) of Mindanao. Most IPs live in their ancestral lands under their own 
set of customary laws and practices.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mary P. Judd (EASSD) 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASEN) 
Mr Roberto B. Tordecilla (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is assessed to have localized, manageable and reversible environmental 
impacts, which will be coming mainly from the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure 
and a few new construction of farm-to-market roads, bridges, communal irrigation 
systems and water supply systems to be financed under the Rural Infrastructure (RI) 
component.  Impacts will be coming mainly from civil works activities, which will 
include increase in noise and dust levels during construction that could affect the health 
of construction workers and nearby settlements and temporary degradation of the quality 
of nearby bodies of water.  There will be no resettlement of people, but there may be 
limited/minimal land acquisition which the proponent LGUs will have to address as part 
of the subproject appraisal and approval process.  Indigenous peoples and communities 
Page  3
are expected to benefit from the Project because of the purposive targeting of IPs in areas 
where they are present.  
 
The other Project components: the Community Funds for Agricultural Development 
(CFAD) and the Natural Resource Management (NRM) are expected to have positive 
environmental and social impacts that will complement other Project initiatives to ensure 
that productivity increases will not result in the degradation of the natural resource base. 
NRM and CFAD components may support agricultural, agro-forestry and/or 
technological demonstration farms that may entail limited or prudent use of chemical 
pesticides. Impacts, however, from the prudent use of chemical pesticide are assessed to 
be minimal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long term impacts of the Project are expected to be positive.  The NRM and CFAD 
components are expected to contribute to the improvement and sustainable management 
of the natural resource base in the Project sites.  Overall, increase productivity, 
sustainable resource management and increase incomes are among the long term positive 
impacts envisaged for the Project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Civil works activities that will encroach upon ecologically- and/or culturally-sensitive 
areas, critical watersheds and protected areas will not be supported by the Project.  The 
Project also came up with a negative list of sub-projects that will not be eligible for 
funding due to their negative environmental and social impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project is a second phase of the MRDP (MRDP1 closed December 31, 2004 and 
covered five provinces in Mindanao).  MRDP 1 has put in place adequate safeguard 
frameworks, guidelines and procedures that were adhered to by subproject proponents 
and properly monitored by the Program Coordinating Office (PCO).  Safeguard 
compliance for MRDP1 was rated satisfactory by the Bank.  As a standard operating 
procedure, environmental and social clearances were required by the PCO as basic 
requirements for subproject approval, and compliance during implementation was being 
monitored by the provincial and PCO staff on a regular basis.  The program has invested 
a
lot on building the safeguards capacity of staff from the PCO, concerned Department of 
Agriculture Regional Field Units (DA-RFUs), and the participating LGUs (provinces and 
municipalities) under MRDP 1.  
 
While safeguards capacity may be weak in some of the new LGUs to be covered under 
MRDP 2, they will be strengthened as part of project implementation.  The capacity 
building approach drawn from MRDP 1 experience will be adopted to build the capacity 
of the new LGUs.  The DA-RFUs and the PCO, in partnership with the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), will build the safeguards capacity of the  
Page  4
participating provincial and municipal LGUs and provide technical assistance to ensure 
that they comply with the Project safeguard frameworks and guidelines.  
 
To address sub-project specific environmental and social issues, the Project formulated 
and adopted the environmental and social safeguard frameworks and operating guidelines 
as part of the Operations Manual.  In particular, the Project environmental guidelines are 
formulated as a result of the Mindanao-wide environmental assessment, but also drawing 
lessons from MRDP1 experience. These guidelines are mainstreamed into each of the 
Project components.  The guidelines also include the adoption of an integrated pest 
management (IPM) and the purchase of chemical pesticides in the negative list.  
 
For IPs/ICCs, in cases where they are present, the Project IP framework and guidelines 
will ensure that they are consulted and participate in the planning and implementation 
process and a purposive targeting of the IPs will be done in the CFAD interventions. The 
IP framework for MRDP 1, which was rated satisfactory by the Bank, is adopted for the 
Project.  
 
Upon the advice of the Country Lawyer, the Framework for Land Acquisition, 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation of Project Affected Persons which was adopted during 
MRDP 1 was updated to reflect changes in the Bank's OP/BP 4.12 on involuntary 
resettlement.  The Borrower had submitted an updated framework on involuntary 
resettlement (in October 2006), which was also disclosed locally and in the Bank's 
InfoShop.  In addition, the task team reviewed and enhanced the operational procedures 
for the said framework.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The IP and LARR frameworks have been disclosed in the official website of the 
Department of Agriculture.  
 
To ensure that key stakeholders, especially IPs and PAPs, are meaningfully involved in 
key Project decision making, the Project has developed a social participation framework 
that cuts across project components and across levels and phases of project management. 
The framework provides avenues for beneficiary groups to develop their individual 
capacities as well as their institutional capacities to become effective development 
partners of the Project.  
 
Considering the reach of IPs in the target Mindanao provinces of MRDP 2, the borrower 
conducted a social assessment of 15 municipalities across the original 5 provinces of 
MRDP 1.  Twelve of these 15 municipalities have IP communities.  The results of the 
assessment informed the development of IP and LARR implementation procedures which 
were then adopted in the operations manual of all components of MRDP 2.  
 
The borrower has established strong partnership with the National Commission on 
Indigenous Peoples (NCIP).  A memorandum of understanding is being prepared for this 
purpose.  They have initially lined up joint undertaking activities in preparation for 
Page  5
MRDP 2 implementation.  The Commission has committed to mobilize its regional, 
provincial and municipal bodies for IP-related activities of MRDP 2.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/31/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/25/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/14/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/14/1999 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/25/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
N/A 
Page  6
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Carolina V. Figueroa-Geron 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary P. Judd 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Roberto B. Tordecilla 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
