Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/11/2007 
Report No.:  AC2360
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P096174 
Project Name:  National Program Support for Environment and Natural Resources 
Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihou 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P091147 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 27, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (85%);General public 
administration sector (10%);Mining and other extractive (5%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program's overall development objective is to assist the Department of Environment 
and Natural Resources to improve efficiency and effectiveness in its service delivery. 
More specifically, the project would aim to strengthen the allocative efficiency of 
DENR's limited budget resources, through better prioritization and partnership 
arrangements, facilitating scaling-up and better linking of plans and budgets.  The 
program?s approach based on targeted expenditure support is also consistent with the 
CAS strategy for improving fiscal and expenditure discipline, mainstreaming support for 
the regular programs of the Government and developing broader sector based approaches.  
The GEF will partner the Bank in meeting these higher level objectives by providing 
incremental funding for operational GEF priorities with anticipated global benefits.  The 
global environment objective of the program would be to enhance ecosystem services for 
global and local benefits.  
 
The global environment objective of the program would be to enhance ecosystem 
services for global and local benefits.  Specific global objectives would be addressed 
Page  2
through GEF financing in strategic areas to enhance ecosystem services for global and 
local benefits.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project components have been designed to support a time slice of DENR's core mandate 
and regular program.  This approach constitutes a move away from projectized 
approaches generally employed by donor assisted projects in the past, which established 
parallel structures and had problems of transition to regular programs on completion.  
Project interventions will also be fully consistent with the attainment of Major Final 
Outputs (MFO) that agencies are adopting in a move toward results based budgeting, and 
adoption of an Objective Performance Indicator Framework (OPIF).  
 
Component/MFO 1: Policy, Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (total cost US$28.14 
M
-
of which GEF US$1.90 M): Due to the construction of DENR's MFOs, a wide range 
of activities are included under MFO1, including those which are more operational in 
nature, supporting investments in MFO 2 and 3, (e.g., preparation of maps, development 
of full rehabilitation plans for abandoned mines, surveys and development of detailed 
watershed management plans). More importantly, however, the design of the project 
maintains conformity with the MFOs, and therefore the GAA.  That said, an important 
element of Component 1 is the support for DENR's institutional reform agenda which is 
based on the institutions Rationalization Plan. In line with the DBCC requirement that 
DENR "flesh-out" and "implement" its Rationalization Plan under the loan, a Framework 
Rationalization Plan has been developed (Annex 18: Table 2 - Rationalization Plan and 
Action Framework) which identifies the specific actions and outcomes expected under 
the project, and the longer-term steps to be undertaken by DENR to fully implement its 
Rationalization Plan. Progress in implementing the Rationalization Plan would be 
reviewed annually as part of the oversight agency review of DENR?s work plan and 
budget, included as a dated covenant under the loan.  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Rationalization of ENR Plans and Policies:  a) Strengthening the 
efficiency of DENR's organization and operations: Key activities include: i) development 
of a framework for rationalizing and prioritizing the wide ranging ENR policies and 
legislation; ii) streamlining the delegation of approving authorities at the different 
hierarchical levels of the organization; and iii) restructuring EMB to be functionally-
based, rather than sub-sectoral.  Expenditures would be for technical assistance, 
facilitation of action plans for planning and budgeting, and some computers and software 
necessary to support the activities; b) Strengthening the service delivery functions in the 
provision of data, information and M&E:  The project would support a baseline survey 
which, inter alia, would provide measures of client satisfaction with DENR's service 
delivery, and on the level of perceived transparency in the access to data and information.  
A
follow-up survey would be done by June 30, 2011. The Policy and Planning Office 
would be strengthened to more effectively monitor DENR's program implementation and 
to undertake periodic evaluations. Support would also be provided for strengthening key 
databases, and the establishment of a more effective MIS system.  By December 31, 
2007, it has been agreed an MIS strategic plan and budget would be approved which inter 
alia would establish and thereafter implement the action plan for the design of a program 
Page  3
to improve the quality, public accessibility and links between the key databases of the 
DENR. Expenditures would be for the baseline surveys, setting-up and upgrading of the 
MIS system, and purchase of goods as required, and c) Strengthening DENR?s overall 
project management processes:  The programmatic approach being supported by the 
project would entail expenditures for conducting the internal audit, and for PCU/FASPO 
for project management and associated costs such as computers, data collection and 
compilation.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Surveys and Mapping:  Survey and maps would be prepared to 
better demarcate forest lands, watersheds, protected areas, foreshores, geo-hazards (high 
risk areas for landslides and flood-run-off) and groundwater. To the extent that the 
project provides for the location of boundary markers/survey pegs, it has been explicitly 
agreed that, under the project, the placement of such markers shall not support nor 
encourage in any way, actions which would lead to the displacement of people occupying 
lands within the demarcated areas. Expenditures will include the costs of maps, surveys, 
GPS units etc.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3: Watershed Development Planning. Expenditures would include the 
preparation of watershed management plans, including the characterization of land-use 
patterns, delineation of forest and protected areas etc., and their ground truthing. This will 
be focused on the priority watersheds identified for support and discussed in detail in 
Component 2 below.  
 
Subcomponent 1.4: Remediation of Risks:  Support would be for (i) site investigation 
and analysis and development of environmental rehabilitation and remediation plans for 
selected abandoned mines; (ii) implementation of interim mitigation and remediation 
measures to manage immediate risks posed by the abandoned Bagacay mine site, while 
the final rehabilitation and remediation plan is being prepared; and, (iii) development of 
environmental and social policies and guidelines for current and future mining.  
 
Subcomponent 1.5: Public Awareness and Environmental Education: Support, in 
particular from the GEF, would be provided for review and assessment of DENR's IEC 
strategy and framework, structure, roles and functions, drawing upon the experience from 
other donor-project supported IEC plans and programs and identifying best practices in 
ENR for dissemination and replication. Expenditures would be for strategic public 
awareness and education campaigns, goods, services, some technical capacity, 
preparation of the campaign materials etc.  
 
Component/MFO 2 Integrated Ecosystem Management (total cost US$14.09 - of which 
GEF US$4.43): This component targets watersheds facing severe risk of further 
degradation, and particularly those in critical ecological areas.  It focuses the support on 
participatory actions with stakeholders who are directly influenced by the state of the 
natural resource degradation.  
 
Subcomponent 2.1: Integrated Ecosystems Management: a) Promoting participatory 
watershed management. The focus would be on prioritized integrated watershed and 
Page  4
wetlands management strategies in priority areas facing severe risk of further degradation 
or in sensitive ecological areas.  Specific activities to be supported would include: 
community organizing, stakeholder analysis and mobilization, formulation of IEM/IWM 
guidelines, IEM/IWM plan formulation; conduct of specific and focused IEC (see 
subcomponent 1.3 above), land use zoning planning and boundary delineation.  Support 
would also be provided for strengthening communications systems and strengthening 
partnership/ collaboration with other sectors in environmental compliance. A specific 
focus would be on strengthening LGUs to undertake responsibilities in ENR 
management. The watersheds agreed to be supported under the GEF and the SIM areas 
follows: i) Angat Watershed Reservation (55,709 ha), Ipo Watershed (6,600 ha), Dona 
Remedios Trinidad-Gen. Tinio WFR (20,760 ha), Kanan Watershed (39, 160, 83 ha), 
Bicol River Basin: Libmanan-Pulantuna Watershed (70,924ha), and Ligawasan Marsh 
(46,798 ha). Additionally, it has been agreed that funding under the SIM would be 
directed to support integrated watershed protection activities in Abulog (CAR), 
Matutinao (Region 7), Pola (Region 4-B).  For these additional watersheds, before 
investments are made it will be necessary to follow the up-front work on 
stakeholder/social and environmental assessments, as well as site descriptions.  These 
activities could be included as part of the watershed management plan work to be done 
under the project in 2007; b) Habitat Rehabilitation and Restoration. This would support: 
i) restoration and rehabilitation of convergence watershed (with GEF support) and non-
convergence watersheds (with SIL support); ii) capacity building (LGU, local 
communities, DENR); and iii) IEC campaigns. Prioritized degraded ecologically 
sensitive areas would be rehabilitated primarily through rain-forestation. Biodiversity 
conservation and management would be supported within priority PAs and other 
biologically important areas; and the assessment of key conservation areas, including 
resource-base assessments and mapping of wetlands.  
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Agro-Forestry and Livelihood Support.  Communities would be 
supported to implement demand driven livelihood activities that achieve sustainable land 
management and/or biodiversity conservation, identified in micro-catchment plans. 
Guidelines for project proposals would also emphasize linking sustainable land and 
natural resources management practices and tenurial instruments with community 
participation in local ENR monitoring systems and resource protection.  Proposals would 
be financed on a competitive (such as community willingness to provide in-kind 
contributions) and best practice basis, and would be screened and endorsed by the 
Watershed Management Councils and or LGUs. Carbon finance activities will be 
explored as a means of providing recurrent financing in exchange for the establishment 
and maintenance of forests in eligible areas. Financing for this is envisaged to be 
provided through Carbon Funds, the details of which would be worked out at a later time.  
 
Component/MFO 3 Strengthening Environment and Natural Resources Management 
(total cost US$4.77 M - of which GEF US$0.67): This Component targets the regulatory 
and oversight functions of DENR.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1: Monitoring Systems for ENR Laws and Regulations:  Support 
would be for: (i) strengthening of key regulatory functions related to the issuance of 
Page  5
tenurial instruments, and encroachment into forest areas; and (ii) strengthening the 
implementation of regulations, relating to air and water quality, solid waste management, 
and environmental impact assessment (EIA), which inter alia, would include greater 
transparency, improved partnerships with both the public and the private sector and the 
use of market-based and command and control instrument. This component would fund 
capacity-building for volunteer enforcement and local natural resource monitoring in 
priority sites. On the compliance of environmental laws and regulations, the Program 
would finance the following priority activities: (i) air quality management: purchase of 
air quality monitoring equipment to upgrade DENR?s monitoring tools and capability; 
monitoring of private emissions testing centers to ensure they perform according to the 
guidelines and standards set by the DENR; monitoring of firms issued with permit to 
operate to ensure that they comply with the standards; inventory of firms with hazardous 
air emissions and stack sampling, among others; (ii) water quality management: 
establishment of at least three priority water quality management areas that will pave the 
way for the implementation of the recently enacted Clean Water Act, including the 
implementation of the environmental user fee/discharge permit system, an economic 
instrument, to complement water quality regulations; operationalization of the multi-
sectoral water quality management boards (WQMBs); implementation of the 
environmental user fee/discharge permit system; and capacity building activities for EMB 
Central and Regional Offices and the WQMBs to implement the discharge permit system; 
(iii) waste management: inventory of firms that manufacture and/or import toxic and 
hazardous wastes; and technical assistance to LGUs on solid waste management to 
increase compliance and adoption of the ecological solid waste management act by the 
LGUs; (iv) EIA: development of guidelines to strengthen the implementation of an EIA 
system, which inter alia would include provisions for bio-diversity and capacity building 
of Regional Offices and LGUs.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2: Community-based Participatory IWM Monitoring System: On the 
basis of the existing DENR Biodiversity Monitoring System (BMS), a local level priority 
participatory land, water and resource use monitoring system will be developed to be 
used in IWM.  DENR has, with funding from the World Bank, developed a successful 
BMS for protected areas over the past 10 years.  GEF funds would, through the financing 
of TA, assist DENR in scaling-up this existing monitoring system so that it can be used 
as a participatory monitoring tool in targeted watersheds and PAs with a critical and 
urgent need for conservation action, across the Philippines.  It will be further developed 
so that it can be used as a simple monitoring tool for IWM and with added monitoring 
components such as water quality and soil.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will have a nationwide coverage, particularly in terms of the reforms to be 
effected. However, Component 2 will be implemented in the priority watersheds located 
within the Southern Sierra Madre Watershed Cluster that includes the Angat watershed 
reservation, Ipo watershed, Dona Remedios Trinided-General Tinio watershed forest 
reserve, Umiray watershed forest reserve and Kanan watershed all in the island of Luzon, 
Libmanan-Pulantuna watershed in the Bicol Region (Region V) and the Liguasan marsh 
Page  6
in Mindanao. These areas were selected based on their global and local biodiversity 
significance, rate of degradation and the existing activities and interventions currently 
being undertaken. Additional watersheds have been proposed for inclusion once the 
environmental and social aspects have been assessed.  These activities would be in 
Abulog, Matutinao and Pola.  
 
The rehabilitation of an abandoned mine site to be supported under Component 3 will be 
carried out in the Bagacay mine in the island of Samar in the eastern Visayas. The 
abandoned mine site is in public land, uninhabited and idle.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASRE) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Program will finance a slice of the DENR's core priority activities to meet its 
mandates and strategic goals in managing, conserving and protecting the country's 
environment and natural resources. It will not finance any activities related to mining of 
mineral resources, but will instead assist Government address the legacy of the past by 
supporting the preparation of a comprehensive mine rehabilitation and remediation plan, 
implementation of interim measures to contain immediate risks posed by the abandoned 
mines to the environment and the community and strengthening enforcement of 
environmental and social policies for current and future mining.  
 
Environmental issues. There are no environmental issues for year 1 priority activities 
since these are mostly "soft" activities, with the exception of the interim measures for the 
Bagacay mine site. Year 1 activities include stakeholder mobilization and consultations, 
surveys and mappings, trainings and capacity building, seedling collection and 
establishments of nurseries for indigenous tree species, formation of Water Management 
Councils in priority watersheds, formulation of watershed management plans, advocacy 
Page  7
and IEC works, review of programs and policies, among others. The interim measures for 
the Bagacay mine site include construction of diversion and limestone channels to 
prevent and neutralize acidic water from flowing into Taft river; construction of drainage 
canals, fences and berms, slope stabilization measures and installation of signages.  
 
Environmental issues related to the interim measures include siltation of waterways due 
to civil works, management of silt materials from de-silting and maintenance activities 
and the potential increase in acid mine drainage during construction. These impacts, 
however, are assessed to be localized and manageable and would only occur during 
construction and during periodic de-silting and maintenance work.  
 
The possibility of tailings ponds (TPs) failure is highly unlikely due to the already 
compacted tailings materials, the absence of water impounded along the TP structures 
which reduces the pore pressure in the dam, the low height (3 m or less) and gentle slopes 
of pond embankments and the construction of proper drainage canals within the tailings 
ponds which strengthen its stability. This is confirmed by a separate geotechnical 
assessment report of the TPs conducted by the Mines and Geosciences Bureau.  
 
For years 2-5 of the Program, negative environmental impacts are envisaged to be minor 
and manageable given the very strong Program emphasis on sustainable natural resources 
management and integrated ecosystem management approach. Minor impacts, if any, 
would relate to some livelihood activities that may pose added pressure to the already 
stressed ecosystems, if not designed and implemented properly, and if these are not 
consistent with the watershed management plan. Other impacts may relate to perverse 
reforestation activities such as monoculture of species, introduction of exotic species in 
conservation areas and non-sustainable agro-forestry practices.  
 
Social issues. The Program envisages having positive impacts on communities with the 
introduction and implementation of sustainable livelihood activities and sound integrated 
watershed management programs which are prepared in a participatory manner. The 
Program is not expected to involve involuntary resettlement and land acquisition or 
restrict community access to resources. The program has opted to use OP12 (GEF) 
ecosystem management as opposed to OP2 - biodiversity management as the focus; the 
underlying argument being to improve management by creating the right incentive 
structures to reduce threat to the resources. Through the implementation of demand 
driven alternative livelihoods activities, communities would be encouraged to participate 
in activities that also benefit NRM and biodiversity management; a process to increase 
buy-in. The program does not envisage demarcation of protected areas into strict 
biodiversity - no go areas - with a surrounding buffer area which would result in some 
restriction.  Rather, by offering communities a menu of feasible alternative livelihood 
activities the assumption would be that in the medium term the pressure would be 
reduced through a voluntary change in the communities' use of resources.  This more 
"relaxed" approach is guided by previous lessons learnt, which have shown that 
restriction results in animosity and limited benefits to the threatened areas.  
 
Page  8
Indigenous peoples/indigenous cultural communities are present priority watersheds and 
are expected to benefit from the program by way of increased income and greater social 
inclusion. These IPs/ICCs are the Dumagats of the Southern Sierra Cluster, composed of 
the Angat, Ipo, DRT-Gen Tinio and Kanan Watersheds and the Agtas of Libmanan-
Pulantuna Watershed.  
 
The interim measures for the Bagacay mine site are implemented to protect 
communities from the health risks and danger posed by the mine site.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long term and future impacts of the Project are envisaged to be highly positive that will 
contribute to the overall improvement of the country's environment and natural resources.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternative is "business as usual", where the DENR continues to centrally implement 
ENR laws with little LGU involvement and where planning is disconnected from the 
budgeting process.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Two separate environmental assessment (EA) studies were conducted by the DENR as 
part of the Program preparation. One assesses the impacts of year 1 activities and the 
other assesses in great detail the impacts of the interim measures. The two EAs confirm 
the negligible negative environmental impacts of the year 1 activities due their ?soft? 
nature and the manageable impacts of the interim measures. Environmental issues related 
to the interim measures include siltation of waterways due to civil works and the potential 
increase in acid mine drainage during construction. Siltation will be addressed by 
constructing silt traps/ponds within the drainage channels and downstream of the 
limestone channels and other strategic areas and by doing the construction during 
summer/dry months. The construction of proper drainage canals as well as stabilization 
of the tailings dam will prevent any movement of tailings materials downstream. Also, 
most of the tailings materials are already compact thus eliminating movements 
downstream. Possible tailings materials that will be moved by the flow of surface water 
during rainy days will be contained along the silt traps/ponds, thus preventing them from 
flowing to Taft River. Regular monitoring, de-silting and maintenance activities will be 
conducted to ensure efficiency of the silt traps. Silt materials that will be generated 
during de-silting and maintenance works of the silt traps/ponds will be temporarily 
deposited in tailings ponds until full measures to manage and dispose them are identified.  
 
The increase of acid mine drainage volume during construction is considered remote 
during the dry season, but could be different during the rainy season. As such, 
construction will be done during the dry season/summer period. Upon completion of the 
interim measures, the volume of   acidic water will be reduced since all neutral water 
from the different tributaries will flow directly to Taft River and only the rainwater which 
Page  9
falls into the surfaces of the mining areas will form acidic water. Any acidic water 
generated from the rainwater that gets in contact with the areas will, however, be 
subjected to neutralization process through the limestone channels before this flows into 
the Taft River.  
 
The EAs also formulated environmental guidelines, including a negative list of 
activities/subprojects with adverse impacts and those that are not sustainable, that will be 
followed for priority activities for years 2-5 and these guidelines are made part of the 
Operations Manual. The Environmental Management Bureau (EMB) of the DENR, with 
the mandate of implementing the Philippine EIA, will ensure that these guidelines are 
followed by the other Bureaus and LGUs, who will be implementing their respective 
priority activities. The other Bureaus of the DENR (MGB, FMB, PAWB) have the 
capacity to prepare and/or review EAs based on their involvement in reviewing EAs as 
part of the EIA Review Committee convened by EMB to review EAs of projects. LGUs, 
on one hand, will be capacitated by the Program to screen activities for environmental 
impacts and to prepare their respective EAs or EMPs for their priority activities assessed 
to have environmental impacts. Finally, EMB?s capacity will be further strengthened 
under Component 3 of the Program.  
 
A
Social Assessment report was prepared for each of the six watersheds. The SA 
defined and analyzed the respective key internal and external stakeholders their capacities 
and assets, constraints and liabilities and degree of influence. They also include 
respective demographic and socio economic baseline data of affected communities and 
framework for micro enterprise development. Recommendations were provided for the 
preparation of Integrated Ecosystem Watershed Management programs for greater social 
inclusion, equitable distribution of livelihood opportunities, accountability, transparency 
and greater ownership of the program by key stakeholders.  
 
A
separate social assessment report has also been prepared for the interim measures for 
the Bagacay mine site. The SA validated the divide between the parochial interest of the 
upstream communities to reopen the mine and those downstream along the Taft River 
whose head water flows below the Bagacay Mine. The Samar Catholic Church, the 
academe and local officials are supportive of the closure of this and other mines in 
Samar. The SA report also provides recommended arrangements to ensure meaningful 
participation of the stakeholders and accountability of implementers in the 
implementation of the interim measures, and factors to consider in the preparation of the 
full scale rehabilitation plan.  
 
An Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework was developed to ensure that IPs/ICCs are 
informed, meaningfully consulted and mobilized to participate in the identification, 
planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the activities/subprojects in the 
priority watersheds. It gave detailed provisions on principles and operational strategies in 
the preparation of Indigenous Peoples Development Plan in tandem with the Integrated 
Ecosystem Watershed Management Plan. The integration of completed ancestral domain 
sustainable development and protection plan (ADSDPP), which when verified to have 
Page  10
genuinely represented the interest of and done by the IP community, will facilitate 
implementation under the Integrated Ecosystem Management(IEM)approach.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the program, particularly the component on integrated eco-
system management, include DENR, the participating LGUs, communities, IPs/ICCs and 
other agencies. The program is designed to increase the participation of these 
stakeholders in environment and natural resources management. The multi sectoral 
Coordinating Council and/or the Protected Areas and Wildlife Boards (where they are 
active) are the two mechanisms through which this can take place. They will be involved 
in the planning, design and implementation and monitoring stages. Specific capacity 
building activities shall be undertaken to strengthen consultation and participation skills 
of the stakeholders.  
 
The government agencies involved by virtue of their mandate or activities in the 
watersheds are the National Irrigation, DENR, DA, DAR, MWSS, NAPOCOR  and 
NCIP and DENR-ARMM and DTI (for the development of alternative livelihoods). 
Traditional Muslim institutions are a key stakeholder of the Ligawasan Marsh IEM while 
Bagacay Rehabilitation Project will involve the Samar Catholic Church. Private business 
dependent on the upland water for their enterprises are also among the stakeholders like 
the big plantations and processing plants.  
 
The preparation of the different working papers and other studies were done using 
consultation meetings with the stakeholders. Completed studies are disclosed in the 
website of DENR and have been circularized to the different regional offices and 
bureaus.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/19/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/19/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  11
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  12
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
01/08/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
01/08/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro 
01/08/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
01/24/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
01/24/2007 
Comments:   
