Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/17/2006 
Report No.:  AC2069
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P075464 
Project Name:  National Program Support for Health (BACKUP TTL=TIENZO) 
Task Team Leader:  Loraine Hawkins 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 6, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Health (60%);Non-compulsory health finance (30%);Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Social risk mitigation (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
110.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
•
Increased financial protection of the poor from the costs of ill health and health care, 
and increased accuracy and transparency in poverty targeting of the National Health 
Insurance Program's sponsored indigent program  
 
•
Improvement in the health MDGs and other priority public health indicators inareas 
covered by project intereventions  
 
•
Establishment of performance-based budget mechanisms in the DOH and the 
Philippines Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC), linking resource allocation to progress 
towards priority public health and health system reform goals   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project components are selected priorities from a larger set of “Fourmula One” 
flagship programs, projects and activities of the DOH:  
 
1.
Health Financing (Est. US$50 million loan finance)  
 
1.1
Budget reforms of DOH and attached agencies will be the basis for planning, 
budgeting, utilizing funds and monitoring other Project components, harmonized with 
DOH’s own management processes.  
 
a. 
Development of a medium term HSEF.  
Page  2
b. 
Establishing a system for budget allocation, utilization and performance 
monitoring (linked to the DOH’s OPIF nationally, and LGU scorecards at local level).  
 
1.2.Expansion of the National Health Insurance Program. (US$50M)   The loan will 
support equitable expansion of the NHIP Indigent Program and increased support value, 
by financing the national subsidy for indigent premiums for LGUs that use community 
based poverty mapping to identify and enroll poor families.  
 
2.
Health Service Delivery: Public Health (Est. loan finance of US$48.5 million)  
 
Public Health (US$48.5M)  
 
a.  
Disease free zone initiative (US$4.5M).  The loan will finance procurement of 
public health drugs, vaccines and commodities (excluding pesticides) and 
information/education materials to support eradication of malaria, schistosomiasis, rabies, 
leprosy and filiarisis.  
 
b.
Intensified disease prevention and control (US$44M).  The loan will finance 
public health commodities, including EPI and hepatitis B vaccines, tuberculosis control 
drugs and laboratory supplies, subject to progress in logistics.  The loan will finance a 
pilot performance awards scheme for LGUs that achieve defined performance targets in 
service agreements with DOH for delivery of immunization and TB control programs.  
LGUs may use awards for non-devolved expenditures in their public health plans. Budget 
space for the awards will be generated through the budget reforms under Component A.1.  
 
3:
Regulation of pharmaceuticals (US$0.5M)  
 
Strengthening of the Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD), and development of 
certification (“Quality Seals”) for pharmacies and for generic drugs.  The program will 
support further capacity building and policy development in BFAD, for a transition to 
income retention, and further progress in raising BFAD’s service performance standards.  
 
4:
Governance (Est. US$10.725M loan finance)  
 
4.1
Sector management  
 
a.  
National Human Resources for Health Program (US$0.5M) The loan will finance 
training, stipends and salaries for the DOH’s programs for deploying doctors torural areas 
with shortages, including “doctors to the barrio’s” and resident physician and medical 
specialist pools programs, which will be integrated and strengthened.  
 
b.
Sectoral Development Approach for Health (US10.225M).  The loan will finance 
the DOH counterpart contribution for the EC’s Health Sector Reform grant for 16local 
convergence provinces implementing Fourmula 1 locally over the next five years.  The 
EC grant and the DOH counterpart will jointly finance LGU health reform 
implementation plans, with DOH funds used for non-devolved activities in the plans 
(local capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, etc), according to the EC’s Technical 
and Administrative Provisions for Philippines Health Sector PolicySupport Program as 
already approved by the ICC in September, 2005.  A performance-linked tranche in the 
EC grant design will be related to substantive milestones and results.  
 
c. 
Sectoral Monitoring and Evaluation (Nil loan finance.  Parallel grant finance.) An 
LGU scorecard system will be implemented in 16 convergence sites, and used as an 
element of the criteria for the performance-linked tranche of the EC grant program.  
 
4.2
Internal Management Reform in DOH. (Nil loan finance. Parallel grant finance)  
 
a.  
Procurement and logistics reform will address past inefficiencies in materials 
management to ensure efficient supply of public health commodities under Component 2.  
b.  Financial management reform will be consolidated through eNGAS rollout, eBudget 
Page  3
systems development, development of the Finance Service, stronger inventory controls, 
financial and procurement information system integration, development of internal audit.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will not fund any civil works, procurement of medical equipment nor 
activities in health facilities. Procurement of public health goods will be done through the 
UN agencies and not through domestic pharmaceuticals.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASEN) 
Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project will not finance any civil works, whether rehabilitation or construction of any 
health care facilities, and will not purchase any medical equipment. The procurement of 
public health goods to be supported by the Project is through the UN systems and not 
from domestic pharmaceutical companies.  
 
The Philippines has strong laws and guidelines on the proper handling, collection, 
transport, treatment, storage and disposal of health care wastes, which the Bank had 
reviewed during the preparation and appraisal of another Bank-funded project, the 
Second Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood Project. The review concluded that the 
country’s guidelines on health care waste management, issued as Joint Administrative 
Order by the Department of Health and the Department of Environment and Natural 
Resources, are in compliance with the World Health Organization’s standards and to 
local laws such as the Toxic and Hazardous Waste Management Act (Republic Act 
6969), the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act (RA 9003) and the Clean Air Act 
(RA 8749).  
 
Page  4
On one hand, positive impacts are envisaged for indigenous people (IP) groups, who 
may benefit from the intensified public health effort by the local government units and 
the expanded coverage of the Indigent Program of the PHIC.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The long term impacts of the project will be positive, with the reforms in the public 
health sector, more improved public health outcomes and expansion of the PHIC 
coverage.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
There are no safeguard issues in the Project. Positive impacts, however, are anticipated 
with the increase in coverage of the PHIC, which may include IPs.  Related to this, the 
DOH formulated an IP Planning Framework which outlines the plans for monitoring and 
evaluating Project impact on IPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Project Team will take affirmative action to ensure that the meaningfully 
consultations of various stakeholders, including IPs, on the various reforms regarding 
health financing, regulation, service delivery and governance.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/28/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Page  5
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Loraine Hawkins 
03/29/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
03/29/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Loreto Padua 
03/29/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
