Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1777 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/03/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P095315 
Project Name: Western Provinces Rural Water Suppliy, Sanitation and Hygiene Project 
Task Team Leader: Parameswaran Iyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 26, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (70%);Sanitation (20%);Sub-national government administration 
(10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
25.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)25.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project would support Shaanxi and Sichuan in carrying out an integrated approach to the 
design and delivery of rural water supply, sanitation and hygiene services, while incorporating 
past innovations and lessons learned, to scale up the approach in China. It would support poverty 
alleviation by targeting poor villages and per-urban areas which lack safe drinking water and 
sanitation facilities.  Special attention would be given to the needs and concerns of vulnerable 
groups, like women, children and minorities. The project would also enhance government 
capacities and reforms to better integrate rural water supply, sanitation and hygiene programs.  
 
The project development objective is to improve the quality, quantity and sustainability of 
water supply and sanitation services in the participating poor communities, through an integrated 
approach to equitable service planning and delivery, which could be replicated in other provinces 
of China. Key performance indicators would include the number of beneficiaries with increased 
access to safe water supply and sanitation access, financial sustainability, evidence of an 
integrated approach to service delivery and improved hygienic and sanitation practices   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components. The four main components with approximate costs are given below:  
 
(a) Water Supply (US$ 53 m): Multi-village piped water supply schemes and single village 
schemes with piped water supply and other technologies like deep bore wells, rain water 
collectors etc.  
 
(b)Sanitation (US$ 16 m): Latrines, drains and other environmental improvements  
 
(c)Hygiene Education (US$ 4 m): Mass media programs through print and electronic media, 
household and community campaigns, and  
 
(d)  
Institutional Strengthening (US$ 2 m): Strengthening national and provincial institutional 
and management capacity, training/capacity building and technical assistance at provincial, local 
government and community levels. A central component will be included to ensure that the 
lessons from the implementation of the project in the two provinces are disseminated wider and 
to provide advocacy for the project approaches as well as for sanitation.  The central component 
will include three activities: (i) international workshop on sanitation and hygiene; (ii) a major 
research activity on sanitation and hygiene and (iii) a national dissemination workshop.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in the provinces of Shaanxi and Sichuan.  25 counties (15 in Shaanxi and 
10 in Sichuan) have been selected on the basis of poverty, water scarcity, water quality and then 
on the basis of demand for services by rural communities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Pending determination of the scope of actions necessary to meet safeguard policy requirements, 
it is difficult to assess borrower institutional capacity at present. Capacity will be assessed in the 
course of preparing safeguards-relevant plans or frameworks.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASSD) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSD) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
draft TOR for environmental assessment has been prepared for the preparation of the 
proposed partial EIA and the EMP for the project.  Local agencies with relevant experience will 
be engaged to carry out this work with guidance from the Bank.  
 
The project seeks to improve the environment in the participating poor communities in rural 
and peri-urban areas through the delivery of rural water supply, sanitation and hygiene services.  
Project activities include construction of water supply schemes (typically small civil works for 
water supply plants supplying water through pipelines as well as rain water collectors, bore wells 
etc), latrines, drains and other environmental improvement activities such as solid waste 
management.  The environmental impact is therefore relatively limited.  An environmental 
assessment will be conducted consistent with the domestic laws/regulations and OP/BP 4.01.  
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The draft EIA/EMP for the two provinces would be prepared by end-February 2006, and the 
Provincial EIA/EMPs, and the executive summary for the project would be ready by early April 
2006.  
 
The draft EIA/EMP for the two provinces would be prepared by end-February 2006, and the 
Provincial EIA/EMPs, and the executive summary for the project would be ready by early April 
2006.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The project counties selected do not prima facie reveal any distinct minority communities. 
However, screening and social assessment will be undertaken to identify any potentially affected 
minority nationality communities, and to consult with potentially affected communities 
regarding potential impacts and project design.  If minority nationalities are found to be 
potentially affected by the project, an IPP or IPPF (or both) will be prepared to meet OP4.10 
requirements.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Efforts will be undertaken to minimize or avoid land acquisition, but it is likely that civil 
works will require some land acquisition.  In each province, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) 
will be prepared for first-tranche activities involving land acquisition, and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be prepared to guide any land acquisition occurring after loan 
effectiveness.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
In cases where the source for water supply schemes under the project is a dam/reservoir, a 
dam safety report as per the provisions of OP 4.37 will be called for.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/28/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/28/2006 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Timetabel for RAP preparation:  
 
RAP consultants to be mobilized by end-December 2005  
 
First draft RAPs and RPFs are to be submitted to the Bank for review by end-February 2006  
 
Revised draft RAPs and RPFs are to be disclosed locally as well as at World Bank InfoShop 
by end-March 2005  
 
Final draft RAPs and RPFs are expected to be ready for review by end-April 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Parameswaran Iyer 
08/15/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/25/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
10/28/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
