Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/30/2007 
Report No.:  AC2590
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P079935 
Project Name:  Second National Roads Improvement 
Task Team Leader:  William D. O. Paterson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (82%);Central government administration (18%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S);Technology diffusion (S);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
232.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
330.53 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 8.00
338.53 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Program goal is the establishment of road management arrangements which ensure 
the upgrading and preservation of the National Road System (NRS) in an 
environmentally, socially and financially sustainable manner, as originally defined.  
 
The development objective for Phase 2 is:  to assist the Borrower in improving the 
operation, organizational effectiveness, and fiduciary control in the management and 
financing of the national road system so as to enhance road user satisfaction in the Project 
area and to improve the efficiency in the use of financial resources in the road sector.  
 
The achievement of this development objective will be evidenced by the following 
outcomes or results by the close of Phase 2 of the Program (details in Annex 3):  
 
(a) Improved road management organization 
–
new planning tools applied to the 
majority of the expenditure program; processing times for procurement, payments and 
land acquisition reduced; compliance with quality standards increased; operational 
integrity improved; and satisfactory rationalization plan implemented.  
Page  2
(b) Revenues to the Road Fund increased from 40 percent to at least 60 percent of asset 
preservation needs; and asset preservation programs based at least 80 percent on 
economic prioritization;  
 
(c) Condition of the national arterial roads improved from xx percent to yy percent in 
good condition; and total length of paved roads increased by 187 km by the Project.   
 
3. Project Description 
NRIMP2 will support: (a)improvement of 791 km of national arterial roads and related 
bridges, including road extension of 146 km, rehabilitation of 289 km, widening of 13.3 
km, and risk management of 230 km; (b)support delivery of a comprehensive road 
maintenance program through long-term performance-based maintenance contracts 
covering 1,083 km and preventive maintenance program covering 4,300 km; (c)improved 
organizational effectiveness and integrity of public road management services in DPWH 
through reforms in corporate processes, relationships and partnerships, and service 
delivery structures; and (d)strengthened operation of the Road Fund and a framework for 
subsequent sector restructuring.  
 
Part A:  National Road Improvement and Asset Preservation  
 
Component A.1:  National Road Improvement (estimated cost US$ 238 million, incl. 
$124 million loan portion).   The road improvement component comprises civil works 
covering road rehabilitation, road upgrading, widening of roads and bridges, bridge 
rehabilitation and replacement, and landslide rehabilitation, totaling approximately 790.8 
km of roads and 1057 lin.m. bridges on the arterial National Road Network.  
 
Component A.2:  Asset Preservation of the National Road Network (estimated cost US$ 
277 million, incl. US$ 87.5 million loan portion).  The component will expand the 
coverage of preservation works on the national road network in partnership with the Road 
Board, including financing on a sector-wide basis, and comprehensive performance-
based contracts, as follows:  
 
A2.1 Preventive Maintenance - finances an 11 percent slice of the national road 
maintenance program in partnership with the Road Board, with pooled financing for 
preventive maintenance works covering around 400 km equivalent of the national road 
network over 4 years under a sector-wide approach.  
 
A2.2  Performance-based Maintenance - will support large long-term performance-
based contracts of about 5-year duration for comprehensive maintenance on about 1,000 
km length of the arterial road network including the Strong Republic Nautical Highway 
(5% coverage of the paved length of NRS) in eight packages, including rehabilitation, 
preventive, restoration and routine maintenance works.  
 
Category B:  Institutional and Capacity Development  
 
Component B.1: Optimization of Business Process Improvements (estimated cost 
US$46 million, incl. US$18 million loan portion). The planning tools and financial 
management applications that were designed and piloted under NRIMP1 will be 
Page  3
institutionalized and implemented in all regional and a majority of district offices of 
DPWH, including expansion of the communications networks and computerization.  
 
Component B.2: Corporate Effectiveness and Integrity Development (estimated cost 
US$8.0 million, incl. US$1.1 million loan portion).  This component will upgrade and 
modernize the corporate structure, processes, partnerships and operating codes of DPWH 
to make it a user responsive, transparent, and efficient public sector agency with high 
integrity standards, through four subcomponents, i.e.  
 
B.2.1:  Organizational Effectiveness.  An organizational re-assessment and restructuring 
of DPWH, including national initiatives on rationalization, corporate standards, integrity 
development, performance management and leadership.  
 
B.2.2:  Development of Sustainable Corporate Road partnerships.  The operation of a 
multi-stakeholder partnership among road users and non-governmental organizations 
working in partnership with DPWH, Road Board and various government agencies to 
improve the overall effectiveness and integrity of the road sector.  
 
B.2.3: Improved Road Management Service Delivery.  Improved arrangements for 
delivering maintenance services on national roads and bridges under the current 
organization, and through a pilot trial of options for commercializing the current 
operations of district engineering offices.  
 
B2.4: Integrity Support.  Support to strengthen the fiduciary integrity of the Project, 
including an integrated audit and independent review of the use of public funds, to 
strengthen the transparency of procurement and implementation.  
 
Component B.3:  Strategic Sector Reform (estimated cost US$ 1.3 million, incl. US$1.2 
million loan portion)). Continuing support for phased reform of the sector, assistance 
would be provided to strengthen the operations of the Road Board and update its 
mandate, and to revisit options for restructuring the management and delivery of services 
in the sector.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is spread all over the country, with most sub-projects located in Mindanao. 
While the road systems to be upgraded are mainly national roads, these are existing ones 
needing major rehabilitation and reconstruction work. Thus it is expected that there will 
be little disturbance on the natural ecosystems traversed by these roads.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Simon Peter Gregorio (EASSO) 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASRE) 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASSO) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In general the project impacts include the local impacts associated with the construction 
and operation of several national road systems. The impacts of these roads have been the 
subject of environmental assessment for each sub-project which have been reviewed and 
cleared having been found satisfactory and in accordance with the World Bank 
Environmental Assessment Policy OP 4.01. The Natural Habitat Policy OP 4.04 is not 
triggered since the roads to be upgraded are all existing roads, with cleared or built up 
right of way and no potential disturbance of natural ecosystems.  
 
The environmental assessment process for the sub-projects were undertaken in 
accordance with the DPWH Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy Framework, as 
embodied in the Social and Environmental Management Systems Operations Manual 
adopted by DPWH in 2003 and cleared by the Bank for NRIMP during its first phase of  
implementation.  The same Safeguards management framework defines a set of 
guidelines for undertaking environmental assessment has been applied to all DPWH 
projects regardless of funding source. For NRIMP2, the same safeguards framework need 
not be revised as it has been mainstreamed during project preparation and implementation 
a
set of due diligence guidelines in complying with the safeguards requirements of the 
Bank.  This framework addresses the EA requirements set by the government 
(Presidential Decree (PD) 1151, Presidential proclamation 2146, DAO 03-30). This is 
complementary to World Bank OP 4.01 and includes environmental screening and 
scoping, impact assessment, development of an environmental management plan, 
monitoring and public disclosure and consultation.  
 
The assessment process has produced Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) reports 
and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for the construction, rehabilitation, 
expansion and maintenance of the road systems, separate environmental management 
plans will be implemented by DPWH and construction contractors under their 
supervision.  The issues to be covered are anticipated to include those associated with 
Page  5
construction including traffic, health and safety, landslides, erosion control, flooding, 
management of cut materials, and waste management including fuel and oil.  
 
Based on the success of the first batch of sub-projects more roads, if more subprojects 
will be pursued under this project, the IEEs will be prepared using a programmatic 
approach during implementation.  The impacts are similar to those for the earlier 
NRIMP-1 projects which include impacts associated with construction (waste 
management, traffic and accidents, erosion, removal of trees, air and noise pollution, 
localized flooding) and operation (dust, odor and noise, waste from generator and 
employees, flooding of area near site, fire and safety, and management of cut materials). 
Taking the lessons from NRIMP1, risk assessment will be done for sub-projects that are 
prone to landslides and road slips.  
 
Since the Resettlement policy is triggered, a Land Acquisition, Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation and Indigenous Peoples’(LARRIPP) Policy Framework has been 
submitted, reviewed and cleared by the Manila Office. While majority of the sub-projects 
will not trigger the IP Safeguard Policy, an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework has 
been formulated and submitted by DPWH, which was reviewed and cleared by the 
Manila Office for the few sub-projects that may require this.  
 
To be used during project implementation, an updated Social and Environmental 
Management Systems (SEMS) Operational Manual was finalized by ESSO during project 
preparation and was reviewed and cleared by the Manila Office.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is specifically designed to support environmentally and socially sustainable 
road projects which will not generate any significant long term or indirect environment 
impacts. As practiced in NRIMP1, all NRIMP2 projects will follow methods and 
processes defined in the Social and Environment Safeguards Policy Framework which 
includes preventing long term environmental impacts to occur.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project was designed with environmental enhancement in mind and thus the project 
alternatives which include choosing the best design or alignment that will not create 
significant environmental effects. Some of the key alternatives considered were:  
 
*
No project alternative: In the no project alternative, environmental degradation if the 
roadways are not rehabilitated or upgraded. Some existing concerns of the existing roads 
to be rehabilitated are heavy dust and other vehicle emissions generated by passing 
vehicles or heavy traffic, flooding due to poor roadway drainage, landslides due to 
unstable cuts or slope protection.  
 
*
Focus on building environmental capacity. Based on Executive Order 291 (1996), an 
Environmental Impact Assessment Project Office (EIAPO), now the Environment and 
Page  6
Social Services Office (ESSO), was established within DPWH. The DPWH Secretary 
then issued a Departmental Order to maintain ESSO and strengthen it, which included 
training in technical skills to address social and indigenous peoples issues. Its further 
strengthening under NRIMP2 will forge a stronger link between EA teams and those 
preparing resettlement action plans (RAPs) in the DPWH Central Office and its 15 
Regional offices.  
 
*
Environmental Assessments. For programmatic initiatives such as NRIMP, sub-
projects need to be screened to identify environmental impacts. As part of its enhanced 
social and environmental management system, to be integrated in full EAs are risk 
assessments for road systems located in environmentally critical areas, especially those 
lying on steep slopes and unstable terrain.  
 
*
A
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of the National Road Sector Policy of 
DPWH is also planned to be conducted during project implementation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project impacts anticipated are manageable and not environmentally significant. 
These are shown below along with their attendant mitigation measures.  
 
*
The mitigating measures for construction and other impacts as well as the monitoring 
costs (odor, noise, workers health, site safety and hygiene) will be included in the project 
cost and in the construction contracts.  
 
*
Implementation arrangements: The ESSO would be primarily responsible for 
compliance with the environmental and social safeguard policies by preparing the EAs, 
LARRP and IPDP and securing proper implementation of the ECC and EMP.  
Implementation of the environmental management plan during construction will be 
undertaken by the construction contractors as an obligation under their contracts to be 
supervised by the NRIMP2 PMO, with the assistance of the Regional Offices, under the 
guidance of ESSO.  
 
*
Institutional Responsibilities:  The ESSO shall be responsible for ensuring the 
completeness and accuracy of all the NRIMP2 environmental and social reports to be 
submitted to the Bank and that the EMP is properly incorporated into the construction 
contracts.  The DENR, through its environmental unit will perform an oversight function 
to ensure that environmental covenants in the Loan Agreement are complied with.  
 
*
EA approval: (i) For the Road Improvement program of 12 packages, the IEEs and 
EMPs have been approved by the DENR, approved by the Bank and disclosed for all 4 
packages in Year 1 and all 8 packages in Year 2; (ii)  For the Long-term Maintenance 
(LM) program of 8 packages: the EMP has been approved and disclosed for all 4 
packages in Year 1, and the EIA has been completed and the issuance of the 
Environmental Clearances and EMPs are in process for 4 packages in Year 2.  
 
Page  7
*
RAP Implementation:  At appraisal the status was: (i) For first year road improvement 
program of 4 packages, all have Safeguards clearance and disclosure, two RAPs have 
been implemented satisfactorily with no outstanding issues, one is not required, and only 
CP2.10 (RAP and IPP) require implementation; (ii) For the second year road 
improvement program of 8 packages: 1 is under preparation (CP-2.5) and 7 have not 
begun preparation; (iii) For first and second years’ asset preservation program of long-
term maintenance in 8 packages, no RAP is required as no involuntary resettlement is 
anticipated.  
 
Stage of RAP Formulation and Implementation:  
 
1. RAP Implementation Completed (Affected Persons Relocated and/or Compensated):  
 
-
Year 1 contract packages  = Two (2)  
 
2. RAP Approved/ Disclosed, under implementation:  
 
-
Year 1 contract packages = One (1)  
 
3. RAP Under Preparation:  
 
-
Year 2 Contract packages = One (1)  
 
4. Not Started:  
 
-
Year 2 Contract packages = Seven (7)  
 
5. Not required:  
 
-
Year 1 Contract packages = Five (5)  
 
-
Year 2 Contract packages = Four (4)  
 
TOTAL Road Improvement & Asset Preservation Program:  
 
-
Year 1 Contract packages = 8  
 
-
Year 2 Contract packages = 12  
 
*
IPP Approval and Implementation:  The IP policy was triggered in six (6) of the 
twelve (12) contract packages for Road Improvement and one (1) out of the eight (8) 
contract packages for Long-Term Maintenance. For Year 1, one (1) Contract Package 
requires an IPP (CP-2.10), which has been approved by the Bank and disclosed. For Year 
2, six (6) contract packages require an IPP. (4 under Road Improvement and 1 under 
Long-Term Maintenance). Work on the IPP for all five (5) contract packages has yet to 
start.  
 
*
Monitoring, auditing and reporting:  Monitoring, auditing and reporting procedures 
related to the EA implementation, covering both biophysical and socio-economic 
parameters, are described in the EMP.  Monitoring arrangements include:  
 
-
Internal monitoring:  DPWH field engineers, NRIMP2 project management team, and 
EIAPO staff will be responsible for the monitoring and oversight of the EMP including 
oversight of associated obligations of the construction contractor.  
Page  8
-
External monitoring: An external monitor for the social safeguard issues will be hired 
to serve as a third party monitoring unit during project implementation.  DENR and a 
multi-
partite monitoring team will check the contractors’ compliance with the EMP.  
 
*
Reporting:  DPWH will provide a monitoring report to DENR with copy to the World 
Bank.  The World Bank supervision missions will summarize the status of compliance.  
 
*
Implementation completion report: As part of the monitoring/impact assessment to be 
done at the end of the project, the World Bank will work with the DPWH and other 
project participants to evaluate the effectiveness and implementation of the EMP.  The 
evaluation will be attached to the final report on the project and lessons learned will be 
incorporated into the EMP and EA process for future projects, as appropriate.  
 
*
Capacity to implement safeguards: DPWH has extensive experience in the preparation 
and implementation of similar World Bank projects.  Through the implementation of 
NRIMP1, the DPWH has developed effective working procedures and extensive 
experience with Bank procedures for preparing and implementing similar investment 
activities.  
 
*
NRIMP2 will support a close working relationship between the DPWH and the 
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the lead agency overseeing 
the domestic EIA process as well as the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples 
(NCIP).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The proposed project has strong support from the residents and government authorities at 
the national and local levels with strong commitment. Several public consultations were 
done during the EA work, including the residents. The following approaches were taken 
for public consultation (a) consultation meetings with local residents, communities, local 
government representatives, and (b) questionnaire analysis of public opinion 
supplemented by interviews.  
 
The environmental documents prepared by DPWH were publicly disclosed on October 
18, 2006 at the Knowledge Development Center of the World Bank Manila Office and on 
October 20, 2006 at the InfoShop in Washington and on December 18, 2006 in the 
DPWH central, regional and district offices.  Project related information and the EA 
documentations were also disclosed in the project area during public consultation 
processes and to the general public from January to October, 2006 and at the DPWH 
webpage on December 18, 2006. The final Land Acquisition, Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation and Indigenous Peoples’ (LARRIPP) Policy Framework was submitted to 
the Bank on February 19, 2007 and was disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop on 
February 17, 2007.   
 
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/31/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/31/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/19/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/19/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  10
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William D. O. Paterson 
05/24/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz 
05/17/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro 
02/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Simon Peter Gregorio 
05/17/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/23/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
05/25/2007 
Comments:   
