Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2595 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/01/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Poland 
Project ID: P102731 
Project Name: TIR - Transport Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Radoslaw Czapski 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 21, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 25, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (70%);Railways (30%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S);Managing for development results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives would be the following:  
 
(i)  
increased benefits to roads and railways users through improved main Polish national 
road and rail infrastructure and (ii) improved institutional capacity of Polish railway and road 
sector institutions to manage their network assets efficiently and effectively   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project design would be built on the success of the ongoing road program composed of series of 
three Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation (RM&R) Projects which started in 2004 using a 
Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp).  The total World Bank contribution to the program cost is 
estimated to be in the order of ? 350 million, spread over three years.  There would be a series of 
three annual loans (2007, 2008 and 2009) financing road and rail infrastructure improvements, 
with a gradually decreasing share of road investments and increasing railway investments.  Most 
likely, other IFIs, particularly EIB and EU will contribute additional resources to the overall 
program. It is expected that the first-year loan for 2007 would be of EUR 150 million, of which 
Page  2
2/3 (EUR 100 million) would support the rehabilitation of national roads and the remaining EUR 
50 million would be used for launching a railway track rehabilitation program. The Bank's 
financial support to the railway sector (EUR 50 million) might trigger more interest and 
additional resources from EIB.  
 
The following project components for the initial 2007 loan have been identified:  
 
Component A:   Road Sector maintenance and rehabilitation program (EUR 95.0 million).  This 
component will cover the physical improvements of road infrastructure, mostly through 
traditional works contracts for rehabilitation and maintenance, but also through several pilot  
Output- and Performance-based Road Contracts (OPRC) with a duration of several years.  The 
physical works financed under the project would be implemented mostly in 2007.  
 
Component B:  Railway sector maintenance and rehabilitation program (EUR 50.0 million). As 
in previous successful roads projects the project intervention is expected to focus on 
straightforward and relatively simple works (railway track rehabilitation) to be implemented 
through traditional works contracts (most likely not exceeding EUR 5 million each).  They may 
be spread over the whole country and primarily cover those sections of railway track that are 
needed to satisfy existing demand primarily for freight transport.  The works would help to 
eliminate the numerous speed restrictions on Polish freight rail lines, and thus improve the 
competitiveness of the rail mode vis-a-vis road freight mode.  
 
Component C: Institutional support.  (EUR 5.0 million).  This component will most likely have 
three subcomponents: (i) continuation of the support to the Government of Poland in 
modernizing and reforming the road agency GDDKiA by supporting activities needed to 
complete and make fully functional the Management Information System, mainstreaming the use 
of HDM IV as GDDKiA's core system for planning, optimization and budgeting of the road 
sector expenditures and providing consultant support as needed); (ii) completing the 
transformation of the rail infrastructure company PLK into an efficient infrastructure asset 
management firm and to solidify its financial long-term viability through a variety of activities 
including: consultant support to establish a financial model to support decision-making on track 
access charges and Government subsidies, studies to identify opportunities for efficiency gains 
and cost reductions, planning and preparation of priority rail rehabilitation projects outside the 
TEN-T network, planning and startup of a computerized rail infrastructure maintenance and 
rehabilitation system and training of PLK staff ; (iii) support to the Ministry of Transport on a 
variety of issues relating to the overall management of road and rail transport infrastructure 
sectors, such as the acceleration of the program of Motorway construction, absorption of 
available EU funding, introduction of intelligent transport systems, improvement of the interface 
between the normal-gauge rail system of western Europe and the wide-gauge rail network of 
Russia and other CIS countries.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All territory of Poland (rural and urban)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Already in 2003/4 analysis confirmed that the environmental legislation in Poland is compliant 
with safeguards policies. Polish institutions have extensive experience with public consultations 
and environmental analysis that may be required. Modifications of key environmental legislation 
in 2005 that have harmonized it further with EU requirements are gradually being transposed 
Page  3
into day to day practice of the PLK (Polish Railway Lines) and GDDKiA (General Directorate of 
Public Roads) that will be direct beneficiaries of the project.  
 
OP/BP 4.01 is applicable as in the case of the ongoing RM&R projects. GDDKiA, the 
implementing agency, follows provisions of the Environmental Chapter of Operational Manual 
(adopted on March 3, 2006) and disclosed to the public along with an indicative list of proposed 
sub-projects and a map showing their location throughout the country. During preparation of 
RM&RIII lessons learnt were translated into revisions and update of Operational Manual as well 
as incorporation of more specific details on environmental mitigation and monitoring procedures. 
GDDKiA, the implementing agency, assigned an environmental liason within the agency to help 
the Bank team in careful monitoring of implementation of contracts located within or in close 
vicinity of environmentally sensitive areas.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jan Pakulski (ECSSD) 
Ms Barbara Letachowicz (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment policy is triggered due to potential site-specific impacts of 
rehabilitation and maintenance sub-projects which, in most cases if any, can have mitigatory 
measures designed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Some of sub-projects may be classified as these having the potential to cause conversion or 
degradation of natural habitats most likely indirectly (through human activities induced by the 
project).  Potential indirect conversion/degradation will be assessed based on information 
obtained through the environmental assessment (EA) process detailed in OP 4.01.   To be 
confirmed before appraisal.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Potential impacts of the project on physical cultural resources likely to be affected by the 
project. Operation Manual will identify necessary actions to mitigate adverse impacts and, if 
necessary, will include monitoring system to track progress of these activities.  To be confirmed 
before appraisal.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/20/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Darft Envtironmental Chapter of Operational Manual/EMPs will be disclosed on the Internet; 
given low risk, formal public meetings are not anticipated as needed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Radoslaw Czapski 
11/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/01/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
11/28/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
