Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2036 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/12/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Poland 
Project ID: P096214 
Project Name: ROAD MAINTENANCE & REHAB 3 
Task Team Leader: Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 20, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
194.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
33.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
150.00
183.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project are to (i) increase the pace of Polish road network modernization; 
(ii) strengthen road public expenditure management; and (iii) improve governance. The RM&R 
III operation will also support road safety campaigns based on themes such as alcohol and 
driving, speeding, safety of children, and pedestrians’ safety.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total project cost is estimated at â‚¬290 million, of which the World Bank would finance 
about â‚¬150 million (52%). The project will be co-financed with the Government budget and 
will receive parallel financing from the European Investment Bank (EIB) for the road 
maintenance and rehabilitation component; the Performance-based pilots will be included in that 
component. Additional components were identified for road safety improvements, and critical 
technical assistance to MoTC.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  2
The RM&R III project is a repeater of past two projects approved in 2004 and 2005, 
respectively. The project will continue to provide budgetary support to the GDDKiA for its 
FY2006 road maintenance and rehabilitation program. The project location is spread all over 
Poland's national road network; projects will be identified based on the use of HDM-4 (economic 
criteria. The works to be financed under the project will follow the same pattern as Under 
RM&R II, i.e. will be limited to the first nine standards of the Technical Annex produced by 
HDM-4. The project will not involve land acquisition, works will be carried-out within the right 
of way.    
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An independent assessment of Borrower's institutional capacity was carried out in 2004 during 
the preparation of RM&R project, and found satisfactory to the World Bank.  The Environment 
Chapter of the Operational Manual will be updated to incorporate the new list of investments (to 
be also posted on the GDDKiA web site), plus changes in Polish environmental law, the 
experience in implementation of the two previous projects with respect to the environment, and 
more clarity with respect to requirements under “notification procedures” as contrasted with 
construction permits.  It will reinforce the need and approach to have advance notification of 
population to be affected by the maintenance works through signage, newspaper notices, etc.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Barbara Letachowicz (ECSSD) 
Mr Jan Pakulski (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The repeater project is likely to maintain the same category as the RM&R and RM&R II 
projects, i.e. Financial Intermediary (FI) with Category B and C sub-projects; these small 
projects are still to be identified based on the Highway Development and Management 
Computerized system (HDM-4) and cannot be appraised on a case-by-case basis.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/28/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard-related studies are not foreseen for this repeater. Building on the experience of the 
previous two RM&R projects, web-based dissemination and information on the project will 
be launched at end-January. Consultation on the overall maintenance and rehabilitation 
program carried out for previous projects is sufficient.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
01/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/11/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
01/12/2006 
Comments:  cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
