Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/16/2007 
Report No.:  AC2772
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Poland 
Project ID:  P102731 
Project Name:  TIR - Transport Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Radoslaw Czapski 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (70%);Railways (30%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S);Managing for development results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
195.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
320.50
320.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project general will be the following: (i) increased benefits to roads and 
railways users through improved main Polish national road and rail infrastructure, and (ii) 
improved institutional capacity of Polish railway and road sector institutions to manage 
their network assets efficiently and effectively. Achievement of the project objective will 
be confirmed using indicators.   
 
3. Project Description 
The US$515.5 million worth project includes three components:  
 
(i) Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation program (Total: US$447.3 million, WB 
support: US$128.2 million); (ii) Railway Sector Revitalization program (US$64.3 
million); and (iii) TA and training (Total: US$3.9 million, WB support: US$2.5 million).  
 
Component A: Road Rehabilitation 2007. The national budget funds will be pooled with 
the resources provided by the World Bank and EIB loan, to be used for reducing the 
existing road maintenance backlog. The component will finance (i) a total of over 100 
contracts for physical works of periodic maintenance and rehabilitation throughout the 
National Road Network.  
Page  2
Road Safety Improvement. In order to contribute to the improvement of road safety in 
Poland, a new initiative called 'Safe 8 Program', focusing on the National Road N8 which 
links the Czech Republic to the Baltic States across Poland will be implemented. The 
initiative is conceived as a pilot, which in case of success assessed with quantified 
indicators such as number of fatalities per year could be replicated along other itineraries 
of national/international importance.  
 
Component B: The railway rehabilitation component comprises the following sub-
components: (i) replacement of rails on highly trafficked freight lines; (ii) comprehensive 
track renewal on some designated sections, including replacement of rails, sleepers, 
ballast, and any others items which need changing or repairing; and (iii) replacement of 
turnouts at specific locations.  
 
Component C: This component will comprise three distinct sub-components: (i) 
GDDKiA Management Information system; (ii) assistance to PLK for the preparation of 
a
detailed Business Plan including training; and (iii) Institutional Technical assistance for 
the Ministry of Transport.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Components A and B comprise rehabilitation sub-projects scattered across whole 
territory of Poland. The Project will not involve any land acquisition, since all works will 
be carried out within the right-of-way.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jan Pakulski (ECSSD) 
Ms Barbara Letachowicz (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment policy (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered due to the potential for 
localized site-specific impacts from rehabilitation and maintenance road and railway sub-
projects. These potential impacts are quite limited, for example dust and noise emissions, 
and some increase in suspensed solids in run-off water down-gradient from the project 
areas during the construction phase (since runoff controls may not be fully effective in all 
situations). Short-term impact from noise, dust, vibration, and traffic congestion 
particularly during execution of road works cannot be avoided. Noise emissions will 
increase significantly due to movement and operation of construction machinery and 
vehicles.  
 
No new roads/railway segments will be financed and no works will be carried out 
beyond the existing right-of-way. Hence, no land acquisition is foreseen and the 
involuntary resettlement safeguard will not be triggered. For the same reason the 
activities supported by the project will not trigger the cultural heritage safeguard (though 
provisions for "chance finds" are placed in construction contracts should unexpected 
artifacts be encountered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts may result from increased traffic and increased traffic speed. For 
roads sector in some cases restored road infrastructure may result in increased rate of 
certain categories of road accidents. This could be mitigated by adopting proper design 
including adequate signs and traffic calming measures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A: Due to the rehabilitation nature of the project no alternatives can be identified.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Direct, short-term impacts will be controlled by:(a) specifying mitigation and monitoring 
requirements in line with the Environmental Management Plans in technical 
specifications for all contracts/sub-projects, thus attributing responsibility for appropriate 
work site mitigation actions to respective contractors as a routine part of their 
construction site management, (b) assuring that technical specifications for construction 
equipment will be setting permissible noise levels, and (c) assuring proper supervision by 
GDDKiA and PLK  contract managers or external engineering consultants on all 
rehabilitation contracts to assure environmental compliance.  
 
In addition: (i) GDDKiA and PLK will inform and discuss with respective branch 
offices the Environmental Management Plans to make sure that provisions of EMPs are 
followed by the branch offices implementing sub-projects; and (ii) when appropriate PKP 
Page  4
and PLK will organize pre-bidding meetings/conferences related to particular 
contracts/sub-projects with interested bidders underlining also full compliance with 
environmental requirements to secure that bidders will reflect provisions of EMP in their 
offers.  
 
Detailed mitigation measures may include the following actions: use of sprinklers to 
wash down roads and suppress dust emissions during soil transport; cover vehicles to 
prevent spills; transport borrow materials during daytime only; plant dust screening 
vegetation along roadsides and at locations sensitive to air pollution like schools, 
hospitals, etc; reduce noise by using noise absorbing/protecting building materials, 
planting noise absorbing trees, provide workers with ear plugs and helmets and generally 
preventing them from prolonged exposure to high noise levels, etc. In addition, size of 
construction facilities areas will be as small as possible, they will be located outside 
environmentally sensitive and/or protected areas. No heavy equipment is to be stored at 
forest areas and no transport will be conducted using roads in forests. Technical means 
will be undertaken to protect treas. For sub-projects located in sensitive areas, 
implementation of works involving significant noise emissions will not be conducted 
during nesting seasons.  
 
Capacity of road sector: Responsibilities of management of environmental issues related 
to projects on the national roads network are divided between GDDKiA headquarters and 
regional branch offices. Headquarters staff employed at environmental protection unit is 
responsible for overseeing all general aspects of environmental protection related to 
GDDKiA activities throughout the entire country including: (i) reviewing  specific 
reports on environmental protection aspects; and (ii) upon request of regional branch 
offices reviewing technical documentation for sub-projects from environmental 
requirements perspective. The GDDKiA headquarters staff is accountable for handling 
environmental complaints related to GDDKiA activities and for cooperation with 
Ministry of Environment.  
 
GDDKiA has proven to be responsive to concerns raised by NGOs on possible impacts 
to natural habitats from specific maintenance and rehabilitation sub-projects. In one 
particular sub-project under a prior loan, GDDKiA contracted for a study of animal 
migration patterns which led to the incorporation of special mitigating measures. While 
not all concerns could be accommodated given the nature of the sub-project (which 
would have required road reconstruction), the responsiveness of GDDKiA was 
demonstrated.  
 
In 2006, PLK adopted integrated policy on quality management and environmental 
protection by implementing integrated quality management and environmental protection 
system developed in line with the requirements of ISO standards: 9001:2000 and 
14001:2004, respectively. The main company responsibilities under the integrated system 
are: (i) to meet legal requirements set by the environmental legislation and all 
requirements related to environmental aspects of PLK operations; and (ii) to reduce 
emissions resulting from all types of PLK operations. During preparation of projects to be 
funded by the EU funds, PLK initiated cooperation with group of the best Polish experts 
Page  5
on nature conservation and biodiversity protection while working  on Environmental 
Impact Assessments, that were subsequently highly valued by EC. PLK is experienced in 
public consultations/public hearings which were conducted to satisfy Polish and EU 
requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In Poland all modernization and construction plans, programs, policies or projects which 
are subject to Strategic Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact Assessment 
are consulted with public based on clearly described procedure. Draft documents 
including Environmental Assessments or other relevant reports are made available to the 
general public for comments for the period of at least 21 days. All submitted comments 
and recommendations have to be considered by the relevant authority. Such authority has 
to take them into consideration in the final documents, inform the public and justify how 
such comments and concerns have been addressed.  
 
In addition to standard practices in this respect required under Polish law, and 
strengthen disclosure of information related to the project, it has been agreed that 
proposed list of work contracts/sub-projects planned to be co-financed by TIR project 
will be published on GDDKiA and PLK WebPages for road and railway sectors 
respectively. In addition to the list of proposed roads and railways sub-projects, 
respective maps illustrating their locations throughout the country will be published on 
respective websites along with draft Environmental Management Plans. GDDKiA and 
PLK are used to address the needs of careful supervision of works implementation, with 
particular attention to those located in vicinity of designated Natura 2000 protected sites, 
as well as other recognized areas of high biodiversity value. This is of particular 
importance since there is an ongoing discussion on Natura 2000 listing between the 
Government of Poland and the European Commission. More detailed description of 
environmental legislation, sector specific legal requirements including recommendations 
to EIA for sub-projects located in environmentally sensitive areas including Natura 2000 
are provided in the project appraisal documents.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/27/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/27/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Radoslaw Czapski 
02/21/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Barbara Letachowicz 
02/21/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jan Pakulski 
02/21/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/13/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
03/16/2007 
Comments:  approved 
