Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/23/2006 
Report No.:  AC2214
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Poland 
Project ID:  P096214 
Project Name:  ROAD MAINTENANCE & REHAB 3 
Task Team Leader:  Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 23, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
195.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
34.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
181.00
215.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The repeater project will continue improving the effectiveness of Poland's national road 
rehabilitation and maintenance systems, with emphasis on quality, efficiency, financial 
viability, safety, and road user satisfaction.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project provides: (i) financial support to the road maintenance and rehabilitation 
program in line with the budget framework prepared by GDDKiA for 2006, including 
pilot Performance
–based Management and Maintenance contracts;(ii) assistance to 
complete the GDDKiA Management Information System (MIS); (iii) support for road 
safety campaigns; and (iv) technical assistance to the Ministry of Transport and 
Construction, including on EU funds absorption and intelligent transport system.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As a repeater project, RM&R III will provide budgetary support to the Road 
Administration for its FY2006 road maintenance and rehabilitation program, along with 
Page  2
EIB loan. The project finances about 181 contracts, and their location is spread all over 
Poland's national road network. The works to be financed under the proposed project will 
be limited to the first nine standards defined in the Technical Annex (attached). The 
project will not involve any land acquisition, since works will be carried out within the 
right of way.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jan Pakulski (ECSSD) 
Ms Barbara Letachowicz (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No new road segments will be financed, and any road widening conducted under the 
project will be carried out within the right-of-way. Hence, road maintenance and 
rehabilitation works supported by the project will not involve acquisition of land and the 
triggering of the involuntary resettlement safeguards is not anticipated. For the same 
reasons, the activities supported by the projects will not trigger the cultural heritage 
safeguard.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the nature of the interventions supported by the project, the project does not trigger 
any social safeguards. The project does not finance land acquisition.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to ensure that the project will not negatively impact the environment in any way, 
additional due diligence was or will be carried out during the preparation of RM&R III, 
to follow-up the actions undertaken earlier in 2004 and 2005 for the RM&R and RM&R 
II projects: (i) a description of the proposed project has been prepared and made available 
to the public by GDDKiA in the context of the updated Environmental Chapter of the 
Operational Manual, on March 3, 2006. It includes specific details on environment as 
mitigation and monitoring procedures, along with a list of potential contracts for 2006 
and a map of their location; and (ii) a satisfactory ex-post review of selected subprojects 
under the previous project for environmental compliance with the OM and Polish 
regulations was completed in December 2005. In addition, GDDKiA is to address the 
need of careful supervision of works implementation, especially those located in vicinity 
of environmentally sensitive areas with a status of “Natura 2000” sites, if any. The 
detailed description of the current environmental legislation, including resettlement 
policy, has been provided in the project documents and the Environmental Chapter dated 
March 3, 2006.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Throughout the project preparation process, the Government has continued to be heavily 
involved in explaining the pros and cons of various models proposed for road 
rehabilitation and investment financing to the public.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  4
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anca Cristina Dumitrescu 
03/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Barbara Letachowicz 
03/23/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jan Pakulski 
03/23/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Barbara Letachowicz 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/23/2006 
Comments:  Cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
03/22/2006 
Comments:  Cleared. 
