Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2485
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Romania 
Project ID:  P093775 
Project Name:  Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project 
Task Team Leader:  Karin Shepardson 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P099528 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Animal production (20%);Sanitation (20%);Sewerage (20%);Solid waste 
management (20%);Crops (20%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Water resource management (P);Land administration and 
management (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
64.75 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Local 
Communities 
4.53 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
1.81 
 Financing 
Gap 
76.59
82.93 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To reduce nutrient discharges to water bodies and promote behavior change through 
strengthened institutional and regulatory capacity and demonstrated communa-based 
actions.  
 
The global environment objective is to reduce over the long-term the discharge of 
nutrients into water bodies leading to the Danube River and Black Sea through integrated 
land and water management.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Project components are (i) communa-based investments; (ii) institutional strengthening 
and capacity building; (iii) public awareness and replication; and (iv) project 
management.  
 
Communa based investments include platforms to compost organic wastes and enable 
sorting and separation of household wastes (approximately 110 communes); communal 
afforestation and vegetative buffer strips to stem deterioration of degraded lands and 
protect water bodies; demonstration of on-farm nutrient management farming practices; 
rural wastewater improvements in selected demonstration locations (3 estimated); and 
low-cost sanitation improvements in schools linked with public awareness; and 
biogas/energy co-generation from organic waste digestion if feasible (up to 2).  The 
project will finance feasibility studies for rural water and sanitation and compost bio-gas 
enhancement.  
 
Institutional strengthening and capacity building investments include include portable 
water quality monitoring field equipment; groundwater monitoring wells; 
rehabilitation/expansion of a water a training facility; and training and consultant 
services. Public awareness and replication activities to be financed include well-testing 
kits; school curricula; promotional materials; and specialized consultant services.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The selected project counties are geographically spread across Romania to include one 
within each of 10 River Basins.  The Danube Delta River Basin is the only Basin not 
covered.  The entire territory of Romania is located within the Black/Sea Danube Basin 
and therefore all waterbodies are tributary to international waters.  Targeted communes 
are located in "nitrate vulnerable zones" based on an assessment of soil and water 
conditions and historic and current pollution loads.  Many NVZs are near waterways or 
have shallow groundwater tables and project activites aim to demonstrate practices which 
can improve local water quality.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Karin Shepardson (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large scale, significant, or irreversible impacts are expected from the project 
investments.  The project design aims to have a positve effect on the environment as 
measured by improved water quality.  Local impacts from project activities would be 
limited to minor construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The long-term environmental impacts anticipated are positive and linked to the overall 
project development objectives to reduce nutrients in surface and ground water bodies.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The cleanup/remediation of illegal dumpsites in project communes will be limited to sites 
with over 75% of organic waste composition which can be closely linked with operations 
of the manure compost platforms.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower will have an implementation unit located within the Ministry of 
Environment and Water Management which includes environmental specialists who will 
oversee the project environmental management plan and ensure necessary review of 
individual investments.  They will be supported by 2 staff covering each Basin   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are commune residents in Nitrate vulnerable zones; local commune 
administrations; and county administrations who are responsible for the promotion of 
investments to help improve environmental conditions and raising awareness of the local 
Page  4
population on behavior change.  During project preparation consulations have been 
conducted in all project counties and in communes with (first year) investments.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  5
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
01/18/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
01/18/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop 
01/18/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
01/18/2007 
Comments:  The ENV Review is being confirmed by the Ministry of Environment and Waters EIA 
Dept. 
