Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/20/2006 
Report No.:  AC2004
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Romania 
Project ID:  P093096 
Project Name:  SOCIAL INCLUSION PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Ana Maria Sandi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (75%);General education sector (25%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Social risk 
mitigation (P);Social safety nets (P);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
58.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to support Romania to raise living standards and the social 
inclusion of disadvantaged people.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
Lending instrument  
 
The lending instrument for the proposed project is a Specific Investment Loan. The 
Program- Based Approach (PBA), with a performance-based financing modality would 
promote efficiency and reforms. The project is designed in such a way as to help jump 
start the GOR’s inclusive programs. Later on, the GOR can scale-up program’s 
implementation by using its own funds.  
 
The PBA will be implemented through Annual Development Plans (ADPs) of the two 
line ministries and two agencies supported by the SIP. Each year, the Bank and the 
Government will agree on the specific activities to be financed and included in the 
national budget cycle for the following year. The ADP will include: implementation 
priorities; an activity plan; procurement plans; a budget plan; and a monitoring plan. 
Bank financing would be restricted to the expenditures specified in the ADP and included 
in the approved budget lines for involved ministries and agencies. Each year’s ADPs 
would set expenditures in accordance with an assessment of progress against output 
Page  2
targets, development outcomes and institutional performance benchmarks. The total 
estimated cost of the SIP is US$58.5 million.  
 
2. 
Project development objective  
 
The development objective of the SIP is to improve the living conditions and the social 
inclusion of the most disadvantaged/vulnerable people in the Romanian society by: (i) 
improving the living conditions and social inclusion of Roma living in poor settlements; 
(ii) increasing the inclusiveness of ECE services in targeted areas; and (iii) improving the 
quality of services for PWD, youth at risk and victims of domestic violence.  
 
3.
Project components  
 
The SIP supports the implementation of priority objectives of the Government’s JIM 
during 2006-2010. The overall SIP has four components that support several inclusive 
programs.  
 
Component 1: Priority Interventions Program (US$14.5 million). The overall program is 
RSDF’s program of interventions, which is being expanded to cover Roma communities. 
This component targets the most disadvantaged Roma who live in poor settlements. The 
main expected outcome is: improved living conditions and social inclusions for Roma 
living in about 100 poor settlements. There is an urgent need to upgrade the most 
disadvantaged Roma settlements up to minimum standards in terms of infrastructure and 
basic services. The Romanian Social Development Fund (RSDF) has some experience 
working with poor Roma communities, but its interventions have not systematically 
addressed the needs of such communities. The Priority Interventions Program proposed 
by RSDF will expand the Fund’s activities to specifically address the needs of these 
settlements.  
 
Key inputs are the grants provided by RSDF to fund demand driven, integrated 
community development sub-projects in these settlements. In addition, poor Roma 
communities will be assisted in preparing mature projects for accessing EU structural 
funds.  
 
Key outputs will include: (i) improved small infrastructure (rehabilitation or 
construction of small infrastructure in order to increase access to services, markets, water 
and sanitation, safe environment, and basic housing); (ii) community-based social 
services (increased access to educational and health centers, waste collection and 
disposal, advocacy services); professional training for social services activities; and 
activities designed to sustainably improve the environment within target communities. 
The procedures will be similar to current RSDF practice (facilitation, community-
management and implementation, partnerships with local authorities).  
 
Component 2: Inclusive Early Childhood Education (ECE) Program (US$7.5 
million).The MER’s overall ECE Program (2005-2011) is aimed to ensure every child’s 
right to education and overall development starting from the very early ages. Envisaged 
measures for 0-6 years children are meant to better equip them to face the educational 
challenges of primary education and beyond. The objective of the ECE Program under 
the SIP is to mainstream Roma and disadvantaged categories into the regular policies and 
programs of the MER. The ECE Program is supported given the importance of 
Page  3
interventions made in the earliest years of childhood, the long lasting influence on the 
progress of children, their school readiness and further learning, especially in the case of 
Roma and disadvantaged categories specifically targeted under the SIP. The expected 
main outcome of the program is: the increased participation of children from vulnerable 
groups in targeted communities to ECE services. The SIP will help jump start the 
inclusive measures of MER’s overall ECE Program, through the following activities: (i) 
rehabilitation of ECE infrastructure in communities with a high percentage of Roma; (ii) 
development of inclusive ECE curriculum, human resources and teaching /learning 
materials; (iii) promotion of integrated services and alternative community based 
solutions for ECE; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation and Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities. Key inputs include: works, goods (furniture, 
equipment), technical assistance and training. Key outputs include: ECE units 
rehabilitated, newly built and furnished in communities with a high percentage of Roma, 
staff trained, quality ECE services and alternative solutions provided to targeted groups.  
 
Component 3: Social Assistance Programs (US$35.5 million)  
 
The SIP will support programs of the MLSSF aimed at improving the situation of PWD, 
youth at risk and domestic violence victims.  
 
Sub-Component 3.1: Disabilities Program (US$18 million). The GOR has launched a 
comprehensive reform program, to be implemented over the next seven years (2005-
2015), aiming at improving the living conditions and the quality of services delivered to 
the PWD. The objective of the Disability Program under the SIP is to improve the quality 
of care in residential services and to increase the access to CBS for PWD in need, 
targeting especially the PWD with a high dependency on residential services. The 
Disabilities Program supports the implementation of the MLSSF/NAPH program for 
institutionalized care restructuring, prevention of institutionalization, de-
institutionalization, development of alternative community based systems of assistance 
and social inclusion through:  
 
(a) A grant scheme, supporting local authorities in: (i) restructuring and rehabilitation of 
the existing institutions (including establishment of new infrastructure facilities), in line 
with standards newly developed by NAPH with the support of EU consultants; and (ii) 
development of alternative CBSs to support the de-institutionalization process. The 
competitive grant scheme is similar to the one already used under the ongoing EU Phare 
financed program.  
 
(b) Institutional capacity building by: (i) delivery of training to professional staff that 
will implement the new standards of care; and (ii) development of the monitoring and 
evaluation system for NAPH.  
 
(c) Provision of occupational counseling services. Positive results were obtained in the 
pilot employment counseling offices for PWD established under the SSD project . Under 
the SIP, the coverage of these services will be expanded to the beneficiaries of the newly 
restructured institutions, especially to the network of Centers for Integration through 
Occupational Therapy.  
Page  4
The key inputs include: grants, goods, training and consultant services. The key outputs 
are: rehabilitated/constructed buildings, trained staff, CBSs established.  
 
Sub-Component 3.2: Youth at Risk Program (US$14 million). The main objective of the 
overall GOR program is to enhance the social and professional integration of the youth 
age 18+ who ceases to be eligible for the child protection systems (placement centers, re-
education centers) or who are homeless. The SIP sub-component is targeting youngsters 
(age 18+) graduating the institutionalized child care system aiming at their smooth social 
integration. The main outcome is an improved access of the target group to integrated 
social services that will increase their readiness for an independent living. The SIP will 
contribute to the establishment of the network of Multi-Functional centers, where eligible 
beneficiaries will have access to protected housing, complemented by a wide range of 
counseling services (psychological, social, vocational, occupational and legal 
counseling), as well as basic health services. The following activities will be supported 
by the SIP: (i) rehabilitation and/or construction of housing infrastructures to host the 
young leaving the child care institutions; (ii) endowment with furniture, household 
appliances and office equipment; (iii) monitoring and evaluation; and (iv) professional 
training for the staff that will provide the counseling services. The key inputs include: 
grants, goods (furniture, equipment) and consulting services. The key outputs include: 
rehabilitated/constructed buildings; counseling services provided; staff trained.  
 
Sub-Component 3.3: Victims of Domestic Violence Program (US$3.5 million). The 
main objective of the overall GOR program over the period 2006-2010 is to prevent and 
combat the domestic violence, through a wide range of specific activities incorporated in 
the Action Plan attached to the approved strategy. The specific objective of this sub-
component is to support the development of specialized integrated social services, to 
which victims of domestic violence can have access for a limited period of time, until 
their family situation is solved, and they can go back to a normal life. In order to achieve 
this goal the SIP will finance: (i) rehabilitation and/or construction of housing 
infrastructures to shelter the victims (and their dependents); (ii) endowment with 
furniture and  household appliances; (iii) professional training for the staff that will 
provide the counseling services; and (iv) development of specific MIS (unique national 
register). The key inputs are: grants, goods (furniture, equipment, hardware) and 
consulting services; the key outputs are:     buildings rehabilitated/constructed; MIS in 
place; and staff trained.  
 
Component 4: Capacity Building for Social Inclusion (US$1 million). The SIP will 
support capacity building for social inclusion. Assistance will be given to the National 
Agency for Roma (NAR) and its 8 regional branches to coordinate activities aimed at 
improving inclusive planning, monitoring and evaluation and project identification, 
preparation and implementation. The main outcome will be an increased capacity of the 
NAR to monitor the impact of Roma related public policies. The key inputs are: training, 
consultant services and goods. The key outputs will be: a functional monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) system for NAR, trained staff, trained Roma groups capable to prepare 
projects for accessing EU funds, and an IEC strategy developed and implemented.  
 
Page  5
Building Capacity to Absorb EU Structural Funds. All above mentioned programs have 
activities meant to strengthen the capacity of accessing EU structural funds. Assistance 
will be provided for project identification, preparation and implementation. Since loan 
funds would be used for leveraging EU funds, expected outputs and outcomes will go, 
starting with the second year of implementation, beyond what can be achieved only with 
Bank funds.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented throughout the country.  Specific sites for project 
interventions will be determined in the context of Annual Development Plans to be 
prepared by the ministries and agencies involved in the project and, therefore, are not 
known at appraisal.  Site selection will be based on demand, compliance with eligibility, 
and selection criteria.  The compact Roma settlements to be targeted under the Program 
of Priority Interventions are typically on the edges of urban areas, often in areas, such as 
former waste dumps or areas at high risk of erosion, where others do not want to live and 
where environmental concerns are salient.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mark C. Woodward (ECSSD) 
Ms Rita Klees (ENV) 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is rated FI with primarily B and some category C subprojects.  Infrastructure 
works as yet to be determined will be carried out in the contexts to the Program of 
Priority Interventions, the Inclusive Early Education Program, the Disabilities Program, 
the Youth at Risk Program and the Victims of Domestic Violence. An environmental 
chapter is included in the Operational Manual setting out environmental screening criteria 
and approaches to identify and mitigate risks.  The involuntary resettlement safeguard is 
Page  6
not triggered, despite the inclusion of infrastructure works, since the legal agreements 
will exclude any financing of subprojects involving land acquisition.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Infrastructure works could potentially have some minor environmental impact.  This will 
be mitigated as described in the Operational Manual.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
RSDF and line ministries have the capacity to comply with Bank safeguard policies as 
demonstrated through the involvement in previous Bank assisted projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Direct beneficiaries are: Roma living in compact, substandard settlements, children at 
risk (e.g., from vulnerable segments of the population, those with special needs), persons 
with disabilities, youths coming out of the residential child care system and victims of 
domestic violence. Other key stakeholders include local and county level authorities and 
staff of the ministries and agencies involved in the project.  
 
During preparation stage meetings and field trips were undertaken with the main 
stakeholders, including advocacy groups and Roma NGOs. The consultative process 
helped identify arrangements for stakeholder participation in implementation and 
monitoring mechanisms. At the local level, RSDF will facilitate the set-up of Community 
Initiative Groups to be involved together with the local authorities in problem 
identification, solution finding, and sub-project preparation and implementation. This will 
serve as the primary mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies. 
Furthermore, every project proposal submitted to MLSSF/ANPH will have to be 
accompanied by minutes of consultations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/14/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/16/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  7
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ana Maria Sandi 
03/16/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Rita Klees 
03/16/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mark C. Woodward 
03/16/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop 
03/16/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
03/16/2006 
Comments:   
