Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2760 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Romania 
Project ID: P101204 
Project Name: Regional and Rural Development 
Task Team Leader: Keith W. McLean 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 8, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Sub-national government 
administration (30%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Rural policies and institutions (S);Municipal 
governance and institution building (S);Decentralization (S);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to support territorial development in Romania by 
building capacity of local administrations to: i) prepare local development strategies, and 
investment plans that reflect structural funding opportunities and priority local needs; ii) identify, 
prepare, and implement local projects with good local development impact; and iii) help local 
administrations to meet requirements for access to funding from EU-supported operational 
programs.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will include three main components:  
 
Component A: Capacity Support for Local Development ($15 million) will target selected local 
administration with support activities to prepare economic development strategies and 
investment plans based on best-practice global methodologies.  The component will finance the 
technical assistance, information technology, and equipment need to prepare:  Local economic 
development strategies, identification & preparation of an actionable pipeline of projects based 
Page  2
EU funding criteria, strengthening own resource mobilization; and to introduce social, technical, 
and financial sustainability criteria. This component will also provide training to localities on 
procurement, financial management, revenue mobilization, and project management, as these 
aspects can affect the quality of local investments.  
 
Three sets of beneficiaries have been identified:  counties, strategic economic zones within 
counties, and communes.  The project would work at all three levels.  Strategies would be 
developed for these priority zones and would include both communes and towns. The county 
would apply for county and zonal projects under operational programs open to counties e.g. the 
ROP and Environment OP. Commune specific applications would target the National Program 
for Rural Development, and any other operational programs for which the communes are eligible 
beneficiaries.  
 
Component B: Flexible Investment Fund ($30 million).   The purpose of this fund is to provide 
bridge financing to local administrations, related costs of accessing funds from EU and other 
government and donor resources for their own local development. It is designed to address 
significant start-up preparation and project implementation costs related to leveraging EU 
resources, and using them productively.  Local administrations would be given flexibility to use 
the funds in a number of ways, aimed at getting them to the point of submitting good 
applications to managing authorities and intermediate bodies:  (i) Non-eligible EU expenditures, 
(ii) eligible expenditures for which resources will only be available upon successful application -
-e.g., feasibility studies and technical design; (iii) important projects identified in the local 
strategy for which no source of EU funding can be identified.  The team will investigate the 
possibility of transforming all the resources used to pre-finance eligible expenditures into a 
revolving fund.  However, the success of this approach will be dependent on time taken for 
reimbursement to be provided from the EU.  
 
Component C: Management, Monitoring & Evaluation ($5 million).  On Project Management, 
this component will finance non-recurrent implementation costs of the project management unit 
and regional support hubs of the project.  . Regional hubs will partner with county teams set up 
by the county councils themselves.  Costs related to county teams are not included in this 
component. Monitoring & evaluation will assess the application success rate to EU funded 
operational programs, and project quality. The project will require an integrated M & E system 
and the ability to aggregate multilevel information.  While implementation arrangements for the 
project still need to be worked out, it is expected that there will be a small PMU at the central 
level for general coordination and monitoring and evaluation, and there will be 5-6 Regional 
Support Hubs to support local administration with project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project includes institutional and financial support to strengthen the capacity of potential 
beneficiaries of structural and rural development funds in selected areas of Romania to identify 
and prepare an actionable pipeline of projects based on sector operational program (SOP) 
criteria, and possibly to implement selected rural investments targeting the National Program for 
Rural Development. The project geographic coverage will target the entire country and a few 
types of subprojects that are likely to be demanded might be identified and defined during the 
Page  3
project preparation and before project appraisal to avoid duplication and harmonize the National 
Strategic Plan of Rural Development 2007-2013.  
 
The proposed project shows structural similarities with an FI project in that the specific 
investments are not yet known and will be determined during implemntation of Component A. 
However, not having a true financial intermediary the classification B will be maintained.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has some capacity to implement the Bank's safeguard policies, based on previous 
experience with implementation of World Bank projects. Capacity needs are mainly at the local 
level (e.g., counties, communes, towns) with a call for appropriate staff and training necessary to 
carry out sound environmental monitoring and safeguard compliance for possible sub-projects 
selected to be implemented under the proposed project. If infrastructure investments will be 
financed under the project an Environmental Management Plan will be develop for each sub-
project to provide the implementing agencies and the local authorities with the appropriate 
guidelines needed to undertake good practice environmental management of respective activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is classified as environmental category B since it may provide selected rural 
investments (e.g., rehabilitation of roads, cadastre activities) but the precise nature and types of 
investments will not be known until after local strategies are developed as a result of support 
under Component A. However, the project, showing structural similarities with an FI since the 
specific investments are yet unknown,will develop instruments characteristic for an FI type 
project including preparation of an Environmental Framework (EF) and a Land Acquisition 
Framework (LAF). The occurrence of any category A projects in the project investment portfolio 
will be excluded through establishing a screening and pre-selection process in the project 
Operational Manual. Representatives samples of subprojects will be assessed based on 
development of Environmental Assessment (EA)/Environmental Management Plan (EMP) that 
will be prepared and disclosed in country and infoshop before appraisal along with EF.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
TThe OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is selected as TBD at this stage of the 
project since the potential investments are not known yet. However, the EA/EMPs prepared in 
the context of future selected investments will assess the possibility of PCR.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Involuntary Resettlement is triggered since specific civil work contracts are not yet 
identified and may well involve land aquisition. A Land Aquisition Framework will be prepared 
and disclosed before appraisal to present mechanisims for dealing with the posibility of land 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
aquisition under the proposed project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/12/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
-
An informal follow-up safeguards meeting will be required before QER (07/07/07);  
 
-
Draft Environmental Framework including examples of individual EA/EMPs for 
subprojects will be prepared before appraisal and disclosed in country (10/10/07)  
 
-
Draft Land Aquisition Framework will be prepared and disclosed before apprasial 
(10/10/07)   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Keith W. McLean 
02/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
